- REVIEWING THE ADMINISTRATION'S GOVERNMENT REORGANIZATION PROPOSAL
[Senate Hearing 115-547]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-547
REVIEWING THE ADMINISTRATION'S GOVERNMENT REORGANIZATION PROPOSAL
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 18, 2018
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
34-573 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).E-mail,
[email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
JOHN McAIN, Arizona
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JON TESTER, Montana
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
STEVE DAINES, Montana
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
Christopher R. Hixon, Staff Director
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Chief Counsel
Courtney J. Allen, Deputy Chief Counsel for Governmental Affairs
Margaret E. Daum, Minority Staff Director
Phylicia L. Woods, Minority Counsel
Sarah Garcia, Minority Senior Counsel
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Bonni E. Dinerstein, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
1
Senator McCaskill............................................
3
Senator Lankford.............................................
13
Senator Heitkamp.............................................
17
Senator Hassan...............................................
23
Senator Jones................................................
26
Senator Peters...............................................
28
Senator Carper...............................................
32
Senator Harris...............................................
36
Senator Hoeven...............................................
38
Senator Daines...............................................
41
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
49
WITNESSES
Wednesday, July 18, 2018
Honorable Margaret Weichert, Deputy Director for Management,
Office of Management and Budget
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
50
APPENDIX
OMB Government Reorganization Plan...............................
56
Statements submitted for the Record:
American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO.........
188
National Active and Retired Federal Employees Association....
193
National Treasury Employees Union............................
196
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Ms. Weichert.................................................
206
REVIEWING THE ADMINISTRATION'S GOVERNMENT REORGANIZATION PROPOSAL
----------
WEDNESDAY, JULY 18, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Ron Johnson,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Portman, Lankford, Hoeven,
Daines, McCaskill, Carper, Heitkamp, Peters, Hassan, Harris,
and Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JOHNSON
Chairman Johnson. Good morning. This hearing will come to
order; the title of this hearing, ``Reviewing the
Administration's Government Reorganization Proposal.'' Glad to
see good attendance by Members of the Committee. I am really
glad to see a pretty full audience. It is nice to see a lot of
people are really interested in reorganizing the government to
make it more efficient, more effective, and more accountable.
First of all, I would like to ask that my written statement
be entered into the record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 49.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to start today's hearing with a question to the
audience. I ask this to many audiences, just most recently in
front of the Council of Inspector Generals on Integrity and
Efficiency (CIGIE).
A show of hands from the audience. How many people here
think the Federal Government is efficient and effective?
Senator McCaskill. Do not be afraid. You can raise your
hand.
[Show of hands.]
Chairman Johnson. OK. We got a couple people.
Listen, I asked that in front of CIGIE, and Senator
Heitkamp was there. I do not believe anybody raised their hand,
and let us face it. It is probably the most knowledgeable group
of people in terms of the question is it efficient and
effective.
Now, I have literally asked that question to tens of
thousands--that is not an embellishment--tens of thousands,
primarily Wisconsinites, but Americans as I traveled around,
and this is for sure the largest percentage. We maybe got five
or six people raising their hands. Maybe a couple hundred out
of those tens of thousands have raised their hand.
I generally do a follow up question: How many think it is
pretty broken and dysfunctional? The majority of the audience,
after having laughed at the first question, raised their hand
who think it is pretty broken and dysfunctional.
It is obvious that the Federal Government needs a very
close evaluation and is well overdue for serious reorganization
and a serious look at how to make it more efficient, more
effective, and more accountable.
In my briefing pack, they gave me just some basic stats,
and I think this pretty well tells it all. We spend $4.2
trillion a year. That is how large this entity is, and it is an
incredibly complex entity. People cannot even begin to grapple
what a trillion dollars is, much less 4.2. We are $21 trillion
in debt, total debt. It exceeds the size of our economy, a very
dangerous place for us to be, and according to the
Congressional Budget Office's (CBO) long-term projections,
which they present as a percent of gross domestic product
(GDP), we convert it to dollars for them--at least $100
trillion more in deficits over the next 30 years tacked onto
$21 trillion. It is clearly unsustainable.
The deficit for fiscal year (FY) 2018 is $873 billion, and
I think this almost says it all. There are 441 Federal
departments, agencies, and sub-agencies listed in the Federal
Register--and here is the money line--but there is no
authoritative list of Federal agencies in existence. We are
kind of taking a guess at 441. I am taking a risk that I might
be PolitiFact wrong on that, but it is pretty amazing that
there is really not even an authoritative list of how many
agencies there are.
Now, it is important to point out that we are just at the
start of this process, although the Executive Order (EO) was
issued over a year ago. You have solicited comments. 106,000
came in, and in testimony, Ms. Weichert will talk about that
this is really a process that it will probably span 3 to 5
years. We are not talking about this proposal, every last thing
being enacted, but we have a lot to consider, laid on the
table, but it is a process. We are only at the start of it,
which is why Senator Lankford and I have introduced a piece of
legislation, the Reforming Government Act of 2018.
Let me just quickly describe what this thing does. It is
not a scary piece of legislation at all. It is pretty much the
exact same piece of legislation updated for the circumstances
today, as Senator Lieberman, when he was Chairman of this
Committee, and Senator Warner introduced when President Obama
was talking about reorganization.
What this bill does, it provides the Administration with
the authority to submit reorganization plans to Congress for up
to 2 years after enactment. The last authority that we actually
enacted into law expired in 1984. It lifts current statutory
restrictions on reorganization plans by authorizing, one, the
creation of new executive department or renaming of an existing
executive department and, two, the consolidation of two or more
executive departments. That is what reorganization is about.
Lift the statutory prohibition on that right now makes that
possible.
It requires a determination by the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) and the reorganization plan will likely result in
a decrease in the number of agencies or a cost savings. Again,
those are good things, and it triggers Senate and House Rules
for expeditious consideration of reorganization plans, and all
it does is it puts in the same approval process that was part
of the 1984 bill.
This bill does not reorganize the government. It just
offers and produces a process that can possibly do that.
I hope we can get support. I hope we can get this thing
signed into law. I hope people take very seriously, I think, a
very sincere attempt by this Administration to take a look at
the government and do the reorganization that is necessary to
make it a little more efficient, a little more effective, a
little more accountable. I do not see how anybody could really
be opposed at least to the effort. I can understand maybe
opposed to the specific proposals, but it is good, worthy
effort, and I think it is our legislative jurisdiction. I think
we ought to authorize that effort and support it in every way,
shape, or form that we can.
With that, I will turn it over to my Ranking Member,
Senator McCaskill.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MCCASKILL
Senator McCaskill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I certainly agree that this is an important effort. What my
questioning will focus on and what I would like us all to
remember today is that if we are emulating business, there is
no way this document would be brought into a board room of any
private company for a mergers and acquisitions (M&A)
determination. It is woefully short on details.
Since my time as a State auditor, I have made it my mission
to fight for a more efficient and effective government, and I
have repeatedly in my time in the Senate supported
reorganization, consolidation, and program elimination by the
Executive Branch.
I have conducted oversight on how some of our formal
investment entities like the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation and the U.S. Trade and Development Agency and
thought there was an awful lot of duplication there. I have
repeatedly introduced legislation, which I am proud that the
Chairman supported, to eliminate another entity I investigated,
the National Technical Information Service at the Commerce
Department, a relic of the 1950s that the Internet has
essentially made obsolete.
These proposals were works--unfortunately, these took years
of fact-finding, data-gathering, analysis, and meetings with
stakeholders. What I learned from that process is that it is
difficult to reduce or eliminate government programs, even when
you have bipartisan support and even when you have done the
work.
On their face, some of your reorganization proposals--and
some of that--and that is frankly, in some instances, a pretty
generous word because many of them are things we could work on
together. We can agree about the importance of strengthening
the cybersecurity workforce, improving Federal agencies'
customer service, and ensuring veterans' cemeteries are well
maintained.
To be fair, many of these proposals are not new. Some of
them are ongoing, and some were the work of previous
Administrations and Congress.
On the other hand, some of these ideas are untenable. I
would put postal privatization in that category. We all
understand that a business model of privatization for postal
results in one reality, the same reality that faced rural
communities when it was time for them to get electricity, the
same reality that faces rural communities when they need to get
broadband, and that is, there is no business model that will
provide the level of profit that that last mile of real estate
requires.
If you look at what is going on in rural America right now,
the hope for rural America is not only a trade policy that
makes sense, but it is also the ability of rural Americans to
participate in small business by online participation. That is
why we spent so much time talking about rural broadband, but if
you do not have the delivery of the packages, if you do not
have the delivery in Alaska of food, that is absolutely a big
step backward for economic vibrancy in our rural communities.
There is no way a privatization model delivers the same
level of service to rural America as they currently receive. It
just does not work by the numbers, and you know who would pick
up the liabilities? The privatization companies would take all
the profit out of the urban areas, and guess who would be left
holding the bag for all the rural areas? It would once again be
the government. Why do not we just give the postal authority
the flexibility and the authorities they need to do this in the
most effective and efficient way possible?
For some reason, this Administration and the Republican-led
Congress has been incredibly stubborn about facing that reality
in the Postal Service.
I know what privatization means for rural Missouri, and I
will not go there on postal. I am pretty confident that most of
my colleagues that have a large swath of rural constituents
will feel the same way.
Although we may disagree on the substance of some of these
proposals--and that is fair with any proposal--I take issue
about the idea that there is substance. The details we need are
simply not here. There is no cost-benefit analysis. There is no
implementation timeline. There are no metrics by which these
measures would actually show success, and we know how to set
goals and metrics and come up with plans. In fact, the
Government Accountability Office (GAO), has come up with a
whole framework, which you did not follow.
I am not seeing the facts behind this proposal. In fact,
what has been frustrating is we have repeatedly asked the
Office of Management and Budget about the data, about any cost-
benefit analyses that might exist, about the over 100,000 in
public comments, timeliness and authorities. A simple question,
tell us what you think you need in terms of legislation. Tell
us what you think you can do without legislation.
We are getting stonewalled. There has been an outright
refusal to answer many of these questions. That is not the way
to get this started. If you want a willing partner--and I want
to be one--then you have to give me the information that you
have, and if we are not getting the information you have, then
this is not serious. It is just not serious.
I will work with anyone to find common solutions, and I
will elevate any good idea, regardless of who proposes it, but
you have to provide the details. I am going to ask for those
details, the data, the analyses, and the agency plans behind
this proposal again after the hearing. That is where we are
going to reach a stalemate if we cannot begin to openly share
information.
I do not know what the strategy is behind stonewalling us.
That certainly was not the way I took your presentation when
you visited with a number of us as we began this process, but
that is the way the agency is treating this in terms of
requests for information that we have had.
I am willing to withhold judgment, and hopefully, we can
begin anew with sharing data. But there is no way that Ron
Johnson's manufacturing company or any other private sector
would begin to even consider putting into law this proposal
without more data. If we are going to try to emulate the
efficiency of the private sector, we need to do it in every
regard and not just notional ideas that are thrown out without
any meat on the bones. We have to get to that meat before we
can really move forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. I think I mentioned this was the start of
the process, and from my standpoint, I am looking at these
things coming before Congress. Legislation says no more than
three proposals at a time. You will have the backup. I would
require the backup.
I understand the deliberative process, but this Committee
will certainly--and the Congress will certainly--expect the
type of information to validate whatever proposals are actually
submitted to Congress on those things. This has far greater
detail than what the Obama administration presented--which by
the way, I would have liked to support reorganization of that
Administration as well.
This is just barely the start of the process, although
there has been an awful lot of work. But there is a lot of work
to be done.
I will agree from the standpoint that we will need more
information. I do not think you disagree with that either, Ms.
Weichert.
It is the tradition of this Committee to swear in
witnesses, so if you will stand. Raise your right hand. Do you
swear the testimony you will give before this Committee will be
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help
you, God?
Ms. Weichert. I do.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
First of all, I want to welcome Margaret Weichert, Deputy
Director for Management, Office of Management and Budget, as
our witness.
In my script, I have a brief little description, but it
does not do you justice. I want to describe really the
qualifications you bring to this process and to your job and
thank you for your service.
You were nominated on September 5, 2017. Our Committee
approved, sent you on to the Senate on January 8, 2018, and you
have been on the job since being confirmed on February 14. I am
pretty impressed with how quickly you embraced this and brought
us to this starting point.
A brief history, but one that still probably does not even
do you justice, Ms. Weichert currently serves as the Deputy
Director for Management at the Office of Management and Budget.
Ms. Weichert is an experienced business executive who served as
a principal at Ernst & Young, LLP, since 2013. In her 25-year
professional career, Ms. Weichert has also held executive
leadership positions at Market Platform Dynamics, First Data
Corporation, Bank of America, and Andersen Consulting focused
on strategy, innovation, and business process improvement in
banking and payments technology.
An innovator and an entrepreneur, Ms. Weichert also co-
founded an Internet company, Achex, Incorporated, and sold that
company to First Data in 2001. As a result of her innovative
work in payment technology, Ms. Weichert has been named as an
inventor on 14 successful U.S. patents.
An avid supporter of technology innovation in Georgia, Ms.
Weichert has served since 2010 on the Technology Association of
Georgia's Fintech Steering Committee. She holds a B.S. of
Foreign Service, Magna Cum Laude, from Georgetown University; a
postgraduate diploma in Economics with distinction from the
University of Sussex; and a Masters of Business Administration
from the University of California at Berkeley.
Ms. Weichert also is certified as a Green Belt in Six
Sigma, Design for Six Sigma.
You are an overachiever, and I certainly appreciate that
and I think well qualified for this particular task of trying
to start reining in and reorganizing parts of Government to
make it more efficient, effective, and accountable.
Ms. Weichert, thank you for your testimony and your time
for coming here before the Committee, and the floor is yours.
TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE MARGARET WEICHERT,\1\ DEPUTY
DIRECTOR FOR MANAGEMENT, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Ms. Weichert. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member McCaskill,
and Members of the Committee, thank you for having me here
today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Ms. Weichert appears in the Appendix
on page 50.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Healthy organizations are designed to adapt and change to
customer needs and free market demands. The U.S. Government
should be no different. Our Founders conceived a durable
governing framework and Constitution to serve the American
people. However, our current Federal Government organization
model has not kept pace with the 21st Century needs.
Despite dramatic changes in technology, today's Federal
Government still operates much like it did 50 or 60 years ago.
Current government infrastructure is not aligned to provide the
service and flexibility that Americans expect in the Digital
Age.
I cringe when I hear how inefficient it is for Americans to
interact with their government due to layers of organizational
bureaucracy. This is not how Americans want their government to
operate.
Job seekers have to navigate more than 40 workforce
development programs across 15 agencies, while small businesses
face overlapping, multi-agency processes every time they engage
with the Federal Government.
Food safety has its well-known red tape, and there are
numerous other examples of how everything from fish in our
rivers to housing benefits to infrastructure projects are
subject to counterproductive layers of bureaucracy.
Most programs were designed with positive intent and are
funded by supportive taxpayers, but old-fashioned
organizational complexity creates confusion for citizens. This
Administration recognizes these challenges, and a March 2017
Executive Order directed the Office of Management and Budget to
produce a comprehensive proposal to reform and reorganize the
government to better meet the needs of the American people.
This plan seeks to balance the mission, service, and
stewardship responsibilities of the Executive Branch, while
reducing inefficiency, risk, and duplication.
Although it is difficult to cut bureaucracy and red tape,
it is not impossible. The President's Management Agenda (PMA)
released in March offers a vision for government change that
the Reform and Reorganization Plan continues. To that end, OMB
reviewed reorganization proposals from agencies, academics,
interest groups, and Federal employees. Over 106,000 public
comments came from Americans interested in government
efficiency. OMB shared this feedback with agencies to inform
their proposals.
We also reviewed GAO and CBO reports, leading
organizational design frameworks, think tank recommendations,
and business journals. Last month's Reform and Reorganization
Plan reflects synthesis of this input.
The recommendations include top-down and bottom-up proposal
for change, and they represent a starting point for public
dialogue on much needed government transformation. This
approach addresses difficulties that hampered past proposals by
creating a holistic, all-of-government, organizational change
blueprint rather than piecemeal recommendations.
Given the seriousness of the task and its potential for
impact to government missions and to our workforce, OMB
conducted pre-decisional reform plan analysis in phases. The
first phase was the data collection phase. When OMB collected
key stakeholder input, seeking the most significant input from
agencies, early outputs were included in the 2019 Budget.
The second phase focused on opportunities to reduce
duplication, fragmentation, and to improve cross-agency
efficiency. This analysis drew heavily on GAO reports,
including the GAO High Risk List and duplication reports.
The final phase incorporated the President's Management
Agenda priorities identifying organizational opportunities to
improve mission, service, and stewardship support in the 21st
Century.
Transformation at this scale will take time and teamwork to
implement. Some changes can be achieved directly in Federal
agencies, while other more complex proposals require
Presidential or congressional action. Now that the Reform and
Reorganization Plan has been issued, we are eager to engage
with Congress on moving forward together. This Committee in
particular will undoubtedly play a leadership role.
We have seen similar transformations at the State and local
levels. Cities like Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Detroit;
States like Georgia, Arkansas, and North Carolina provide
insights for rethinking government. We can learn from
innovative State and local government approaches, including
reorganization to address the practical realities of delivering
citizen services in the 21st Century without overburdening
taxpayers.
As the U.S. faces the challenge of serving the diverse
needs of our growing country, commitment to government of the
people, by the people, and for the people is critical. We must
ensure that the Executive Branch is well aligned to 21st
Century realities.
As we collectively pursue the task of government
transformation, OMB acknowledges the important role of dialogue
and public deliberation in determining the trajectory for
government change.
I am grateful to be here today for this ongoing dialogue on
the path forward.
Thank you again for inviting me here.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Ms. Weichert.
Normally, I would defer my questioning because I really
want to reserve the time for the other Members that have shown
up.
In this case, I want to make a slight exception. In your
testimony, you really have not listed kind of a prioritization.
I have a six-page summary. I know you are talking about 32
proposals. There are 49 bullet points on this.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. A lot of ideas, a lot based on GAO. Can
you just for the Committee, maybe to help structure our
questioning, can you just lay out what you believe are, first
of all, the top priorities of things that we really want to
focus on first and what may be most possible, where there might
be areas of agreement as opposed to obviously, Ranking Members
talking about where there will be areas of disagreement. But
can you just kind of talk about those top priorities before I
turn it over to the Ranking Member?
Ms. Weichert. Yes. Thank you, Senator.
I think it is great framing to say that this activity was
meant to showcase the art of the possible, and so, as noted,
the proposals are at varying degrees of specificity. The things
with less specificity are going to need more public dialogue,
more traditional interactions on the specifics, but the ideas
that are most prepared for near-term implementation, I would
start first with background investigations.
This is an issue I know that this body has thought long and
hard about. When the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
in December suggested and required moving 70 percent of that
capability from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to the
Department of Defense (DOD), that really catalyzed an in-depth
look at the economics and the efficacy of that entire function,
which we all know needs a lot of work. The determination of
that analysis, much of which has taken place in a public
deliberative process, concluded that both the reality of having
to move 70 percent and the economics of stranding the remaining
30 percent would mean that moving the entire background
investigation made more sense and was less risky. That is the
first proposal.
I think the second one, the work on cyber, obviously very
topical. The proposal outlines some specific work that OMB and
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) have done that, again,
has been fairly well shared, and we would be happy to share
more detail about that. I know this body has done a lot of work
in thinking about how we can particularly look at our cyber
workforce. The work to actually do the skills gap assessment
has already kicked off, so that is a second area.
There are a number of other proposals. They did not get as
much sort of noise in the press, but the customer experience
proposal--there is the proposal for advanced research called
the Government Effectiveness Advanced Research (GEAR) Center
that actually would involve the creation of a capability
outside of government, but with a real focus on government
issues. That would bring private sector, government, academics,
and the public together to address key issues in government.
Those are the ones that I think are top of mind for me.
There are a range of other really important topics that
require deep consideration by Congress, and those need to--as
you all have noted--follow a process that allows appropriate
deliberation, and so, again, what is in the proposal is meant
to be a framing-a vision document and the operating model
component and then the implementation planning component are
what typically come next. You frame the vision. You look at the
operating model, the high-level target, and you do the analysis
on the cost benefit at that point. Then you get into the
detailed timelines and implementation planning.
Chairman Johnson. You agree with the Ranking Member. There
will be a lot more information supplied to Congress as we move
forward on this.
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely. The real question and part
of--and we take many of the comments that we have heard today,
but also we have seen in the literature. There is a
bibliography on page 128 of the document that highlights some
of the analysis we did looking at past reform efforts that
failed.
What we actually wanted to do--and my characterization from
the private sector is a little bit different than what the
Ranking Member suggested, but what this is is not the detailed
due diligence. What this is is the prospectus to shareholders.
It is a high-level articulation of the objectives of the
reorganization. It is not the cost-benefit analysis. It is not
all the detailed planning.
We actually loved the report that GAO released mid-June,
days before we actually released the plan itself. We think that
is utterly appropriate to apply to the operating model and
implementation phases for these activities, and I have shared
that with my team on that front. But this for the most part on
the more complex projects was the vision framing to ensure that
we did not hide in darkness and lose under the name of
deliberation the potential art of the possible for the bigger
change.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Thank you.
I did not use up quite all my time. Senator McCaskill.
Senator McCaskill. I understand the point you are making,
and I get that. But as we move forward, we need to get the
information that you have gotten that is informing you.
The Executive Order that was issued on March 13, 2017,
tasked OMB with developing a comprehensive plan. Shortly
thereafter, OMB issued guidance to agencies for developing the
plans. The guidance listed very specific things for agencies to
consider. One of those things was cost, the cost of continuing
to operate an agency and the cost of shutting down or merging
agencies.
Did the agencies comply with OMB guidance?
Ms. Weichert. That component of the analysis happened
before I took over leadership of the work product earlier this
year, but what I can say is the agencies that submitted plans
attempted to comply. The ones where the detail was sufficient
for those plans, they ended up in the 2019 budget.
What we discovered and undoubtedly is not surprising to the
members of this body, is the ask in the Executive Order was
massive and the potential scope unlimited. What we got came in
at varying levels of specificity, and we had to proceed based
on what was appropriate to proceed with.
Senator McCaskill. How many of the agencies complied with
the guidance and gave you any information on cost of merging
cost of shutting down, etc? How many of the agencies complied
with that?
Ms. Weichert. I cannot give you the specific number, but I
would be happy to consult with my team at OMB and provide it.
Senator McCaskill. When you get that number, you can see
the list of the agencies that have complied and the estimates
they made on cost?
Ms. Weichert. Again, the notion of the pre-decisional
deliberative process, much like in the budget process, follows
a specific path to ensure that in the Executive Branch, we can
adequately vet ideas, that we do not become so risk averse
because we are concerned in the deliberative process.
Senator McCaskill. You are concerned that some of the
information that would become public would harm your effort to
do what you would like to do?
Ms. Weichert. I am concerned that we need to follow process
that is----
Senator McCaskill. Let me just get to the chase here. You
have listed very specific things for the agencies to consider.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. You are asking Congress to give you the
authority, maybe sequentially and maybe over years, to
implement bold changes, but you are going to take the position
that the information you have from the agencies has to be held
within the Executive Branch and not shared with the Legislative
Branch at this point in time. Is that an accurate assessment?
Ms. Weichert. No, it is not.
Senator McCaskill. OK. Will you share the information you
have received from the agencies about the cost of this plan
with this Committee?
Ms. Weichert. When the plan is in the post-deliberative
stage--when we have determined that there is sufficient
information that it can follow either a normal budgetary
implication--again, as I said earlier, the plans that had
sufficient information and impact from a cost-benefit analysis,
those plans were included in the 2019 budget, and that
information was shared in the way it is in any budget cycle.
That is kind of the notion that the vision was the starting
point, the framing, but the actual execution needs to follow
the processes that we are all familiar with, whether it is
administrative action, Presidential action, budgetary action,
or congressional action.
Senator McCaskill. If we cannot get what you are getting
that is informing the proposals you made, how can you expect us
to fully evaluate those proposals? I do not understand how you
think that is going to work.
Ms. Weichert. For things to actually get implemented--we
have shared the reason why the proposals were considered. We
have shared the framing of it. For anything to move forward
into implementation, again, if we go back----
Senator McCaskill. So you are not recommending an
implementation of anything at this point in time?
Ms. Weichert. All of the implementation activities will
follow the normal course of business, the way it does in
government. You brought up a great example of how M&A happens.
The initial discussion in an M&A context happens completely
behind closed doors. Lots of considerations are discussed,
debated behind closed doors effectively in an effective body.
When it is time for implementation, they have to go to more
of a due diligence process, and then it is published. Because
of the nature of a public forum and a lot of the legislative
authorities, we needed to put something out as a framing
document so we could have the conversation about substance in
the way that it always happens.
Senator McCaskill. You are not going to get very far if you
do not give us the data. I am just telling you. It is not going
to happen. If you think you are going to be able to come to us
and make serious proposals about reorganizing government
without sharing with us the data that you are basing those
recommendations on, this is a nonstarter.
I think we have to get clarity on what exactly you are----
Ms. Weichert. When we have a proposal----
Senator McCaskill. Two of the things you have actually made
specific reference to today, I think are well down the line
because they began during the Obama administration----
Ms. Weichert. Correct.
Senator McCaskill [continuing]. Both cyber and customer
service.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. There is data out there, but for the
vast majority of this proposal, we have no data. Until we have
data, it would be highly irresponsible. We are the board of
directors here, but this is a little different than a private
company in that this is the public's money.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. Absolutely agree.
Senator McCaskill. This is their services. This is not
about making a profit. This is about making sure that somebody
down that rural road in Shannon County can start a small
business and get delivery of their packages on Friday and
Saturday. This is something that is really important in terms
of us having all the data.
If you think you can closely hold this and not share with
us, then there is going to build up a level of distrust and
build up a level of why are not they sharing, what is it they
do not want us to know. I am trying to give you solid, good
advice.
I am not your enemy here. I want to help you do this, but I
cannot go further.
Ms. Weichert. I appreciate the advice. I would like to just
share. As the proposals get closer to implementation--again,
this was a vision of----
Senator McCaskill. You cannot implement without us.
Ms. Weichert. Right, but we are not----
Senator McCaskill. You are saying you are going to make a
decision on implementation without us?
Ms. Weichert. No.
Senator McCaskill. OK.
Ms. Weichert. What I am actually committing to is as the
proposals get traction in this type of dialogue about substance
as opposed to process, we will follow the process that you
always have in considering legislative proposals. We are not
there yet. I understand the frustration that we are not there
yet, but the task that we had was to be big enough. That was
the expanding part of the task.
Now for 32 proposals that are not at the same level of
deliberation or analysis, we cannot give lists that are
completely uneven in terms of the level of data.
I agree with you. We cannot make decisions on data if we
are a mile deep in one place and an inch deep in another place.
What you have characterized as stonewalling, I would
characterize as definitive deliberative thought about what is
it time for now.
Senator McCaskill. Come when you are ready. When you are
ready, come to us.
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely, I will.
Senator McCaskill. You are clearly not ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Johnson. I think you are talking about each other.
I do not see any problem in terms of providing a vision, an
outline. These things are not fully fleshed out. They are
really not proposals yet. You can call them a proposal. It is
kind of a definition. When you are really ready to propose
something, you are going to have the information. You will
provide that to us.
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely.
Chairman Johnson. But developing the proposal to a position
or a point where you can actually make the proposal, there is a
deliberative process in there.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Chairman Johnson. You have a very unequal level of detail
from different agencies. I think that is pretty understandable.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Chairman Johnson. But, what you are committing to us is
once you have done that deliberative process, you have brought
one of these ideas, one of these visions to the point where you
literally can make it a proposal, you will have the data
backup, and you will share that with us.
Ms. Weichert. Correct.
Chairman Johnson. That is just obvious, right? Part of our
piece of legislation will actually require the fact that we are
going to have to see that there is going to be some reduction
number of agencies and cost reduction.
There will be information provided once the proposal is at
a State. Maybe we have to come up with different terminology.
These are bullet points of a vision, and when the proposal is
finally made, they will have the information. You are not going
to be hiding anything from us. You are going to making full
disclosure because we will all demand it, correct?
Ms. Weichert. Correct. Absolutely.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Senator Lankford.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD
Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Let me tell you how I see it. When I go through the list, I
go back to business perspective in the past and remember a very
old term, the big, hairy, audacious goals (BHAG), and that is
really what I see this, as the list of the big, hairy,
audacious goals. Without any details under them, just to say
this is a vision of have we considered and would we consider to
be able to look at it because some of these things obviously
will take years----
Ms. Weichert. Correct.
Senator Lankford [continuing]. To be able to think through
and to be able to gather data and to be able to go through.
Can I ask just a specific questions on this? How many of
these big, hairy, audacious goals that you are laying out there
and different vision ideas are coming from GAO High Risk List
or Inspector General (IG) reports or from previous
Administrations to say this is something that is out there that
has been considered for a while?
I know a lot of these things were bottom up from different
agencies or different individuals that work in agencies say
this is something we should consider. How many of them are
specifically GAO, IG, or previous Administration?
Ms. Weichert. There are about 20 of the 32 proposals that
have input or a significant fact base derived from the GAO
reports.
When I talk about the highest level--and I talked to Gene
Dodaro about the proposals--we agreed it is probably about 40
percent of the proposals are effectively, if not identical,
fairly close to what has been recommended by GAO.
Senator Lankford. OK. What about from previous
Administrations, however far back as you want to go?
Ms. Weichert. I could look at the exact numbers. Many of
them, I would say. Probably 10 to 12 include items from
previous Administrations.
Senator Lankford. All right. Jeh Johnson spent a lot of
time with this Committee going through DHS and the
restructuring and the requests and brought multiple requests to
us on what to be able to do to be able to help some of the
process in that particular instance. We are familiar with
dealing with those. We have had a lot of debate on what that
would look like, and we will look forward to continuing to be
able to get information as these continue to get fleshed out in
the future.
Let me ask a question that Senator McCaskill had asked as
well. How do we get a good balance between what the
Administration already has authority to do and what the
Administration does not have authority? It is obviously going
to be a longer deliberative process.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Lankford. You have mentioned already security
clearances as one of those.
Ms. Weichert. Right. Our estimate is there are about 10 to
12 proposals that do not require legislative activity in
addition to some of the agency-specific proposals that were
included in the 2019 budget. Things like the customer
experience idea that I mentioned, things like what we are doing
in cyber workforce, but even that one, I think there could be
additive areas of input from Congress.
On even some of the things we could do ourselves, that
might be part of a broader proposal.
Senator Lankford. OK. That is helpful. We will try to work
through that process together, but that is a clear line for us
that we have to be able to know what is our part, what is this
Administration's part, and what they are already taking on.
Let me bring up something else this Committee has spent a
lot of time talking about, and it is real property.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Lankford. You addressed this as one of the ideas in
trying to be able to resolve this. This is one of the things we
have started looking at with how the General Services
Administration (GSA) disposes of properties that are either
underutilized or underutilized property, but also how we are
doing leasing or buying.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Lankford. Recently, I was going through some
reports and looked at the requests for the Department of
Transportation (DOT) Headquarters here in Washington, DC. They
are requesting to be able to buy the facility. Well, that is a
great idea. It is the headquarters. We will probably have the
Department of Transportation for a very long time. We should
probably own the facility.
The problem is we have been leasing that facility for 15
years----
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Lankford [continuing]. At an approximate cost of
$750 million to lease it for 15 years.
Now we are being offered to buy the facility for $750
million. We are paying for the building twice.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Lankford. The first 15 years, there is very little
maintenance of the building.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Lankford. For the owner of the building to lease it
to us, it is no skin off their nose because air conditioners
are going to work, all those kind of things. That is not an
issue. Now it will be, and we are going to own it then. It was
a terrible idea 15 years ago.
Trying to be able to fix how we are disposing of property,
when we are buying and leasing property, this is a very big
issue to this Committee. Senator Carper spent a lot of time on
this issue. What are some of the proposals that you are already
looking at for that area?
Ms. Weichert. I think it is a great idea. One of the very
specific things that gets to the heart of this idea is the
Federal Capital Revolving Fund.
Back in business school, there is a very classic financed
truism when you compare a lease by decision. Usually, the only
rational economic reason for a lease decision is if there is a
tax benefit to that decision, and obviously, government does
not have a tax benefit for that decision.
The other reality could be a cash-flow consideration and
how the actual money gets allocated, and very often some of our
leasing decisions are made because of the nature of the
appropriations process. What is in the proposal actually looks
at a Federal capital revolving fund that would essentially free
us up to make more rational decisions about a lease-buy
decision if we really think the asset would be valuable for us
in the long term.
Senator Lankford. One of the things that you looked at was
a territorial issue of who runs this space and who has this
lane, whether that be in small business lending, small business
programs, which are scattered all over the Federal Government--
--
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Lankford [continuing]. Whether that be in veterans'
cemeteries----
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Lankford [continuing]. Which are also scattered all
over multiple agencies, whether that would be in other projects
and other grant-making, which again is scattered everywhere.
How did you make the determination to say there is a wide
variety of entities doing basically the same thing? We need to
be able to consolidate, or do we need to be able to streamline
that within the agencies?
Ms. Weichert. Yes. I think there are a number of things,
again, in the proposal that speak to how do we leverage data to
really be much more thoughtful about how we are making
decisions. That is very much something in the private sector,
and so relocation analytics and being more thoughtful about
that are critical components of the proposal.
A range of smarter leasing activities that will allow us to
make improvements to how we make decision about our leasing
decisions, and then the number of process improvements included
build on the Federal Assets Sale Transfer Act (FASTA) work that
has already been put in place.
I think there are a range of ideas that are fairly tangible
and designed to provide incentives for agencies to do the right
thing, that perhaps they do not have those incentives today,
and then to provide data to make it easier for them to do that.
Senator Lankford. OK. If I could say this, Mr. Chairman, as
well, Senator Heitkamp and I are in a hearing on the Office of
Personnel Management, coming up very soon. There are seven
areas that OPM has responsibility for. Five of those, you are
recommending transferring out. The other two is left undefined,
and we do not know what that is, if it stays there, if there is
a future plan for that as well. But that is an area that we are
going to continue to be able to focus in on.
Obviously, there is lots of issues with OPM----
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Lankford [continuing]. That are historic issues
there that absolutely affect our Federal retiring workforce
dramatically, and so we are going to continue on with ongoing
hearings to be able to drill down a little bit more in that
particular area.
Ms. Weichert. I look forward to that because it is
critical.
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Let me get a little clarity here. You
said there were 10 to 12 of your proposals that do not need any
kind of legislative authority. Does that include the
authorizing language that Senator Lankford and I are proposing
here, the Reform Government Act?
Ms. Weichert. Those would be before that language.
Chairman Johnson. OK. So 10 to 12 of these things, we can
expect the Administration to move forward with?
Ms. Weichert. That is our hope. We are using the remaining
time this summer to really go through the analysis and
clearance process about what we would do there, purely
administratively. Some things may be done via executive action.
Chairman Johnson. OK.
Ms. Weichert. There will be obvious communications about
that as it moves forward.
Chairman Johnson. Using your current authorities, following
the process the way----
Ms. Weichert. Correct.
Chairman Johnson [continuing]. Previous Congresses laid to
out for you?
Ms. Weichert. Correct.
Chairman Johnson. OK.
Senator McCaskill. Do we know which ones?
Ms. Weichert. We are working on that as we speak.
Senator McCaskill. You just said 10 to 12. Which 10 to 12?
Ms. Weichert. Correct. We are prioritizing and determining
which of those would move forward by the end of the summer.
Senator McCaskill. You know the 10 to 12, but you will not
tell us today?
Ms. Weichert. We have not cleared which of those would be
move forward----
Chairman Johnson. She is ball-parking.
Ms. Weichert [continuing]. Because we are doing pre-
decisional deliberative analysis.
Chairman Johnson. Yes. That is perfectly appropriate. There
is nothing wrong with that. You are giving us some sort of
sense, and you will inform us when you have made those
decisions.
Ms. Weichert. Right. I did share a few of them.
Chairman Johnson. Again, this is the process, and we are at
the start of it.
Ms. Weichert. Right. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. OK. Senator Heitkamp.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HEITKAMP
Senator Heitkamp. First impressions are everything, and
when you release that document, I think it is fair for us to
assume that there was data beyond that document, that there was
analysis behind that document, and that we should have access
to that analysis as you work through these things. You cannot
just plop these in, in the budget process, and expect us all to
say, ``Brilliant. Great idea.''
If you really want this to work, as Senator McCaskill has
said, you have to form a greater partnerships with us,
especially when we have been looking at this. We are the
Committee that is most committed to making this happen.
I am going to give you an example, the postal issues. Right
after you guys came out, I met with Congressman Meadows and the
Postal Task Force that the President has put together. Did you
consult the President's Postal Task Force? Did you consult the
Postal Service? What were their recommendations as you move
forward with a recommendation for privatization, which has
created a great deal of angst now that we have these rural
communities who are very concerned? They have already lost
service standards. Now we are suggesting we are going to
privatize where we know the last mile is not an easy mile to
cover.
My point is, did you consult the task force? Did you
consult the Postal Service? What were their recommendations
that came to you that led you to conclude that we should
privatize the post office?
Ms. Weichert. I appreciate that question, and it is
absolutely something critical and that we absolutely are
interested in a sustainable economic path forward that includes
university service and provides a fair----
Senator Heitkamp. No, you are not really answering my
question.
Ms. Weichert. I am trying to get there.
Senator Heitkamp. Yes or no. Did you consult the
President's task force on postal issues?
Ms. Weichert. The work that we did preceded the creation of
the task force. So there has been communication between the
bodies, and the same folks that are involved in this proposal
also are participating in the work of the task force.
Senator Heitkamp. OK. Did the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) suggest that they move food stamps out of
USDA and over to the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS)?
Ms. Weichert. I cannot comment on the specifics of the
origins of that particular proposal.
Senator Heitkamp. Imagine that you are on this side of the
dais and you are responsible for implementing this, and like
Senator McCaskill has said, we want to help you, but this is
the answer we get: ``We release this document. It makes us look
like we are innovators; we are reformers. But, oh, by the way,
do not ask the question about whether USDA had this
recommendation or HHS or if that was just something somebody
invented over at OMB.''
Senator McCaskill. Or Heritage.
Senator Heitkamp. Yes. I am not going to get into that.
But I will tell you that this will not work unless we have
complete partnership, and it will not work with an idea that
down the line, we will see the source documents. You have
released a report with recommendations that will affect service
delivery to our constituents, and we are interested in
streamlining, but we are not getting the kind of background
information that we need to support you.
Maybe you are right. Maybe these are things we ought to do,
but this idea that later on we will all get to see the data and
the documents, why release this without data and documents? Why
not release something that has the kind of gravitas?
You used mergers and acquisitions. That is like one side of
a merger and acquisition releasing the report to sway the
public one way or the other without anyone having an
opportunity to hear the other side of it, right?
Ms. Weichert. Typically, in M&A, most of the deliberations
are not public. In this environment, we need to have more
public deliberation about the bigger ideas.
What I would say is there is a bibliography on page 128
that shares a lot of the impetus for the top-down proposals,
and duplication and overlap as well as mission, service, and
stewardship were the critical drivers.
What I can say about the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) proposal is the origins of SNAP in USDA had to
do with the notion of originally it being food----
Senator Heitkamp. No, I know. I know why SNAP is over at
USDA. I know why the food bill----
Ms. Weichert. Right. What I was saying----
Senator Heitkamp [continuing]. Is structured the way it is.
Ms. Weichert [continuing]. The idea of moving it came from
the notion that how the electronic benefit is delivered today
electronically, not in commodity food form, at the States and
local levels, it is delivered together with other forms of aid
like the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).
Senator Heitkamp. I understand. I am not opposed
necessarily to that happening, but it is a true example of
where we do not have the analysis behind it that would give us
the ability to say yes or no.
I do not mean to browbeat you, but this sense that you can
hide all this data--and that may be unfair, but that you can
hide all this data until you spring a proposal into a budget
proposal and then we are going to have time to analyze it, it
is not going to work. You are not going to be successful doing
that.
The best way to be successful is to give us the source
data. Let us take a look at it. If this is not a political
document, then let us make sure that it is not a political
document by having transparency, and that is one of the
problems that we have here, is that we need transparency.
Clearly, on the postal stuff, you have raised a lot of concern
in my State with the proposal of privatizing the Post Office.
You have bitten off a huge chunk that will lead to weighing you
down rather than working with people to listen to the various
proposals.
Privatizing, your example on the Post Office does nothing
to get us to solvency. It does nothing to solve the problems of
the Post Office. We would love to have a partner.
I met with the Treasury folks. They seem to be moving in
the right direction, I felt a great deal of confidence with the
work that is being done by the task force at this point. We
will have a chance to deliberate.
But when there is an overarching kind of, ``this is the
plan,'' it really dilutes, I think, the efforts that we have
been taking, and the Post Office is a great example on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. I often describe this Committee as
nonpartisan, not even bipartisan. Nonpartisan. I just have to
say it is disappointing.
You have put the Administration in a no-win situation here.
It is a lose-lose. They are coming before us with a proposal
that has not been all fleshed out. If they were not doing this
and if they got all the proposals fleshed out, had all the
data, and it was going to take more months, then there would be
the complaints, ``Well, how come you were not consulting with
us?''
Again, this is the start of the process. Ms. Weichert has
come here beginning that consultation with us, she does not
have all the data.
You talk about source data. There is a deliberative process
here. I have no doubt I will want to see the information. If
there is somebody who is data driven on this Committee, it is
me.
I have been doing a lot of work on postal, and I absolutely
am going to require data to determine what course of action we
need to take on any of these proposals.
I guess I am just cutting the Administration some slack
here from the standpoint of they are trying to consult with us,
lay this thing out, so we can start looking at this. I will be
demanding the information required to move forward on any of
these proposals.
Senator McCaskill. Listen, Mr. Chairman, I get what you are
saying, and I do think this Committee is not a partisan
committee.
I think there are a lot of people on here--and I think that
we have records to show--that we have spent an awful lot of
time trying to get to the efficiency and the effectiveness of
government and doing aggressive oversight about duplication and
waste, all of those things.
But you cannot expect us to sit here at a hearing and say,
``Gosh, this is a great document.'' You have to expect us to
ask where it came from. You have to expect us to ask basic
questions about what underlies these recommendations. Where did
they come from? What are they based upon?
Did you expect this hearing to be ``Gosh, this is really
great. Thanks''? That is not what this hearing is.
Chairman Johnson. No.
Senator McCaskill. This hearing is about fleshing out on
what basis did these recommendations come about, and the
essential component of that is where did they come from, what
data are they based on.
To act as if us asking for data is a partisan exercise is
terribly unfair.
Chairman Johnson. No.
Senator McCaskill. She should expect that these are the
questions that are going to be asked. She should expect that we
are going to want to know whether it came from Heritage or
whether it came from GAO, and we know a lot of these came from
Heritage. They gave us our Supreme Court nominees. They now are
giving us government proposals.
We have a right to know where these proposals came from.
Did the USDA recommend this? Was there a recommendation from
Postal? Was there a recommendation from the Department of
Defense as it relates to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE)? These are all reasonable questions to be asked.
Chairman Johnson. At the appropriate time.
Senator McCaskill. And that does not turn us--but what is
this hearing for?
Chairman Johnson. This is the first step in the
consultative process for us to understand the scope.
Senator McCaskill. What questions should we be asking?
Chairman Johnson. Those are fine, but the answers, you do
not have to expect them today.
Senator McCaskill. OK.
Chairman Johnson. They will come when the proposals are
actually being made.
Senator McCaskill. OK. So then I would just----
Chairman Johnson. This is the vision statement.
Senator McCaskill. For economy in the future, if this is
just about us asking questions and not getting answers, then
why do not we do it by writing and then have a hearing when she
can provide the answers? Because I do not see the purpose of a
hearing if us asking reasonable questions are going to be
couched as a partisan activity. It is just not fair to us.
I think if the roles are reversed, you would be doing the
exact same thing. In fact, I am kind of surprised you are not
doing more of it today because typically you are the one that
says if government wants to move the needle, there needs to be
data.
This is not partisan. I want to work with you. I want to
make our government more efficient, but I cannot--and if the
idea
is--first, she said 10 to 12 are going to be done by summer.
Are we going to have another hearing before they are done? Are
we going to get answers to these questions that are going to be
done administratively? Are we going to have any data about what
they are doing administratively, or are we just ceding the fact
that the Executive Branch has the right to do it?
Maybe we want to disagree over whether they have the right
to do it. That is why it would be helpful to know what are the
10 to 12 that are in consideration.
How about this? How about them going into the Budget
Proposal? Are we going to have a hearing before they go into a
Budget Proposal so that we can get at the underlying data? We
are never going to have a chance in this Committee to get at
the underlying data in a Budget Proposal because that will be
the Budget Committee.
If this is the oversight committee for government and if
there is a massive plan to reorganize government, I guarantee
you we have the right to ask these questions, and I believe
that it is fair for those answers to come as soon as these
proposals are made. We ought to be able to at least get basics
like how many agencies gave you cost benefit. Why does that
have to be a secret? What is the purpose of that?
Chairman Johnson. First of all, I do not believe it is not,
and I actually broke form. I asked questions, and I laid out
what are the top priorities. Ms. Weichert laid out top
priorities so we can ask follow up questions and we can follow
that process through.
I think the questions will be answered. I will demand that
they are answered at the right time. This is just the start of
the process. It is the start.
If the Administration wanted to come before us, had they
not laid out this vision, then we would be complaining about
the fact that you are dropping this on us 4 months without
consulting with us. This is the beginning of the consultation
process, and I think it is totally appropriate. I do not expect
all these detailed answers to be answered today, but I will
expect them. And I would imagine the Administration will be
willing to answer those in detail as each proposal is actually
being made, when they have the data, past the deliberative
process. Once they finally have the data there to make the
proposal, then I will expect full disclosure, OK? That is all I
am saying.
Senator McCaskill. Will we get that----
Chairman Johnson. But we can----
Senator McCaskill. Will we get that before the
Administration makes these changes of 10 to 12 that you said
you would make by the end of the summer? Will we get the data
on those changes?
Ms. Weichert. All of the proposals that move by
administrative action would follow the standard process for
those types of actions.
Senator McCaskill. That did not answer the question. Will
we get the data underlying those decisions before you make
those decisions?
Ms. Weichert. My challenge today--making blanket statements
about lists of objects that are not alike--is difficult. If we
talk about, how are we moving forward on cyber, there are
elements of guidance that we are moving forward on. There are
elements of other administrative Presidential action that we
are moving forward on.
My big challenge--and I understand the energy in the room.
I really do because I do not know the last time a proposal had
32 sort of even medium-size scary ideas in them, let alone the
smaller ones that are kind of at the back. But I cannot do
blanket statements around lists because they are not like
objects.
What I can commit to is that we are trying to be open and
transparent at the appropriate time, but we need to make sure
that to the extent we need to get feedback before we finalize
what the operating model might be, so we are really well
positioned to frame it and get the right cost-benefit analysis
data--because, for example, there are proposals. Privatization
of the Postal Service, that is an example where it is a framing
idea. It could have a bunch of implementation hurdles. The
notion of universal service that you raise is absolutely
critical to the economy, not just of rural America, but all of
America.
To the extent we cannot thread the needle around this big
idea, that frankly the largest orientation for that idea is
precedent in other countries and a top-down analysis of how
other countries have done it. Other countries are not the
United States. They may not have the geographic dispersion that
we have.
What is here, the big, hairy, audacious goal that Senator
Lankford mentioned, is to frame the conversation. I am
absolutely prepared to have conversations about what is wrong
with the idea here, but the main thing that this document was
meant to do was to say this is the nature of the problem we are
trying to solve, and here is not the only proposal, not the
definitive proposal, but a proposal for how we solve it. That
is the vision piece.
The operating model piece is the next piece where we say,
``OK. Here is really where we are going to lay out the data for
the piece parts,'' and that is the place where I would expect
we would have a whole lot more data.
Again, what GAO laid out in the document that responded to
your inquiry, I think is a fantastic framework that lays out
not only answering the key questions that you all rightly have,
but also how you measure success against that over time.
Maybe the last philosophical point I will make is--I have
been through probably 40 reorganizations in the private sector,
and one of the things that reorganization in the private sector
does is bring attention to problems. It is rare--Bank of
America, I think is a great example, reorganizing constantly.
It creates anxiety. The more you do it, the more you get
comfortable at least with the process.
We have not really done it in government in so long, but
simple process of asking these reorganization questions shines
a light on these areas and very often leads to action
organically on the ground that starts solving those problems.
I would anticipate even on some of the things that feel in
the pit of people's stomach like this is just scary and we do
not like it--I am willing to bet that is going to motivate
action in the workforce, in management, and across this body
and elsewhere to really say, ``OK. If we do not want to
reorganize, how might we address that same problem?'' I think
there is a lot of examples, even when we looked in the
deliberative process, of things that you might make a top-down
recommendation about moving this thing over here because they
sound alike, where the agencies themselves recognize that and
created a joint task force or operating activities that
eliminated duplication.
The biggest motivating factor when I got involved in this
activity, sort of early January, was to say how do we actually
make change happen, not how do we deliver a report, but how do
we actually ask the tough questions that have not gotten
answers, have not gotten traction, despite the good efforts of
this body and others, like how do we shock the system so that
we really make change happen?
I absolutely stipulate that you are doing your job by
asking me these questions. I am not offended. I have to follow
what I believe is the process that can actually be digested.
I brought an enormous menu. I did not have all the
ingredients memorized or even in the report. I would say the
bibliography is a good place to get a sense of the framing of
this. Contrary to what makes nice headlines, the framing of
this is not political. It is about making government operations
work and learning from leading private-sector practices.
Sorry for the speech.
Chairman Johnson. The way you effect changes, you think
big. You think outside the box. You start the conversation. You
start the process. That is what this is. This is a broad range
of proposals. Some can be done within the agencies. Maybe you
should have left those off the list, but again, just like a GAO
report, there are some things the agencies can do themselves,
some things we ask Gene Dodaro, ``Is there legislation
required?'' But we are basically at that stage.
All I am asking is let us be supportive here. Let us
understand this is the start of the process, and I will assure
Committee Members, particularly where it requires legislation,
I will be right there demanding the backup, the information,
the data. I am driven by that.
I think we have a director here who is completely qualified
to go through this process.
Senator Hassan, sorry we stomped on your order here, but
now it is your turn.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member McCaskill, for having this hearing, and thank you, Ms.
Weichert, for being here today and for your work.
I certainly appreciate the meeting we had to discuss this
proposal a few weeks ago. It was a bipartisan meeting with
Members of this Committee. I thought it was productive, but as
you are hearing today, an early abstract of a plan causes
concern. We all share the priority of working toward a more
efficient and effective Federal Government, and there are
specific goals in this plan that I have supported for years,
common-sense ideas such as saving taxpayers money by unloading
unused Federal property.
The devil is always in the details, as we discussed, and as
I noted several weeks ago in our meeting, there are parts of
this plan that I find very concerning.
But I want to take a step back because of the discussion we
have just had. I was happy to see in the introduction of the
plan on page 3 that you paraphrased the Preamble to the United
States Constitution about what the job of government is, and
one of the things you are hearing today is that the job of the
U.S. Government is not exactly the same as the job of a
business in the private sector. We are supposed to establish
justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the common
defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings
of liberty. Quite a tall order, and it is what makes us who we
are as a country.
When you talk about anxiety of the workforce when they see
a plan like this, I think about the anxiety of the American
public because they depend on us to deliver in all sorts of
ways. They depend on us to deliver after a natural disaster.
Many Americans depend on the Federal Government of the United
States to support and protect their civil rights. It does not
get more basic in a democracy than that.
I think it is really important that we take this from the
abstract and remember how this actually impacts people because
that is how we have to evaluate whether an idea is a good one,
not whether it sounds good or whether we would win in a
philosophy debate, but whether in fact it is deliverable, given
our mission as a country.
I have a couple of questions about some specifics. One of
them goes to a concern that I raised in our meeting, but one of
the goals that I find particularly important in this proposal
is solving the Federal cyber workforce shortage.
I have been pressing the Office of Personnel Management for
months to get basic information, such as how many Federal
workers we have doing cybersecurity in each agency, but as far
as I can tell, the information does not yet exist. That speaks
to the magnitude of the problem we face in ensuring that we
have the cybersecurity personnel we need to protect the Federal
Government from hackers.
As we have reiterated just in the past week, the Russian
government was fully willing and able to attack our election
infrastructure in 2016 and hack into a State election website,
stealing sensitive information about 500,000 American voters.
As my Republican colleague, Senator Lankford, correctly
noted, that was a Russian attack on our democracy. If Russia is
willing and able to attack our election infrastructure, they
and others will absolutely attack our Federal agencies, and we
need to ensure that we have a cybersecurity workforce in place
to prevent and mitigate those attacks.
The idea outlined in this plan would create a unified cyber
workforce across the Federal Government. It is an ambitious
proposal in part because it would impact so many agencies.
I am going to ask you to be brief because I have a couple
other questions. If you were to move forward with this proposal
or something like it, how would you work with each of the
impacted agencies to garner appropriate feedback and buy-in
before such a proposal was finalized and implemented?
Ms. Weichert. Thank you for what you shared, and I share
your concerns on this.
As we have outlined in the proposal, the first thing is to
get that talent gap assessment and an actual inventory, and we
have kicked off the process to gather that feedback. That
process has started. We do not have the results yet back in.
In terms of another information component, we need more of
our unfilled slots around cyber, so not only where do we have
gaps, but where do we actually have outstanding billets that we
have not filled? Then working largely through guidance, both
from OMB and from OPM to address the specific areas, I do think
there is a number of interesting proposals that I have seen
both here and in the House that are looking at other things we
might do. But our initial start is with the authorities we
already have.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
That is one of the ideas where I think your proposal has
some promise.
Let me share an area that is one of the most concerning
ideas in the proposal, which is merging the Department of
Education and Labor. There are opportunities to better
coordinate workforce training across agencies to be sure, but
fundamentally, these two Departments have the responsibility to
protect rights in two vastly different settings, and they carry
out very different functions.
Under this proposal, a single enforcement agency will
combine a number--I think it is up to eight--of currently
separate divisions, including the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA), and the Department of Education's
Office for Civil Rights.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration was
created in 1970 to combat the rising injury and death rates in
the workplace.
The mission of the Office for Civil Rights is to ensure
equal access to education and to promote educational excellence
throughout the Nation through vigorous enforcement of civil
rights, making sure every child has access.
These entities, the offices came about because we
discovered over the course of our history that unless there
were champions in the Federal Government to protect workers, to
protect kids, for instance, with special needs, those
protections did not happen. That is why we are here. These did
not come out of thin air. They came out because workers were
dying on the job. Kids who had disabilities could not go to
school.
This Administration has a track record of chipping away at
workers' protections, including blocking OSHA rules and
limiting public information about important action taken
against bad actor employers.
The Administration also has scaled back on the enforcement
of important civil rights protections, such as rescinding the
2011 Title IX guidance and dismissing hundreds of civil rights
complaints in schools because they were deemed to be part of a
so-called serial filing. When you are combining these missions
and many others, students and workers will presumably be left
with no champion to carry out important protections under
Federal laws, and that creates real concern.
A single senior official tasked to oversee this division
will be forced to choose what protections are more important
when allocating limited resources.
This reorganization comes off as another attempt by this
Administration to undermine workers' rights, students' rights,
and civil rights.
Let me just start with this. Would you agree that the
Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights has a vastly
different mission than the Office of Safety and Health
Administration?
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely.
Senator Hassan. How will you ensure that important
protections under Federal law do not fall to the wayside in the
name of government efficiency?
Ms. Weichert. I think this would be a very appropriate area
for a collaborative set of dialogues with Congress and the
Executive Branch because, as you can see in the proposal, the
main drivers were mission elements about workforce development
and kind of lifetime learning.
The proposal itself did not envision touching compliance
from a mission standpoint. I think there might be some elements
of service. How do we make it easier for people to navigate?
Because, as you well know, it is very difficult for people who
are advocating for special education or whether it is
workforce-or education-related activities to interact with
government. But I think this is exactly the kind of area where
we need to have that collaborative dialogue about ensuring all
of the functions of that mission are protected.
Senator Hassan. Thank you, and I look forward to working
further with you.
Thank you for letting me go over, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JONES
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
for holding this hearing.
Ms. Weichert, thank you for being here.
I apologize that I had to leave earlier to do a floor
speech with Senator Alexander.
I know I have missed a lot, obviously. One of the things--
and I am about to ask something that I came in on and heard you
make a couple of statements about. If I am taking this out of
context, please correct me. But when I walked in as you were
answering, I think, Senator McCaskill's questions, you made a
comment about one of the missions here is how do we make
change, how do we shock the system to make change happen, and
my concern with that when I heard that was--first of all, this
Administration is making a lot of shocks to the system, and
second of all, it almost appears that this mission was to find
the change to make change happen, not to see what changes might
need to happen.
Now, am I reading that wrong? Is part of your mission to
simply go in and make the changes and to shock the system to
make the changes, or are you studying what is the appropriate
way--should things be changed at all? Everybody wants to be
more efficient, but I am concerned that we have an
Administration here that went into this with a bunch of
stakeholders in the private sector who said, ``We want this.''
They are after you to make the changes, and your job is to
implement the changes that those people wanted.
Tell me I am wrong. I hope I am wrong.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. I do not think--perhaps coming into a
word like ``shock the system'' sent the wrong message, but the
point I was trying to make earlier was the change we need in
the 21st Century to our organization structure is big, right?
Incremental change will not get us from a system that is
fundamentally rooted in the mission and the organization
structures that came out of World War II and that mission.
Our mission today is much more complex. It is much more
technologically driven, and from my perspective, what has been
happening and really why I am here is that change is needed.
If you look at actually what informs the proposal, it is
heavily informed, as I discussed with Senator Lankford, by
stacks of GAO reports about needed areas for improvement around
duplication, fragmentation, and overlap, areas where the reason
there are pictures of human beings in this report is not
marketing. It is about the mission, the service to Americans.
It is about what Senator Johnson mentioned that average
Americans feel this bureaucracy that is misaligned to the 21st
Century.
And so, the words ``shock to the system,'' I understand why
they might get taken out of context, but the notion is
incremental change is not enough. I have a 17-year-old and a
14-year-old. I would like them to inherit a government that can
actually do the things that Senator Hassan actually mentioned.
Today, so much of the mission of providing for the common
defense, promoting the general welfare, preserving the
blessings of liberty is tied up in bureaucracy, not because the
history of why it was was bad, but because the current
implementation is just--calcified. It is layers on layers.
It absolutely is not, an answer in search of a problem. GAO
has laid out the problems. You all have identified the
problems. What I view as a newcomer to government is we have
not gotten traction on the problems doing business as usual,
and so what this approach of kind of a big, hairy, audacious
goal, a big vision with lots of ideas was meant to showcase
that the incrementalism of the past would not be enough. You
all know in every past Administration in the last 40 years,
there have been one or two major reorganization proposals. Most
of them have not even gotten out of committee.
Senator Jones. I appreciate that. To that point, I do not
disagree, and no one on this Committee disagrees that we can
always make government more efficient. But with every
Administration, there have been some changes.
Since World War II, we have done pretty damn good. I mean,
we fought World War II. We fought the Korean War. We have
survived the cold war. We have survived the Civil Rights
movement. We have survived worker rights. We have done OK, and
I am worried about a sledgehammer coming in that is saying,
``Oh, everything now is calcified, and we need to bust it up.''
That was one thing.
I want to ask a couple of specifics where I have just
seen--and I have only a couple of minutes here for a couple of
specifics. But one of the things I have seen in this report is
the ultimate goal of privatizing the U.S. Postal Service
(USPS).
Now, I got a State in Alabama that is 50 percent--more than
50 percent--50-some-odd counties out of 67 that are very rural.
Those counties depend on their postmen. They depend on their
postmen every day or 5 days a week, whatever it is now, to come
in and deliver their mail, to get their bills, and to do those
kind of things.
In looking at privatization, everything I have seen says
rates will go up for rural America if we privatize the postal
system. Have you looked at that issue for rural America in
particular? Not just the bottom line for mail delivery as a
whole and how much money the Postal Service may or may not be
losing, but what is the effect on Ma and Pa Kettle out there in
rural America that depend on their mailbox every day for their
newspapers and their coupons and their catalogs and their bills
and things like that?
Ms. Weichert. I appreciate the question, and the proposal
is a vision for really dramatically restructuring a service
that we know already has challenges with meeting its
obligations to employees and being economically viable and not
a burden to taxpayers.
The vision of universal service is absolutely something
that we need to square, and again, this proposal is one vision,
and it is a vision that drew heavily from examples in other
countries where privatization took place in some cases writ
large, but in most cases in components to ensure that
compliance function is associated with it, universals service
function is associated with--fairness functions associated with
it were maintained.
We talked a little bit earlier about the relationship
between this proposal and the President's task force. Again,
this proposal is a long-term vision. The task force is actually
specifically focused on some of those operating models you just
raised, and so it is a continuation of the same thought
process. It feeds into that. The specific rate question, I
would defer to the task force as they pull together the
implementation plans, which I understand are coming together
and will be presented in August.
Senator Jones. Have you considered--and this is a quick
question, Mr. Chairman, if you will indulge me. Have you
considered even the potential antitrust implications of trying
to sell off the postal system for the entire United States of
America?
Ms. Weichert. This would be an area--when you get to the
actual operating model and the specifics, that would be the
appropriate time to consider that.
Senator Jones. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to other hearings
on this matter. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Carper.
Senator Carper. Let me pass for this for just a moment, and
I can maybe come in next. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Sure. Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member, thank you for having this hearing.
Ms. Weichert, it is great to have you here before us.
I want to reiterate something the Ranking Member mentioned
is that I--and to you, Mr. Chairman. I do not believe we have
been partisan here today. Ms. Weichert, hopefully you have not
seen partisanship. What you have seen is a Committee, though,
that is very focused on nuts and bolts. I think that is why all
of us were attracted to serve on this Committee. That is why I
wanted to be on this Committee is that I want to work to reform
government, make it more efficient, but also really get into
the weeds. This is an in-the-weeds type of committee. This is
not a philosophical committee. Even though I have a philosophy
degree, this is not a philosophy committee. This is a nuts and
bolts committee; that is, about trying to figure out how we do
things differently and how we do them more efficiently.
I get the fact that this is a visionary document that we
are looking at, but we are going to want to get into those
kinds of weeds.
I think if you look at some of the problems that we have
with duplication right now--in fact, I am working on
legislation in a bipartisan way with Senator Gardner to figure
out how we can get rid of multiple organizations that are
involved in regulatory oversight.
An example I use, we have multiple government agencies that
oversee catfish.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Peters. I do not think we need that. I want them to
have one agency----
Ms. Weichert. We agree.
Senator Peters [continuing]. To make sure that catfish is
safe when I eat it or ship it, but you do not need multiple
agencies.
But some of those problems are as a result of Congress
because Congress has jurisdiction, and every committee has
jurisdiction over certain agencies. They are not going to give
up those agencies. We have to be part of that process as well.
But we want to work closely with you to figure out how we
get to that 21st Century. I am going to ask you some questions
about that in a minute.
Ms. Weichert. Sure.
Senator Peters. But first off, to kind of get into the
weeds of the 10 to 12 or the ones that you are going to put
forward that do not require congressional involvement, you said
you are in the process of looking at those. Give us some
transparency as to exactly what is the process, what will be
the determining factors as to which one or all of those 12 will
be put forward shortly, and will there be complete transparency
as to what factors were used, what criteria were used in order
to come to that list? You have mentioned the data will be
provided at that time, but it is not just the data. I want to
know how you have actually used that data to inform some sort
of metric to determine that those are going to be the reforms
you put forward. Please enlighten us.
Ms. Weichert. Sure.
For the proposals that do not require a change to
authorities or funding, what we are doing now is we are working
with the affected agencies, and we are working to determine
what the operating model would be for moving that forward.
I talked about the background investigation process. That
on its own is a meaty piece of work, and on that one, we have a
body called the PAC that includes the Director of National
Intelligence. It includes the DepSec for DOD. It includes the
Director of OPM. It includes myself and a representative from
the National Security Council (NSC). We are working through
those issues as we speak.
Department of Defense is actually working on standing up
the components, and together, we are working to bring those
components so that we can address the civilian component as
well as the DOD background investigations because, as I said
before, trying to rip them apart while you are also
transferring 70 percent is going to put the whole enterprise at
risk. That is an example of one type of analysis.
Another type of analysis, the GEAR Center, which again it
is one of my personal favorites, but it is actually looking at
a place where we can have public dialogue that is informed by
evidence, that is informed by leading thinking from academics
in the private sector, and we are putting out a request for
information (RFI) in the coming weeks that is asking for more
information from the public about how we might stand that up.
That will be a public request for information that is going
out.
Customer service. My team is looking at how we might
actually integrate some of that and build on things that the
U.S. Digital Service is doing.
Each one of these proposals has kind of a slightly
different track, but the other thing, to your broader question
how does this all come together, 10 to 12 in and of itself,
although they are not as large or as high profile as the things
that need congressional activity, that is a lot of change. We
do not have unlimited resources to manage change appropriately.
The other activity that is not pure science is the art of what
comes first and the art of staging, and that is something that
in every change activity I have been in, it is informed by
data. It is informed by a combination of you want to put some
things that are hard but important and need to get started now
with some things that are easier to achieve.
You cannot do all the hard things at the same time. We do
not have the resources for that.
I apologize that I do not have perfect information to give
you here, because it is part of a process, but rather than
stonewalling or sledgehammering--like this thing right here,
the Constitution, creates this creative tension that ensures
that our drive for efficiency or our drive for action in the
executive is tempered by your representation of the needs of
the broader government.
Senator Peters. To hear that process, I assume this will be
fully transparent as it actually works itself through?
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Peters. This will not be a black box? You are
willing to talk to us even if we do not have a chance to have a
hearing?
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Peters. Hopefully, we will, Mr. Chairman, have a
hearing on those specifics. That you will be fully transparent
to Members of this Committee, answer our questions? You
mentioned that in your hearing for your nomination that you
would be fully transparent----
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Peters [continuing]. Provide all that data? I have
your commitment that as this process goes forward, you will do
that?
Ms. Weichert. So again----
Senator Peters. And we can call you out if you do not. How
is that?
Ms. Weichert. The key thing is I need to not create new
processes while we are trying to reform government that has
plenty of processes today. As much as possible, we are trying
to leverage the processes that exist, and it is my bias to be
as open and transparent as possible. I think the challenge----
Senator Peters. Well, it cannot just be your bias. It will
be this Administration. You will deliver that to us?
Ms. Weichert. I will do my best to be appropriately
transparent.
Senator Peters. How do you define appropriate?
Ms. Weichert. There is a general counsel (GC) that helps me
with that. I am not just a private citizen here with my own
desires. I am part of an institution, and so I have a motivated
desire, as I have shared, to share the information that will
make the change possible.
I need to be cognizant that I am part of an institution, a
branch of government that has its historical precedent and has
process.
My project, the business of government that we are involved
in is much larger than the work that I am doing. Process has
its point, and I have puts and takes on everything that I do.
Senator Peters. One reason why a lot of this reform has not
happened in the past--and we hear it--is because of process.
The process gets in the way.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Peters. I would hope that you would also be very
active in coming to us. If there is a process----
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Peters [continuing]. If someone is telling you, you
cannot give Congress this information, will you be transparent
at least to tell us that you are being told that you cannot
give this information to us? Because we have to stop letting
the process get in the way of meaningful reform, but make sure
that that meaningful reform is actually based on objective
data; it is actually based on information that is quantifiable
that would be used in a corporate boardroom to make decisions,
not based on ideology done in a black box. That is what the
American people deserve. That is what this Committee hopes that
we will deliver, but we need your help to do that. You need to
be transparent and let us know where the process is getting in
the way of us doing our job, which is to be the oversight
committee for this reorganization.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. I appreciate that, and one of the
leading business thinkers I quote a lot is a guy named Stephen
Covey, who basically says, ``If I cannot start with myself when
change is happening, that I am not as well set up for
success.'' My team knows that I am constantly pushing to ask
why cannot we, how might we, what could we do.
Again, I am one person who I believe is in a position, a
unique position right now to be able to take advantage of a
spirit of change, a desire for real action, and I am in a great
institution that has been here much longer than me. I have to
balance those ideas.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. I would point out that a corporate
boardroom does not get the transcript of every conversation
that took place between the people that developed the proposal,
every email, every text. What they get is the proposal. They
can get the work product with all the data backing up to the
proposal, and that is what I expect to get is the rationale
once the proposal is actually developed.
I am not expecting the product from the deliberative
process. I am looking for the final product, the results from
that deliberative process.
Senator Carper, are you ready?
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Yes.
Ms. Weichert, very nice to see you. Thank you for joining
us today and for your leadership. Thank you for taking on a
tough job and presenting what your findings are and
recommendations are today.
When we fell into the Great Recession back in 2009, our
budget deficit ballooned to, as you may recall, about $1.4
trillion, the largest since really World War II.
In the years following that, the deficit has trended down
and reached about $400 billion, maybe 5 or 6 years later. Still
too much, but better than $1.4 trillion.
We are told by CBO now that the budget deficit has begun
trending up, and we are looking at a deficit next year of a
trillion dollars or more, and some people just say, ``Well, ho
hum, it is business as usual.'' It cannot be business as usual,
and we have to look at everything we do and ask if that is the
right, smart way to do it. We have to look at our revenues. We
have to look at our spending. This is an important undertaking.
This is, as you know, not the first time we have taken a
look at the way we structure our government, and my approach to
doing this as the former Chairman of this Committee would be to
ask a lot of folks this question: What do you think? That
includes Federal employees, and I do not know to what extent
you have asked that question. But that is the way I ask all
kinds of people: What do you think? People like to be included.
Frankly, a lot of times, they have good ideas that would inform
what we are working on.
In previous Administrations, including the last
Administration, maybe the one before that, work was done--I
know in the Clinton administration--with respect to
reorganizing government. Among the people I would ask, ``Well,
what do you think?'' are people who led those initiatives, and
maybe you have done that.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Carper. If not, that would be helpful, I think, to
you and certainly to us.
Senator Collins and I got involved in postal reform about
10 years or so ago and to try to put the Postal Service on
sound footing, and everything was fine until we fell in the
Great Recession. Then all kinds of businesses and people, but
especially businesses decided to get out of the mail and to
move lock, stock, and barrel to the Internet. As a result,
First-Class Mail was dramatically reduced.
The Internet taketh away but also giveth back, and it has
given the Postal Service a new line of business, which is
packages and parcels really on steroids, which is a good thing.
I used to be State Treasurer of Delaware. I was State
Treasurer of Delaware when we had the worst credit rating in
the country. I became State Treasurer at the end of 1976. Pete
du Pont became our Governor, turned out to be a very good
Governor, and we had the worst credit rating in the country.
And for a 20-year march from the worst credit rating in the
country to the end of 1999, sometime in 1999, my last year--
2000, my last year as Governor, we earned AAA credit ratings.
And I will never forget meeting with the folks from Fitch,
S&P, and Moody's, and they said to us, ``You you have made
great progress over 20 years in Delaware, but you still have
one big liability you have not addressed.'' We said, ``Well,
what is that?'' They said, ``You have a lot of retirees, and
you have fully funded a pension system for the State, but you
have not done anything to fund health care benefits for your
State retirees,'' and they said, ``You need to do something
about that.''
We looked around. We saw, well, nobody else is doing that.
Businesses do not do that. States do not do that. They said,
``It does not matter. You should do that.''
We began setting aside some money. We still set aside some
money every year to fund the health care benefits of State
employees. Some other States do this as well.
I have asked my staff to look at Fortune 100 companies: How
many of them actually fund the health care benefits for their
pensioners? Almost nobody. How many of the Fortune 500 fully
fund the health care benefits for their pensioners? Almost
nobody. Fortune 1000? Almost nobody.
What we had to agree to do to with George W. Bush's
administration was to actually have a deal on postal reform in
2007 to fully fund, do something we do not ask any other
company or government in the country to do, and that is to
fully fund over relatively a few years the health care
liability for their pensioners. I always like to say the
government should act more like a business. In some cases, we
should.
Well, if we are going to ask the Postal Service to act more
like a business in this case, we would not be asking to put any
money aside for their health care liabilities. That is the 800-
pound gorilla in the room in terms of the postal viability, and
sometimes we take our eyes off of that.
I have worked on this for years. Susan has. Senator Jerry
Moran, Senator Roy Blunt, and the Ranking Member have worked on
it. Senator Heitkamp. We have asked a lot of questions: What do
you think we should do?
If I were in your shoes, if I were in the shoes of
Secretary Mnuchin who is heading up this postal reform task
force, I would have asked to meet with us and say, ``Well, what
do you think?'' To my knowledge, we have had no such request.
If we are going to do anything on postal reform, you are
going to need our cooperation, and I am not telling you how to
do your job, but take advantage of that opportunity.
I understand the folks who worked on this particular issue
within this task force are now part of the team that Secretary
Mnuchin is leading. They have sort of gone from working on this
endeavor to going over and working in the Mnuchin-led task
force. It sounds to me like this could be pre-baked, but I hope
not. I hope not because this is one we can fix. This is one we
can fix, and my hope is we will do that.
Let me ask one question. Sorry to go on so long about the
Postal Service. My wife asked me when I die, what would I like
to have put on my tombstone, and I have said I would like for
it to say ``Return to Sender.'' That sort of explains my
affection for the Postal Service. [Laughter.]
It takes a while to get that.
Chairman Johnson. I guess that should be granted.
Senator Carper. Hopefully, that will not be too soon.
Real quick on the Army Corps of Engineers. Obviously, with
any change, one needs to start by identifying the problem to be
solved, and one or two specific concerns regarding the Army
Corps of Engineers current structure that the President's plan
is intended to fix, and how does that plan address those
issues, please?
Ms. Weichert. OK. The Army Corps proposal essentially looks
at the fact that particularly for our rivers and inland
waterways, there are multiple agencies involved in all of the
mission areas, and they are diverse mission areas, everything
from protecting endangered species to managing locks, managing
ports, and managing flood protection. There is a lot of
overlap, but more importantly, there is a lot of fragmentation
that creates challenges when people are actually trying to make
a decision or actually get something done.
The main changes there were--first of all, only 22 percent
of the whole mission is civilian. Something in the Army where
the Army has a much bigger mission about warfighting, it is
potentially going to get neglected in the broader area where
there are important missions. Particularly with flooding and a
lot of other issues we have seen, we want better management
around that and to streamline that process and to make it
easier to get things done appropriately and also not have
conflicting decisions around, Director Mulvaney did the fish in
the river. It is a funny story, but literally because there are
different species and there are so many people involved and the
Army Corps sits in the middle of all of that, we might make
different decisions about how much water is let out of a dam
and that could have impacts for that.
There are environmental issues. There are flood control
issues. There are permitting issues, and then there is the
overall focus and attention.
Senator Carper. All right. Thanks. Thanks so much. I have
some more questions for the record, and, Mr. Chairman, thank
you for letting me go on.
I would just say on postal, I am not going to suggest this
liability to health care, liability of pensioners should be
ignored. It should not be, but we should not just hold out the
Postal Service as the poster child to do something----
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Carper [continuing]. That we are not asking for
other companies or other government agencies.
Thank you so much. We look forward to working with you on
these. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. First of all, the ``Return to Sender''
comment was well worth your questioning time.
I will say I have met with the task force, and I have been
keeping up with it. My sense is they really are trying to do
that. First up in problem-solving process was develop the
information, which I have been trying to develop. It is like
pulling teeth to a certain extent. It sounds like they have a
pretty competent team to develop that baseline of information
we need to actually develop some kind of proposal, so I am
hoping that is the direction they are going.
Senator McCaskill is on a timeframe. She wanted to ask a
question or two real quick, if that is----
Senator McCaskill. I did not want to have to leave the
hearing without looping around with you.
You have an opportunity, and I certainly cannot say
strongly enough how much I want to go forward in a bipartisan
basis to make changes that make sense. If the attitude--what it
feels like it has been so far--is we are going to closely hold
information until we get far enough along in the process that
they cannot dive in too far to figure out how we got here--and
ultimately, the data you give us is going to be what you choose
to give us, and the worst thing in terms of efficiencies is to
have lawsuits over executive power.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. That is not efficient.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. If there are some bold moves made within
the Executive Branch without legislative buy-in, you are not
going to get efficiencies.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator McCaskill. You are going to get a food fight.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. I just want to stress to you, trust us
if you want us to trust you.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. If you will deal with us in good faith
and not stonewall us on a basic question, ``Give us the number
of proposals you think need legislative action,'' that is not a
high bar for information.
Ms. Weichert. Thirty.
Senator McCaskill. OK. I need to know which 30 they are. So
far, you all have refused to give my staff that information.
I do not know where your staff is getting their marching
orders, but the fact that your staff has refused to tell us
which 30 proposals you think need legislative action and what
that is, that breeds distrust, which is the antidote to good
bipartisan work that we can do here.
If you will begin to share and not stonewall, I think you
might be pleasantly surprised how cooperative many of us are.
You are not going to get 85 votes, but I damn well bet you, you
could get to 60. If you want to do that--because other
administrations, this will be marked as an F and will go in the
dust bin of history if you do not get the trust and cooperation
of Democrats that want the same goal as you want. And I am one
of them.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator McCaskill. Give me a chance to work with you before
you put up the wall and say we are not ready to tell you
anything.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Harris.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HARRIS
Senator Harris. Thank you.
The Administration released a set of three Executive Orders
that seem to be aimed at weakening the unions that represent
Federal workers, and then coupled with the Administration's
reorganization proposal, these actions frankly seem to be
targeted at dedicated public servants and I think have the
potential to really harm the American public in terms of the
quality of service the American public will receive as a result
of that. I am concerned about these Executive Orders.
My question for you is, Do the agencies have discretion to
deviate from the mandates that are contained in the three
Executive Orders that are affecting Federal employees?
Ms. Weichert. The Executive Orders were designed to really
get back to the merit system principles that are set out
guiding our overall civil service structure and in total we are
really looking at how do we preserve that.
I think the agencies have been given guidance around some
of these components. I think additional guidance is
forthcoming, and I think that will be available.
Senator Harris. Is that guidance going to direct that the
agencies have discretion to deviate from the mandates that are
contained in the Executive Orders?
Ms. Weichert. Each Cabinet official is going to obviously
take--or agency head is going to take the guidance that they
were given and interpret it and comply with it as it fits in
their purview.
Senator Harris. There is no standard for all agencies? Each
agency head can do as she or he wills as it relates to an
interpretation of an Executive Order?
Ms. Weichert. Based on the guidance that they are given.
Senator Harris. Are they going to be guided that they have
discretion to deviate from the mandate?
Ms. Weichert. I would like the guidance to speak for
itself. If there is a specific concern you have, I would be
happy to take that back.
Senator Harris. Yes. The concern would be as it relates to
Federal employees and specifically with regard to the Executive
Order on official time, and my concern is whether the agencies
have discretion to negotiate to allow more than 25 percent of
an employee's time in a calendar year to be used for official
time. As you are aware, official time is used for things like
helping the employees report fraud and waste. It helps them
pursue whatever may be a concern about sexual harassment in the
workplace. Things of that nature are the issues that are
addressed when official time is being used.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. On official time, the notion was that
there were people spending up to 100 percent of their time,
including things like nurses and doctors at the U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs (VA) on official times are being paid for
by American taxpayers but not serving the direct mission of
what the taxpayers are paying for, and so the guidance around
official time is the 25 percent number.
Senator Harris. But would not you agree that good public
policy is not crafted around the abuses? We will address the
abuses when they occur. Good public policy should be addressed
at improving efficiency and effectiveness, and certainly, we
know the use of official time is effective use of time to
address workplace issues and particularly those issues that may
harm or affect employees in the work force.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. Absolutely, when we are talking about
protecting against waste, fraud, and abuse and whistleblower
activities--I am actually the executive chair of the CIGIE.
Senator Harris. Well, that is carved out, the whistleblower
piece, right?
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Harris. This is about everything else.
Ms. Weichert. Correct. Much of your concern, I think, at
its root is concern about that waste, fraud, and abuse
component, and that is carved out. The guidance does address
that.
Senator Harris. What about sexual harassment?
Ms. Weichert. I think it is a critical issue, and I cannot
speak explicitly to that point in the guidance, but I would be
happy to look at it and----
Senator Harris. Please do and follow up.
Ms. Weichert. Sure.
Senator Harris. Thank you.
Do the agencies have discretion to negotiate to allow union
officials to use official time to handle grievances that are
filed by the union rather than for the employee to request the
official time?
Senator Harris. Again, I do not want to give you the wrong
answer, so I would want to get back to you on that.
Senator Harris. OK.
How many employees do you believe and expect will be
removed under this reorganization plan?
Ms. Weichert. Although the initial conversation and the
initial Executive Order had a flavor around reduction in force,
when we actually did the analysis--and I have shared some of
this data publicly--the issue we have in government is not that
we have too many Federal employees. The issue is that we
actually have a mass of Federal employees set to retire within
the next 10 years. We actually have a challenge of having the
right number of Federal employees in the right tasks, and so a
lot of what we focused on since I have gotten involved is how
do we get the right people to the right task. There are no
specific reductions in force envisioned in this proposal.
There may be some dislocation areas where either there is a
skill gap challenge or some other mismatch between the future
State and the current State, but in general, the goal is not
reductions in force.
Senator Harris. Is your representation to this Committee
that there will be no Federal employees removed from their
employment with the Federal Government pursuant to this
reorganization plan?
Ms. Weichert. That is not my representation.
Senator Harris. What is your statement on that? How many
will be removed?
Ms. Weichert. I do not know the answer to that. It would
come in dislocation, but the goal is not to remove employees.
The goal is actually--and we have made a request to Congress
for a billion dollars in a reskilling, retention, and
recruitment activity to ensure we have the right skills
mismatch.
To the extent there is any dislocation, it would relate to
the skills being a match for the mission.
Senator Harris. OK. I only have a few seconds left.
You said earlier that there will be 10 to 12 agencies in
terms of the workforce changes, but you did not say which of
those you are moving forward with. Can you tell me which
agencies are we talking about in regard to the reorganization
plan and those that can be done without congressional approval?
Which are the 10 to 12 agencies?
Ms. Weichert. It is not 10 to 12 agencies. It is 10 to 12
proposals, and many of the proposals, like the background
investigation proposals, affect multiple agencies.
As I shared a fair bit, we will have more information for
that toward the end of this summer.
Senator Harris. I have this document, and then each
proposal has a number next to it. Can you tell me which ones,
according to the numbers that have been assigned to each
proposal, can be done from your opinion without congressional
approval?
Ms. Weichert. Again, I shared some examples, the challenge
I had mentioned earlier around providing lists when we still
have not done the assessment of which things are we ready to
move on. We are looking at 10 to 12 things. I shared the
background investigation component, the cyber workforce
component, the customer experience, and the GEAR Center.
Senator Harris. Yes. If I may interrupt you, but you may
not be prepared to move forward on it. But that is a separate
point from whether you think you can move forward on your own
or whether you require a congressional approval.
My question is on that latter point. Which one of these
proposals do you believe, when you are ready, you would be able
to proceed without congressional approval?
Ms. Weichert. Again, what I shared earlier is that--and I
also shared it in the committee with the House last month--is
we are spending this summer doing that final analysis, and so
there are 10 to 12 that we are looking at right now. We are
making the final definitive assessment, because as you could
imagine, our counsel wants to look in and make sure that our
initial hypothesis is valid.
In the end, it might not be 10 to 12. It might be eight. I
cannot definitively tell you that because we want to be
thoughtful. We want to be prudent about actually doing that
analysis and running that through a legal process as well as an
analytical one.
Senator Harris. I think that would be a smart thing to do.
Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Hoeven.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HOEVEN
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Weichert, the plan proposes to move the Army Corps of
Engineers, civil works, out of the DOD. The commercial
navigation function would go to the DOT, and the flood control
functions would go to the Department of Interior (DOI).
Are you going to continue to use uniformed military
officers for those functions, or then would that all be done by
civilians?
Ms. Weichert. The details of that would be one of the
things we would want to work out.
I think one of the things that we all acknowledge is that
the leadership development discipline that the Army has brought
to the Army Corps of Engineers is one of the things that is
exceedingly good about the Corps. The challenge is that because
only 22 percent of their resources are spent on civilian works,
it is not necessarily the highest priority for the military. I
think that particular question would be one of the things we
would want to have a discussion about.
Senator Hoeven. That is a pretty massive change. Is that
the kind of change you are talking about making
administratively rather than via legislation?
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely not. No. This is one that would
require congressional involvement.
Senator Hoeven. This is something where you are doing an
analysis on whether these functions could be done better by
moving them to civilian----
Ms. Weichert. The vision again was this was one of the top-
down proposals, and it reflects a lot of feedback that we got
about challenges, both to a range of missions, whether they
were environmental missions, flood control missions, or
transportation project missions. There is a lot of research
that has been done, and I believe this Committee may have even
looked at issues around permitting and some of the challenges
there.
The root causes of this proposals are varied and myriad,
but this was fundamentally a top-down proposal to say
Department of Interior is doing a lot in certain areas of the
mission, Transportation is doing a lot in certain areas. The
functions sitting in the Department of Defense are perhaps not
getting the full attention that we would want to dedicate to
those civilian missions.
Senator Hoeven. Your proposal also includes a section
titled Solving the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Shortage,
details How the Federal Government struggles to recruit and
retain cybersecurity professionals.
Senator Peters and I have introduced legislation, the
Federal Cyber Rotational Program Act, and it is a rotational
program for employees with cyber designations similar to the
joint duty programs that the military has now.
My question is, Do you support that kind of rotational
program for Federal civilian cyber employees, and are you open
to it? Do you think it has benefits, and are you willing to
work with us on it?
Ms. Weichert. Absolutely willing to work with you on it. I
think it is well aligned. I am not deeply familiar enough to be
able to weigh in on any particulars, but what I can say and
what I know about it at the highest level is it feels very much
aligned. In fact, the proposal we actually envisioned, although
there are things we can do without legislative action that we
have outlined in the proposal, that we would want to actually
think organizationally about how would we take into account
things that this body and yourselves have proposed as well as
some ideas that have come up in the House.
Senator Hoeven. In the realm of small business--and small
businesses make up 96 percent of the businesses in our State
and obviously are really the backbone of our economy nationally
and create most of the jobs--you have a pretty big
reorganization plan for small business programs in general. It
affects Department of Agricultural, Transportation, Treasury,
Veterans Affairs, and it looks like you are essentially taking
all the programs relating to small business from all these
different agencies and saying, OK, we are going to put them
under the Small Business Administration (SBA).
Now, I have always been a big fan of the SBA. I think they
do a great job and appreciate what they do very much, but now,
if we are going to take all these programs, put them into SBA,
I mean, are we going to get into this, Federal one-size-fits-
all bureaucracy, which, of course, is my fear? Being a former
Governor, I think the more you can let States do, the better
off we are because they can respond to the needs in their
State, and those needs differ across the country.
When we get these big monolithic Federal agencies, pretty
soon they are making the customer fit their program and their
regulations and their bureaucracy rather than making those
programs fit the customer, that small business out there that
is trying to get something done.
It is one thing for these giant corporations, with all
their resources and attorneys and everything else to fight
their way through that bureaucratic blizzard, but it is darn
tough for a small businesses.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Hoeven. As you make this change, are you really
empowering these small business programs, or are you going to
turn it into a big old bureaucracy where you cannot even find
somebody that is supposed to help you, let alone actually get
the help?
Ms. Weichert. I think it is a great question, and I have
started to----
Senator Hoeven. You can kind of sense where I am going with
it.
Ms. Weichert. No, absolutely. I have started three small
businesses, and I have a deep affinity for this subject.
This proposal actually was one that started with the
service element: How do we serve small businesses, and how do
we keep them from having to run hither and yon to get stuff
done? That is actually one of the things we as a country do
pretty well.
When I think about the appropriate analogy from the private
sector, I ran strategy, innovation, and business development,
as well as analytics, for Bank of America's e-commerce, ATM,
and mobile channels. We had service to our customers--and it
included small business--that included product areas that were
delivered by all kinds of parts of the Bank, but we delivered
them in an integrated way.
Did all the piece parts move in order to do that?
Absolutely not. This proposal, I think, is another one where a
good robust dialogue with Congress about how do we make this
happen so that it really does cut through the red tape for the
small businesses and make that transparent to the small
business. Some of the functions might actually move if we think
there are real efficiencies. Some of it may simply be a way of
conceiving and advocating for that small business to say does
this end-to-end make sense.
Small businesses in your State, do they have a high overlap
between agriculture activities and commerce activities today?
What is the best way to bring that together? At this point, I
cannot definitively say that. You may have the better idea
about that, but that, I think, would be a great substantive
discussion rather than the goal being creating some behemoth
organization.
Senator Hoeven. Yes. I think if you can achieve that, where
you reduce the red tape, the bureaucracy, and really empower
those programs to serve the customer based on the customer
circumstances, the small business out there, rather than trying
to make them conform to some big one-size-fits-all model, then
that is the kind of thing that could be of benefit. But you
have to be careful as you do this to make sure you are
achieving that.
Ms. Weichert. Right. Because a small business farmer, a
small business high-tech company, and a hair dresser may have
very different needs in terms of how they interact with
government. To your point, we have to be careful we do not want
to lose sight of what we are really trying to do.
Senator Hoeven. Well, that is it. I mean, right now our
farmers produce the highest-quality, lowest-cost food supply in
the world that benefits every single American, every single
day. We cannot take some of those things for granted as we make
these changes, and that is just one area.
But Department of Agriculture, at least they are focused on
the farmer. If some agriculture business now has to go into
some big bureaucracy that does not know squat about agriculture
or rural America, it could be counterproductive.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. I think that is critical, and actually,
when I was in Kansas City, I met with a bunch of farmers. One
of their biggest criticisms of government was ``I am a
business. I am an LLC. I am not an individual, and everything
that I go to do with USDA treats me like an individual, but I
am an LLC. I am a multigenerational family business. I need to
be treated like a business.'' That really stuck with me.
Senator Hoeven. OK. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Those are exactly the kind of questions
we will be asking once you have these proposals fleshed out.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Daines.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR DAINES
Senator Daines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding
this hearing today.
Like the Chairman, I went directly from the private sector
to Congress; like the Chairman, I spent decades in the private
sector.
I want to applaud the Trump administration for initiating
this effort here of how do we eliminate the duplication and
redundancy in the Federal Government, how do we improve
efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability.
Can you imagine if we had James Madison and Thomas
Jefferson at this witness table here today and asked them, ``So
take a look at what is going on in the Federal Government, and
what do you think? Is it panning out like you thought it would
with this vision of limited government?'' as they put forward
this amazing vision, this American experiment, this American
idea? I think they would be shocked at what they see, and I
want to thank you for tackling the swamp and the efforts that
you are doing here to reorganize and reform the way the Federal
Government operates today.
I think back to the countless conversations I have had with
Montanans as I travel around our State. I get to all 56
counties, every congressional period, every 2 years. They
overwhelmingly agree that the Federal Government is broken. It
makes their lives more complicated. The government has
forgotten who the customer is in the transaction, and the
reason for that is there is no competition.
Having spent time in the private sector, as you have, Ms.
Weichert, you know that the reason you get better is because of
competitive forces. You have to keep delivering better value
and a better customer experience, or else your customer goes
somewhere else. But when you have a captive audience like the
Federal Government does, where are the incentives to do that? I
am convinced that most often, these bureaucracies, when they
wake up every morning, they are more focused on serving the
bureaucracy and how do you keep the status quo than changing
things to better serve the customer, so thank you. I think this
is the President once again making good on promises he made to
the American people and why he is the President.
Healthy organizations embrace change. Healthy organizations
adapt to better meet the needs of their customers. That is the
nature of reform that you see in the private sector, but here
in Washington, DC, just listening to this dialogue between
members of the Senate and yourself, it seems that President
Trump's opponents would rather quash any real reform discussion
and seek to preserve the status quo. I think they have
forgotten who the customer is, and if I need to remind
everybody again, the customer is the taxpayer of the United
States of America.
Ms. Weichert, as it stands now, you have estimated the
transformation is going to last between 3 to 5 years. I think
that is a realistic assessment. Should these discussions stall
on Capitol Hill, what aspects of the proposal are most at risk?
Ms. Weichert. I think the biggest elements of the proposal
that are at risk are the ones that frankly are the result of
our top-down analysis and synthesis of the GAO reports. The
biggest issues are also some of the strengths of--what is set
out in the Constitution is this natural tension. Corporations
have a very strong executive that can make even the language
executive decisionmaking. Our democracy was not designed that
way. It was not designed for efficiency. Some of these hard
overlapping areas where you have big dueling bureaucracies and
particularly if they are in different jurisdictions, I think
those are some of the biggest challenges, and that is frankly
why we want to have this process be open and not just jump
precipitously into those things that need congressional help.
Part of what for me this process is about and why even the
conversation here is useful is to get a sense of what might we
do together because I think that is the place the American
people will absolutely be livid if we do not move forward.
In the President's Management Agenda, we started out
talking about trust in government, and that is not an Article
I, Article II combat issue. The trust problem is about all of
us, and the American people do not trust us. The trust has been
declining because we cannot get our act together.
My hope is that collectively we can--whether it is small
businesses, whether it is mission around our inland waterways,
whether it is our mission around cybersecurity, if we can get
traction on a handful of proposals--and that is part of why we
have broken it out the way we have, unlike how it has been
characterized, we are not trying to stonewall. We are trying to
actually line up change that can happen.
I love that you referenced Montana and what happens at the
State level in the context of competition because State
governments know that people can move across State lines. They
do it all the time, and if a State Governor does not get his
act together or her act together, people leave. Businesses
leave.
Senator Daines. And they are right now too.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
Senator Daines. We can see it across our country. They are
leaving States that tend to have higher taxes, more regulation
than other States.
Ms. Weichert. Right.
There is a lot to learn, and I actually indicated my
interest in learning more from what has happened at the State
and local level.
Senator Daines. I think that federalism vision is a good
one on that, to decentralize this behemoth here in Washington,
DC.
I want to jump in, while my time remains, on a specific,
and Senator Hoeven touched on this a bit. I was pleased to see
this idea of consolidating the background investigations from
OPM to DOD. My understanding is last year OPM backlog exceeded
700,000 investigations with no end in sight. It prevents the
military from filling positions that are critical to national
security, and it seems to me on the surface that shifting the
responsibility to DOD seems like it is probably a prudent
decision.
I agree with you, and I have been involved in reform
efforts in larger businesses. You set a bold vision going
forward, but then you have to start eating that elephant one
bite at a time. You cannot go off and boil the ocean. It is
going to have to get some wins in some important areas. This
could be one of them.
Ms. Weichert, could you provide an update on OPM's current
investigation backlog and how what you have proposed might help
resolve this perennial problem? Because when you have this
backlog in background checks, you have outstanding, qualified
people ready to fill a position, but because the background
check is taking far too long, the best people leave and go find
different work because they cannot stand there waiting for
this. The folks you have left sometimes are not your top
performers.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. I appreciate that question, and you are
precisely right. The urgency around this proposal is it is
critical to what we laid out in the President's Management
Agenda. We cannot do the mission if we do not have the right
people with the right skills, and getting people in,
particularly the best people do not wait a year.
In terms of the specific number, the last number I heard
was 700,000. I do not have an updated number. We could
certainly get back to you and provide an answer for the record.
But the goal of this activity is to, again, shine a light
on this, keep the function together, because there is really
critical talent that does that, but we also at the same time
have to look at the nature of the work changing.
As the skills in government become more about judgment and
orientation as opposed to clerical skills, the nature of the
background investigations and the level of the background
investigations is different. The mix of work is different, and
so we need to look at what are the leading practices, including
using information technology (IT), continuous evaluation, that
both improve our outcomes and in terms of identifying potential
bad actors, but also improve throughput. That is a dual
process, and we believe that certainly the resources, the
financial resources and the human resources (HR) will be
brought to bear by the Department of Defense as part of this
transition.
But we continue to maintain in my role as Deputy Director
for Management advocating for the whole of government. We are
going to be looking at service levels. We are going to be
looking at this backlog.
Senator Daines. Yes.
Ms. Weichert. This is something I am totally in agreement
with.
Senator Daines. I know it is one of your high priorities.
I will yield back to the Chairman here.
But thank you, too, for focusing on the customer
experience. Many Americans, they walk into a Federal agency are
not expecting a great customer experience, and I go back to--we
used to require Ken Blanchard's book, ``Raving Fans,'' as a
required reading.
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Daines. A short book, right? How do you move
customers to ``wow''?
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Daines. Let us see if we can do that in the Federal
Government.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. I will take ``OK'' if we can get there.
Senator Daines. All right. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thanks, Senator Daines.
By the way, I think it was pretty interesting. I appreciate
you bringing up our Founding Fathers. First of all, I think
they would be pretty proud of the fact that we survived 242
years. I am not sure they thought that was possible. They would
be pretty proud that the checks that they put in place worked
pretty well for almost two centuries.
They would probably be disappointed that the Federal
Government has busted out of the constraints of the enumerated
powers. I do not think they would be surprised at all at the
inefficiency that is a result of that.
But I think they would be pretty encouraged by an effort
like this that is trying to restrain it, trying to make it a
little more efficient, more effective, and although not
perfect, it is still working. And we still have a pretty bright
future.
They may be spinning in their graves right now. Hopefully,
we can maybe reduce that spin rate a little bit in terms of
what Ms. Weichert is trying to accomplish here.
Senator Carper has one last question before I close it out.
Senator Carper. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
One of the things we do in our office, Mr. Chairman, is--I
succeeded Senator Bill Roth used to chair this Committee, and
his picture is right out here in the anteroom. He had a great
reputation. His staff had a great reputation for constituent
service.
When I succeeded him, I said that we were going to try to
replicate that and maybe even ultimately do better. With
technology, we ought to be able to do better.
One of the things we do at the beginning of every month, we
send out a survey to people we served the previous month. Like
at the beginning of July, we sent out a survey for those that
we served in June, and there used to be by snail-mail paper,
but now it is almost entirely on the Internet. We get about a
20 percent response rate from the folks that we query, and we
ask them to evaluate our service, excellent, good, fair, or
poor. The ones who do not go back and say excellent or good, we
call them to see what we could have done better.
The last I checked for 17 years, we are running 97 percent
excellent or good and 2 percent, I think, fair; 1 percent,
poor. We know we can do better. Everything we do, I do, I know
we can do it. We are very proud of that, and we try to--and it
is one of the things we have orientation for new Senators. It
is one of the ideas we pass on to our new Senators that they
might want to keep it in mind, but others probably have a
better idea. But it is just one idea that seems to work.
Every month when we get responses back over the Internet
with these surveys, they say, ``Why was it excellent, good,
fair, or poor?'' It is sort of like a reinforcement for the
employee, for our constituents, and for the services team. It
is usually very good reinforcement.
Two quick questions, if I can. I do not expect in-depth
responses, Ms. Weichert, but I do want to come back and just
ask you to just comment briefly on how the opinions of front-
line Federal employees were considered in the drafting of this
report.
Ms. Weichert. Thanks for that question. Most of the
agencies actually involved their employees in that. I think
there is actually a good description of what Interior did that
is coming up in a hearing in the coming days. I think
individual agencies will share that, but we shared the public
comments with the agencies. Then they solicited agencies, and
did the career feedback as well.
Senator Carper. OK. I always used to say, ``Ask your
customer.'' You have probably done that too. Both of you have,
but in some cases, it is good to ask your employees as well----
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Senator Carper [continuing]. Because this is their life.
Ms. Weichert. Yes. I think the Federal Employee Viewpoint
Survey (FEVS) was also something that informed the overall
thinking around the proposals particularly related to the
workforce.
Senator Carper. The second question is you mentioned
earlier that--and I think you said in the next 10 years, some
huge percentage of our Federal workforce is going to be
eligible to retire. What did you say? Forty percent? Fifty
percent?
Ms. Weichert. It is 60 percent in the next 10 years and
then 40 percent in the next 3 years.
Senator Carper. OK. That sort of caused me to ask this last
question, and that would be, How does this plan try to ensure
that we are able to recruit and retain a world-class workforce?
Ms. Weichert. There are a number of things in the proposal.
The background investigation piece is part of it. The proposal
around OPM really is designed at its core. It has gotten a lot
of noise about the Executive Office of the President (EOP)
specifically, but the goal was to elevate the strategic
function, to really ensure we are recruiting, retaining, and
reskilling employees, so we have the right skills match. That
is something I would love further in-depth dialogue on.
Senator Carper. All right. Thank you.
All right. Thanks so much.
Chairman Johnson. Thanks, Senator Carper.
By the way, I think you raised a really interesting point.
I am glad you asked the question about the retiring workforce.
I do not know about you, Ms. Weichert, but in business, every
time I faced a problem--and you are facing problems almost
daily--the first question I always ask is ``Where is the
opportunity here?''
Ms. Weichert. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. ``Where is the opportunity?'' Obviously,
that is a huge problem. It almost begs reorganization. it
almost begs efficiency, and so there is an opportunity there as
well.
Ms. Weichert, I really do appreciate the background you
bring to this, the experience. Hard to think of a better resume
of somebody to try and tackle this enormous problem. I think it
is just a fact that the American people, by and large, do not
have a real favorable opinion of the efficiency, effectiveness
of this place.
I appreciate the fact that this Administration, again, is
thinking big, thinking outside the box and willing to take the
slings and arrows as you are trying to effect change because
people, human beings just naturally are resistant to change. I
understand that. Not quite understanding why there was kind of
the pushback here in terms of a sense of a lack of cooperation.
I do not know how else you could do this.
I truly appreciate your transparency. You have been meeting
with members. I assume you will continue to meet with them.
This begins the process. I want to underscore that again: This
just begins the process. We are a long ways from the finish
line.
Now, maybe on individual proposals, it might be a little
bit closer, but I expect full consultation. I would imagine
that you also have understood the desire on the part of every
person on this Committee of full consultation, and it is just
in your best interest to actually accomplish what you want to
accomplish, to provide that and to provide us the information.
That in itself will be a more efficient way of doing this.
I just want to thank you for your openness. I look forward
to working with you in the future, and I just wish you--and I
think the American public and I think the Members of this
Committee really wish you the best to affect the kind of change
that will make this a little more efficient, more effective, a
little more accountable government.
With that, the hearing record will remain open for 15 days
until August 2 at 5 p.m. for the submission of statements and
questions for the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:24 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]