- MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met at 10:30 a.m. in Room SD-138 Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. John Boozman (chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Boozman, Murkowski, Hoeven, Collins,
Moran, Schatz, Tester, Udall, and Murphy.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
STATEMENT OF HON. LUCIAN NIEMEYER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS &
ENVIRONMENT
opening statement of senator john boozman
Senator Boozman. The meeting will come to order. In the
spirit of having our military here, we're going to get started
on time. So we appreciate you all being here very, very much.
The subcommittee will come to order. Today, we're meeting
to discuss the President's fiscal year 2019 Budget Request for
Military Construction, Family Housing, and Base Realignment and
Closure for the Department of Defense.
The fiscal year 2019 Budget Request of $10.5 billion
reflects a slight increase over the 2018-enacted level of $10.1
billion.
MILCON delivers facility investments that contribute to
current and future force readiness, whether they support the
next generation of weapons systems, provide support to the
combatant commanders or strengthen partnerships with our
allies.
Facility investments improve the quality of life for our
soldiers, airmen, sailors, and Marines not only with mission-
critical facilities but with improvements in family housing,
schools, healthcare, and a variety of support facilities.
While the fiscal year 2019 MILCON Request is an improvement
over the historically-low request from prior years, this
request remains relatively flat compared to fiscal year 2018.
The MILCON Portfolio has been taking on increasing levels
of risk for years. Its limited resources have been put towards
higher-priority readiness issues. Critical recapitalization
projects have been displaced as an already-constrained budget
is squeezed even further to accommodate new platforms and
weapons systems.
Compounding with the long list of deferred capitalization,
the increased complexity of facilities needed to support
today's weapons systems are putting further strain on the
budget. Buildings today are more complex in design and function
than traditional construction projects, resulting in higher
costs and critical construction schedules as new platforms and
weapons systems are interdependent with their new facilities.
There are more projects that exceed a $100 million in
fiscal year 2019 budget than the post four budget requests
combined. As cost of construction projects continue to rise,
affordability decreases as large and complex projects take a
greater share of the budget.
In light of the environment just described, it is
disappointing the infrastructure did not receive any increases
from the recent budget cap agreement. It's also frustrating
that half of the department decided not to submit an unfunded
priority list when all of the services have acknowledged the
substantial backlog of MILCON requirements.
Increases in the fiscal year 2019 Budget Request begin to
improve our infrastructure but reversing years of under-funding
while simultaneously building ready and resilient installations
to support changing global posture will remain a challenge.
We must work smarter and find innovative solutions to bring
the right investment at the right time on schedule and within
budget to deliver facilities that provide maximum readiness and
war-fighting capability.
Today, we will hear from representatives of all the
military services as well as the Office of the Secretary of
Defense.
Joining us are Mr. Lucian Niemeyer, Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Energy, Installations & Environment, Lieutenant
General Gwendolyn Bingham, Assistant Chief of Staff of the Army
for Installation Management, Vice Admiral Dixon R. Smith,
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Fleet Readiness &
Logistics, Major General Vincent Coglianese, Commander of
Marine Corps Installation Command and Assistant Deputy
Commandant, Installations and Logistics, and Major General
Timothy S. Green, Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics
Engineering and Force Protection and Director of Civil
Engineers.
The subcommittee looks forward to your testimony. Before we
turn to our witnesses, I'd like to recognize my colleague, the
Senator from Hawaii, for his opening remarks, and also this is
the--as you know, there's been a reshuffling. It really is a
real honor to serve with Senator Schatz and look forward to a
very close relationship. The great thing about this committee
is it's very bipartisan in the things that we attempt to get
done and again we really do look forward to working not only
with you but even better your staff.
opening statement of senator brian schatz
Senator Schatz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate your holding this hearing to discuss the fiscal year
2019 Military Construction and Family Housing Budget Request.
I also want to congratulate you on taking over this
subcommittee. As a leader on the Veterans Affairs Committee and
in the Senate Air Force Caucus, you are well aware of the
challenges facing our veterans along with our men and women in
uniform.
I also want to thank our outgoing chairman, Senator Moran,
for his friendship and collaboration as we completed the 2018
Omnibus. That bill represented an important effort to move us
in the right direction on military infrastructure and because
of his leadership, this subcommittee has made great strides in
fulfilling the promises made to our veterans and I'm looking
forward to working with you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd also like to welcome the members of our panel and look
forward to your testimony.
General Green, this will be your last time testifying
before this subcommittee, and we want to thank you for your
more than 30 years of service and wish you well in retirement.
For too long, we have put off properly investing in our
military facilities. That has put the department and the
services in a difficult position. They have had to sacrifice
infrastructure and sustainment so that they can pay for other
important investments, like urgent non-infrastructure,
readiness requirements, and new missions and operations. These
hard choices have been made more difficult by nearly two
decades of conflicts, sequestration, and CRs.
While there's been some relief from these fiscal pressures
with the bipartisan budget agreement, MILCON has not seen the
windfall other DOD accounts have under this budget deal.
We must not continue to overlook our neglected facilities.
This is where our service members live, train, and maintain
vehicles and aircraft. This is the home base from which they
deploy and that means that failing infrastructure weakens our
ability to train, support, and ensure a high quality of life
for our service members and their families.
And with this in mind, the Fiscal 2019 Budget Request for
MILCON and Family Housing represents a modest step forward.
Total funding is up 4 percent over 2018--enacted levels,
including unfunded requirements added by Congress, and Military
Family Housing accounts are up 12 percent over the 2018--
enacted amount.
But we need sustained and predictable funding moving
forward. One or 2 years of investment will not dig us out of
the hole that we are in that came about through years of
neglect.
We also need to make sure our MILCON investment,
particularly overseas, reflects our national security strategy.
Coming from Hawaii, I take a particular interest in the Asia
Pacific Region where our commitment to our partners remains
absolute and that's why I was surprised to see that this budget
request is light on MILCON in the region, and so I look forward
to hearing from our witnesses about how this request came
together.
We also have to make good on our promise to our troops and
their families on the home front and invest in projects to
improve quality of life. This includes facilities for our Guard
and Reserve who have served as an operational reserve for
nearly two decades and require parity with the Active
component.
I look forward to your testimony. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. Mr. Niemeyer, we welcome your
testimony.
summary statement hon. lucian niemeyer
Mr. Niemeyer. Thank you. I would like to submit my written
testimony for the record and have a brief oral statement.
I want to say thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
Distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, for the opportunity
to talk to you today about the President's Budget Request for
Military Installations, Energy, and the Environment.
I also want to thank personally Senator Moran for his
support for the military and our veterans over the years, look
forward to having that same support from Senator Boozman and
really appreciate, look forward to working with the committee
as we address the needs of our military and their families who
are called to sacrifice so much on behalf of our country every
day.
We are extremely grateful to Congress for the recently-
enacted Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, which begins the
recovery from the significant impact of sequestration.
We have a responsibility now to honor the trust of the
American people by spending each defense dollar wisely. In
order to do so, our investments are now guided by the
President's National Security Strategy and the Secretary of
Defense's National Defense Strategy, recently released, with
both clearly articulate the threats and challenges we face as a
nation.
Our mission is clear. We must be prepared to defend the
homeland, remain the preeminent military power in the world,
and advance international order that promotes security and
prosperity.
The strategy confronts a stark reality that the homeland is
no longer a sanctuary. The strategy requires increased adaptive
and disbursed basing. It also requires the department to derive
budget discipline and affordability in order to direct
resources towards the highest unfunded war-fighter
requirements.
Our budget priorities today support the strategy by
establishing a foundation to rebuild the agility, resilience,
readiness, and lethality of our Armed Forces.
With a clear understanding of the strategy, we have set
forth the following objectives to confront some of the
challenges posed by years of underfunded accounts.
First, we are eliminating waste in the management of
installations and we continue to advocate within the building
for adequate funding to maintain our facilities.
We're protecting installation and ranges from incompatible
development around the country and improving the combat
credibility of our test and training assets. We're enhancing
our MG security. We are exploring new opportunities for third
party partnerships. We are working with the contracting
community to develop smarter contracts and to manage contracts
smartly.
We continue to provide for the welfare of our people and
resources through unparalleled environmental stewardship and
occupational safety programs and, so importantly, we continue
to collaborate with the hundreds of dedicated defense
communities around the country who support our bases every day
and provide for the quality of life for our troops and their
families.
These guiding principles will allow us to apply the
resources in this budget request to achieve real results. The
requested level of $10.4 billion for Military Construction and
Family Housing Programs makes significant progress in
recapitalizing facilities, but this year's funding will not
fully reverse the impacts of 6 years of sequestration.
We currently have an unfunded maintenance backlog exceeding
a $116 billion--23 percent of the department's facilities are
in poor condition and another 9 percent are failing based on
recent analysis.
My frank assessment is that it may be too costly to buy
ourselves out of this backlog. We must work to remove unneeded
capacity in order to fund higher priorities.
As noted in the National Defense Strategy, we continue to
reduce excess infrastructure and assess our installations. For
instance, we must ensure facilities that are sized for 100
personnel actually have 100 personnel occupying or working in
that facility.
We also proposed increased efforts to demolish unneeded
facilities. We are reducing leases in order to remove folks
back on base.
Our work will get us part of the way but we still need your
support for a fair, objective, and transparent process for
future base realignments and closures.
These efforts will be enhanced by a careful evaluation of
how and where we need to base new forces and new technologies.
Bottom line, we must be able to transform from a Cold War
basing strategy by realigning forces at the right locations to
improve their readiness and lethality.
We're also facing other challenges as well head on within
the department. We're managing the impact of increased costs of
labor and material resulting from adverse weather on our
military construction projects.
We are proactively improving MILCON project and contract
management to deliver power projection projects on schedule and
within budget.
Given the cyber risks documented recently by the Department
of Homeland Security, the department's Energy Programs are
focused on power security for critical facilities.
We appreciate this committee's support for the Energy
Resiliency and Conservation Improvement Program to improve
infrastructure security while still maintaining a payback for
our projects.
We're also urgently identifying resources to improve the
cyber protection of our facility-related control systems.
Our war-fighters also need access to unencumbered land,
water, and air space to hone readiness and lethality without
compromising health and safety. We are heavily engaged with
other Federal agencies to provide larger and more realistic air
and land ranges with less maneuver restrictions to better
simulate battlefield and threats around the world. Our
commitment is to provide combat-credible test and training
capabilities.
In all, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, we have both
challenges and opportunities in support of our new National
Defense Strategy. We have a determined sense of urgency to
achieve results now, knowing each achievement deters aggression
by our adversaries.
We appreciate your continued support for our military and
look forward to working with you on the committee to promote
our nation's security.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Honorable Lucian Niemeyer
introduction
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and distinguished members
of the Subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to present the
President's fiscal year 2019 budget request for the Department of
Defense programs supporting energy, installations, and the environment.
This is my first time appearing before you and I look forward to
working with the committee to support the priorities of the Department
and the quality of life for our military members and family members who
are called to sacrifice so much for public service.
First, thank you for your continued support for our mission. We are
grateful to Congress and the American people for the recently-enacted
Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, which lifts the caps so our military can
be resourced at a funding level that begins to reverse the effects of
sequestration. The Administration sent Congress a proposed fiscal year
2019 budget request of $716 billion for national security, $686 billion
of which is for the Department of Defense. We have a responsibility now
to honor the trust of the American people by spending each defense
dollar wisely to address our most urgent priorities to build a more
lethal, resilient, and rapidly innovating Joint Force.
In order to so, we need a timely appropriation in fiscal year 2019
to be fully effective. While the process of Continuing Resolutions
instead of spending bills provides Congress with additional negotiating
time, the price is paid in stress on the Department through a shortened
period to execute contracts for combat capabilities and readiness
requirements. Budgetary disruption and instability negatively impact
the Department's ability to work efficiently and modernize rapidly.
Earlier this year, the President released a National Security
Strategy which guided the development of a National Defense Strategy to
clearly articulate the threats and challenges our Nation faces around
the world. The objectives of the Department are ``to be prepared to
defend the homeland, remain the preeminent military power in the world,
ensure the balances of power remain in our favor, and advance an
international order that is most conducive to our security and
prosperity.'' Our fiscal year 2019 budget priorities enable the
Department to establish a foundation for rebuilding the U.S. military
into a more capable, lethal, and ready Joint Force. Each military
service has a distinctive readiness recovery plan and the increases are
targeted to advance these plans to improve readiness and increase
lethality.
The National Defense Strategy acknowledges that great-power
competition has reemerged as the central challenge to U.S. security and
prosperity, demanding prioritization and hard strategic choices. ``The
future Joint Force will have a modern, flexible, and tailored nuclear
deterrent; decisive, globally-capable conventional forces; and
competency in irregular warfare. The future force will be lethal and
resilient in contested environments, disruptive to adversaries, and
competent across the conflict spectrum.''
The strategy confronts the stark reality that the homeland is no
longer a sanctuary. America is a target, whether from terrorists
seeking to attack our citizens; malicious cyber activity against
personal, commercial, or government infrastructure; or political and
information subversion. New threats to commercial and military uses of
space are emerging, while increasing digital connectivity of all
aspects of life, business, government, and military creates significant
vulnerabilities. During conflict, attacks against our critical defense,
government, and economic infrastructure must be anticipated and
deterred.
The strategy stresses forward force maneuver, resilient posture,
and agile logistics. Investments over the next few years will
prioritize ground, air, sea, and space forces that can deploy, survive,
operate, maneuver, and regenerate in all domains while under attack.
Our investments must facilitate the transition from large, centralized,
unhardened infrastructure to smaller, dispersed, resilient, adaptive
basing that includes active and passive defenses.
Finally, the strategy requires each of us in the Department to
drive budget discipline and affordability. Better management begins
with effective financial stewardship. As noted in the National Defense
Strategy, ``The Department will continue its plan to achieve full
auditability of all its operations, improving its financial processes,
systems, and tools to understand, manage, and improve cost. We will
continue to leverage the scale of our operations to drive greater
efficiency in procurement of materiel and services while pursuing
opportunities to consolidate and streamline contracts in areas such as
logistics, information technology, and support services. We will also
continue efforts to reduce management overhead and the size of
headquarters staff. We will reduce or eliminate duplicative
organizations and systems for managing human resources, finance, health
services, travel, and supplies. The Department will also work to reduce
excess property and infrastructure, providing Congress with options for
a Base Realignment and Closure.''
Each mission within our energy, installations, and environmental
portfolio is directly engaged in the successful execution of this
strategy. The DoD representatives before you today provide warfighter
capabilities through over 585,000 facilities on more than 500 bases,
posts, camps, stations, yards, and centers around the world, with a
replacement cost exceeding $1 trillion, not including the cost of the
27 million acres of land that our installations occupy. We execute the
construction of facilities to provide our Combatant Commanders in
partnership with our Allies with basing adaptability and deployment
flexibility.
Our warfighters need reliable energy to carry out their missions,
whether they are out in the field or on base. We spend over $12 billion
annually on fuel and energy, not including investments to enhance the
energy security of our critical facilities and assets in the
Department. We are also working with other agencies in the
Administration to support the President's goal to accelerate
development of all energy sources in ways that are compatible with the
preservation of military capabilities.
Our warfighters need access to unencumbered land, water, and
airspace to hone their readiness and lethality without compromising
health and safety--we invest heavily in programs and achievements to
secure access to ranges that support mission-essential activities. We
are also heavily engaged with other Federal agencies to provide our
warfighters with larger, and more realistic ranges with less maneuver
restrictions to better simulate battlefields and threats around the
world.
The continued support of Congress, and in particular, this
subcommittee, allow us to use the resources provided to enhance the
agility, resilience, readiness, and lethality of our forces around the
world.
With a clear understanding of the Secretary's intent, we have set
forth the following objectives to guide our efforts to carry out the
strategy and to confront our challenges posed by years of underfunded
facility and infrastructure accounts.
1.We are using every program and funding source available to us to
eliminate waste in DoD installations and infrastructure and
maintain what we need;
2.We continue to advocate for adequate funding for installation and
infrastructure accounts to meet mission requirements and to address
risks to safety and readiness;
3.We are working with other Federal agencies, States, and communities
to protect installations and ranges from incompatible development
and to enhance the combat credibility of our Nation's test and
training ranges;
4. We are implementing programs to ensure combat capability, missions,
and resiliency by enhancing the energy security of our forces and
assets;
5. We are exploring new opportunities for third party partnerships and
engaging with industry to determine best practices and innovative
solutions for our current challenges;
6. We are working with the military engineering and contracting
community to develop smarter contracts, and manage contracts
smartly;
7. We continue to provide for the safety and welfare of our people and
resources through unparalleled environmental stewardship and
occupational safety programs;
8. And last, but definitely not least, we are enhancing our
collaboration with the hundreds of dedicated defense communities
around the Nation supporting our bases and providing for the
quality of life for our troops and their families.
We have a number of high priority issues to review today, including
the ongoing improvement and recapitalization of DoD facilities, access
to training lands, protecting the health of our force, and ensuring
energy resiliency for both our expeditionary forces and installations.
fiscal year 2019 budget request--military construction and family
housing
The President's fiscal year 2019 budget requests $10.5 billion for
the Military Construction (MILCON) and Family Housing Appropriation--an
increase of approximately $700 million from the fiscal year 2018 base
budget request, inclusive of fiscal year 2018 budget amendments to
support the Missile Defense Agency and hurricane recovery requests.
This increase supports the Secretary of Defense's guidance. In addition
to construction required to bed down new or changing missions,this
funding will also be used to restore and modernize enduring facilities,
acquire new facilities where needed, and eliminate those that are
excess or obsolete.
While the fiscal year 2019 request makes significant progress in
recapitalizing facilities in poor and failing condition, the funding
will not in one fiscal year fully reverse the impacts of 6 years of
sequestration. Many of our facilities have degraded significantly from
reduced investments in Military Construction, Facilities Sustainment
and Restoration and Modernization. The Department currently has an
unfunded backlog of deferred maintenance and repair (M&R) work
exceeding $116 billion, and many of our facilities will require
significant investment in the future. The stark reality is that it may
be too costly to buy ourselves out of this backlog. The Department must
ensure that its infrastructure is ideally sized to increase the
lethality of U.S. forces while minimizing the cost of maintaining
unneeded capacity, which otherwise diverts resources from critical
readiness and modernization requirements.
We are requesting $8.9 billion for military construction (excluding
Overseas Contingency Operations funding) across the Services and
defense agencies, which is the substantially higher than our previous
budget submission. This represents a 5 percent increase from our fiscal
year 2018 request, inclusive of budget amendment requests for a Missile
Defense missile field expansion at Fort Greely, AK, and repairs related
to the 2017 hurricane season. This request addresses requirements for
construction at enduring installations stateside and overseas, and for
specific programs such as the NATO Security Investment Program and the
Energy Resilience and Conservation Investment Program. In addition, we
are targeting MILCON funds in key areas to support the national defense
strategy.
1. Delivery of power projection platforms: In support of the Secretary
of Defense's guidance that increased DoD funding will improve
readiness and increase warfighter lethality, the DoD Components
applied more than 66 percent of the MILCON budget request to
construct operational/training facilities ($3.5 billion) and
maintenance/production facilities ($1.4 billion).
2. Combatant Command Priorities: In support of the Secretary's priority
to enhance our relationship with our Allies while providing
adaptive basing opportunities for our warfighters, more than $1.1
billion is included in the President's Budget request ($291.1
million in the base and $828.4 million in the Overseas Contingency
Operations (OCO) request) to support Combatant Command priorities.
Within the OCO request, $700 million is for MILCON projects
supporting the European Deterrence Initiative to improve
infrastructure and facilities throughout the European theater to
provide our allies, partners, and potential adversaries a clear
indication of the United States' long- term commitment to Europe.
The improvements support military readiness in the region and
improve theater Joint Reception, Staging, Onward Movement, and
Integration capabilities.
3. Homeland Defense: The fiscal year 2019 budget request includes $182
million to support missile defense of the homeland, including $174
million for the second phase of the Long Range Discriminating Radar
System Complex at Clear AFS, Alaska, and $8 million for the
expansion of Missile Field #1 to support two additional ground
based interceptors at Fort
4. Greely, Alaska: We also have dedicated the bulk of our $150 million
Energy Resiliency and Conservation Improvement program (ERCIP) for
fiscal year 2019 to projects that will enhance the reliable
delivery of power to mission facilities. We believe this program is
a critical tool to quickly respond to emerging energy security
requirements and request the continued support by the committees
for full funding of this account.
The Department is committed to protecting the quality of life for
military personnel and their families by ensuring access to suitable,
affordable Family and Unaccompanied Housing. The environment in which
our forces and their families live has an impact on their ability to do
their job, and on the Department's ability to recruit and retain.
Quality of life--to include the physical condition of the facilities in
which our service members and their families live and work and a safe,
healthy environment around and within those facilities--is also
critical to support personnel readiness for new and current missions
and strategic initiatives worldwide.
While the Department has privatized 99 percent (more than 200,000
units) of our family housing in the United States, our fiscal year 2019
Family Housing budget request includes $514 million to fund family
housing construction at locations where privatization is not feasible
or not authorized overseas. In addition, our fiscal year 2019 budget
request includes $1.1 billion for operation and maintenance of
government-owned and leased family housing worldwide, to include
providing housing referral services to assist military members with
their housing needs. This O&M budget request supports more than 34,000
government-owned family housing units, most of which are on enduring
bases in overseas locations, as well as more than 7,500 government-
leased family housing units where government-owned or privatized
housing is unavailable. The requested funding will ensure that U.S.
military personnel and their families continue to have suitable housing
choices.
The Department also continues to modernize Unaccompanied Personnel
Housing to improve privacy and provide greater amenities. The fiscal
year 2019 President's Budget request includes $245.8 million for 8
construction and renovation projects, providing more than 1,690 new or
replacement bed spaces that will improve living conditions for trainees
and unaccompanied personnel.
Our request also includes $1.7 million to support administration of
the Military Housing Privatization Initiative (MHPI) program as
prescribed by the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990. This includes
monitoring MHPI programmatic goals and performance, and risk associated
with Federal credit assistance provided for MHPI projects (e.g.,
government direct loans and limited loan guarantees). The Department
continues to work with our MHPI project owners to help ensure the long-
term viability of individual projects and the program as a whole. We
are continually assessing the impact that changes to the Basic
Allowance for Housing may have on project revenue, which covers project
operating and maintenance expenses, funds debt payments, and finances
the future housing revitalization and recapitalization necessary to
provide continued high quality housing for military families and to
ensure these projects remain viable throughout their 40-50 year
lifespans.
special considerations
Cost of labor in a post-storm bid climate and impact on 2018 and 2019
execution
The 2017 Atlantic hurricane season was one of the most destructive
hurricane seasons on record, with over $1 billion in damage in to DoD
facilities. The private sector rebuilding will take years and many
billions of dollars while consuming a large portion of the U.S.
construction market.
As such, the Department's fiscal year 2019 MILCON budget request
takes into account the impact on construction costs of a high demand
for specialty craftsmen and material prices over the near- term. While
the ongoing recovery from last summer's hurricane damage has tightened
construction markets and driven up construction prices in the most
impacted areas, the Department judges the impacts will last through
October 2018, barring a repeat of last summer. As such, we plan on
using prior-year bid savings from other MILCON projects to absorb
potential bid spikes in fiscal year 2018 in order to avoid delays in
the award of critical warfighting requirements. We would appreciate a
discussion with the committees prior to a decision to rescind funds
from prior-year MILCON accounts which could threaten our ability to
award fiscal year 2018 priority projects. We do not anticipate needing
to adjust fiscal year 2019 MILCON project cost estimates in the
affected areas to reflect spikes in construction prices.
Actions planned to mitigate contract cost increases and time delays
We have undertaken a proactive assessment of recent challenges in
MILCON project delivery and program management to improve our
performance delivering MILCON projects on schedule and within budget.
The Department is implementing reforms in a number of key areas, to
include: improving identification of project requirements; enhancing
collaboration between resource sponsors, end users, and construction
agents to ensure projects meet mission requirements within budget
constraints; selecting the best engineering and acquisition strategy to
cost-effectively meet mission requirements; identifying risk mitigation
measures before cost or schedule changes adversely impact the mission;
and increasing awareness and accountability at all levels of management
and performance as problems arise. The Department is also consulting
with our industry partners to identify commercial best practices to
lower costs, save time, measure performance differently, and improve
project quality in support of the warfighter.
Further challenges to incremental funding of military construction
projects
The Administration and Congress have competing interests on an
incremental funding policy for large MILCON projects. Congressional
decisions to reallocate incremental appropriations for a MILCON project
results in the need for DoD to defer priorities late in the budgeting
cycle in subsequent years in order to include remaining increments in
the budget request. Further Congressional incrementation may result in
delays to project delivery of critical warfighter requirements.
facilities sustainment and recapitalization
In addition to MILCON, the Department invests significant funds to
maintain and repair our existing facilities. Sustainment funding
represents the Department's single most important investment in
preserving the condition of its facilities. It includes regularly
scheduled maintenance and repair or replacement of facility
components--the periodic, predictable investments that should be made
across the service life of a facility to slow its deterioration, save
resources over the long term, maintain safety, optimize facility
performance across its lifecycle, and help improve the productivity and
quality of life of our personnel.
These activities have endured funding constraints under the Budget
Control Act, forcing Defense Components to accept significant risk in
facilities sustainment and recapitalization. Recognizing this, the
Military Departments increased Facility Sustainment commitments in the
fiscal year 2019 budget request of $9.1 billion, a 6.3 percent funding
increase compared to the Department's fiscal year 2018 budget request.
In addition, Restoration and Modernization funding is used to
perform total facility renovations and critical repairs to ensure the
facility can support assigned missions. Our fiscal year 2019 budget
request includes $2.8 billion of O&M funding for recapitalization. The
combined facility sustainment and recapitalization funding of $11.9
billion, a slight decrease the fiscal year 2018 request, still reflects
an acceptance of significant risk in DoD facilities.
As a result of limited investments in previous budgets for
facilities sustainment and recapitalization, 23 percent of the
Department's facility inventory is in ``poor'' condition [Facility
Condition Index (FCI) between 60 and 79 percent] and another 9 percent
is in ``failing'' condition (FCI below 60 percent) based on recent
facility condition assessment data. This will ultimately result in DoD
facing larger bills in the out-years to restore or replace facilities
that deteriorate prematurely.
Previous budgets also have limited investment for targeted
demolition to eliminate obsolete, inefficient, and underutilized
support infrastructure. Without a new Base Realignment and Closure
round, DoD has largely been forced to rely on routine demolition or
renovation of buildings as part of MILCON projects in order to right
size its facility inventory. The Department dedicated some of its
additional fiscal year 2019 resources to demolish more unneeded
facilities. The fiscal year 2019 budget request includes $442 million
of O&M funding specifically for demolition or conversion of existing
facilities and $65.4 million for MILCON funding to support demolition
of assets in conjunction with new construction. In total, almost 30
million square feet of building space will be removed or replaced.
environmental and safety programs
Restoring military readiness requires that we maintain access to
training lands and protect the health of our force. The Department's
environmental budget accomplishes these objectives through activities
ranging from managing critical habitat and avoiding training
restrictions to addressing drinking water health advisories and making
the best use of limited cleanup dollars. At the same time, we manage a
$27 billion (and growing) environmental liability, the second largest
DoD liability, while sustaining our reputation as the Nation's premier
steward of natural resources and cultural assets. The President's
fiscal year 2019 Budget requests $3.4 billion for environmental
programs, which is comparable to the fiscal year 2018 request, to
continue our efforts in these areas.
We are requesting $1.3 billion to continue cleanup efforts at the
remaining Installation Restoration Program (IRP--focused on cleanup of
hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants) and Military
Munitions Response Program (MMRP--focused on the removal of unexploded
ordnance and discarded munitions) sites. This includes $1.1 billion for
``Environmental Restoration,'' which encompasses active installations
and Formerly Used Defense Sites (FUDS--sites that DoD transferred to
other Federal agencies, States, local governments, or private
landowners before October 17, 1986). The remaining $245 million is for
``BRAC Environmental.''
Our focus remains on continuous improvement in the restoration
program: minimizing overhead, adopting new technologies to reduce cost
and accelerate cleanup, and refining and standardizing our cost
estimating. We have improved our relationships with State regulators
through increased dialogue, which reduces the number of formal disputes
over cleanup levels and allows us to implement cleanup activities in a
timelier manner. All of these initiatives help ensure that we make the
best use of our available resources to complete cleanup.
Table 5: Progress Towards Cleanup Goals
Goal: Achieve Response Complete at 90 percent and 95 percent of Active and BRAC IRP and MMRP sites, and FUDS IRP
sites, by fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2021, respectively
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Status as of the end of
Projected status at the
Projected status at the
fiscal year 2016
end of fiscal year 2018
end of fiscal year 2021
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Army..............................
91%
92%
96%
Navy..............................
82
83
89
Air Force.........................
83
85
91
DLA...............................
86
88
96
FUDS..............................
84
86
93
Total.........................
86
88
93
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
By the end of 2017, the Department, in cooperation with State
agencies and the Environmental Protection Agency, completed cleanup
activities at 86 percent of Active and BRAC IRP and MMRP sites, and
FUDS IRP sites, and is now monitoring the results. During fiscal year
2017 alone, the Department completed cleanup at over 500 sites. Of the
roughly 39,800 restoration sites, almost 33,200 are now in monitoring
status or have completed cleanup.
In addition, DoD has made significant progress in the cleanup of
our FUDS sites, completing 84 percent of the IRP sites. Despite this
progress, 1,700 of the over 5,100 FUDS sites still need to be
addressed, many of which are MMRP sites. The Department is evaluating
opportunities, such as partnering with landowners at our FUDS sites, to
expedite cleanup and make these lands available for development sooner.
While DoD is committed to cleaning up all the remaining sites in a
timely manner, many of these sites present complex challenges. New and
changing standards require DoD to reprioritize or reopen previous
remediation decisions which delays progress. Additionally, some sites
have no feasible solution to clean up the contamination, and as a
result, the Department is making significant investments in
environmental technology to identify new potential remediation methods.
Environmental Technology
A key part of DoD's approach to meeting its environmental
obligations and improving its performance is the pursuit of advances in
science and technology. The Department has a long record of success
developing innovative environmental technologies and quickly
transferring them from the laboratory to actual use on remediation
sites, installations, ranges, depots, and other industrial facilities.
These same technologies are also now widely used at non-Defense sites
helping the nation as a whole.
While the fiscal year 2019 budget request for Environmental
Technology overall is $172 million, our core efforts are conducted and
coordinated through two key programs--the Strategic Environmental
Research and Development Program (SERDP--focused on basic and applied
research) and the Environmental Security Technology Certification
Program (ESTCP--focused on validating more mature technologies to
transition them to widespread use). The fiscal year 2019 budget request
includes $77 million for SERDP and $24 million for ESTCP for
environmental technology demonstrations, with an additional $16 million
requested specifically for energy technology demonstrations.
These programs have already achieved demonstrable results and have
the potential to increase training land availability by developing more
effective management strategies for installation managers, to reduce
costs by developing new ways of treating groundwater contamination, and
to reduce the life-cycle costs of multiple weapons systems. In the area
of Environmental Restoration, we are launching an aggressive initiative
to develop more cost-effective treatment options for other newly-
identified contaminants in addition to addressing Perflurooctane
Sulfonate (PFOS) and Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA). In the critical
area of installation energy, we are focused on proving technology and
solutions that cost-effectively improve the energy security of our
installations and that protect our energy assets and facilities from
cyber attacks.
Environmental Conservation and Compatible Development
The Department continues to preserve access to the land, water, and
airspace needed to support our mission. As training, testing, and
operational activities expand and new weapons systems are introduced,
access and use of ranges becomes even more important. The fiscal year
2018 budget request for Conservation is $419 million. The Department
will invest these funds to maximize our flexibility to use lands for
military purposes, as well as addressing incompatible land uses beyond
our fence lines.
The Department's lands and waters are vital to readiness, but also
support a diverse array of fish and wildlife species, including over
400 that are federally protected under the Endangered Species Act
(ESA). Managing for healthy and resilient natural landscapes provides
the conditions necessary for mission-essential activities, such as
reducing fire risks, avoiding wildlife conflicts, and improving range
and training area conditions.
Species endangerment and habitat degradation can and does have
negative impacts on the mission through regulatory protections. In
recent years, there has also been a marked increase in the number
species being petitioned and evaluated for listing under the ESA. We
have initiated a TIGER TEAM with the Department of the Interior to
develop proactive, collaborative conservation initiatives to help
prevent additional species of concern to the Department from being
listed under the ESA, and implementing conservation actions to
facilitate species recovery and de-listing. As a result of our
management, research, and coordination efforts, the Department has
regained access to important training lands. For example, our continued
cooperation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and other
partners for the conservation of the black-capped vireo at Fort Hood
has significantly reduced training restrictions on 73,000 acres, and
the species is currently being evaluated for de-listing.
Similarly, working with partners in the USFWS and Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) in California, the US Marine Corps translocated over
1,000 endangered desert tortoises from newly withdrawn lands at Marine
Corps Air Ground Combat Center (MCAGCC), Twentynine Palms. This
translocation opened over 160,000 acres for training, filling a
critical need to support large- scale Marine Expeditionary Battalion
(MEB) exercises. Ongoing management and monitoring efforts will help
sustain military readiness.
We have also realized great success and mission benefits from the
unique regulatory provisions within the ESA that exclude military lands
from critical habitat designations. Building on this success, we will
continue to work with our partners at the USFWS and National Marine
Fisheries Service, as well as other Federal, State, and non-
governmental partners, to develop new and innovative regulatory
approaches that streamline processes and provide greater mission
flexibility. We will also be working to develop more landscape-scale
initiatives to better capitalize on both our on-installation
conservation programs and our off-installation conservation
partnerships through the Readiness and Environmental Protection
Integration (REPI) Program.
Readiness and Environmental Protection Integration Program
REPI investments protect training, testing, and operational assets
of the Department. As training, testing, and operational activities
increase and new weapons systems are introduced, the ability to work
with Federal, State, local and private partners to promote compatible
development, relieve regulatory restrictions, and leverage resources
that sustain critical military capabilities, becomes even more
important. Investing in and taking advantage of current opportunities
for innovative collaboration is paramount to securing the operational
viability of local installations and ranges. REPI is able to directly
leverage the Department's investments at approximately one-to-one with
those of our partners, effectively ensuring compatible land uses around
our installations for half the price. Through REPI's partnering
efforts, we can continue to support the warfighter, provide value to
the taxpayer, and enhance military readiness and capabilities.
To enable DoD to sustain its national defense mission and to ensure
military installations do not become refuges of last resort for
threatened, endangered, or at-risk species, the Department has
developed an approach that supports land protection beyond installation
boundaries. Under this approach, DoD engages with other governmental
and non-governmental partners who work with private landowners, to
develop initiatives and agreements for protecting properties for the
purposes of avoiding or mitigating regulatory restrictions on training,
testing, and operations on DoD lands. These efforts ease the on-
installation species management burden and reduce the possibility of
restricted activities, ultimately providing more flexibility for
commanders to execute their missions.
A recent, innovative example of this approach is the Department's
Gopher Tortoise Conservation Crediting Strategy, which the Department,
the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and three State agencies
finalized in March of 2017. This Strategy seeks to address the
conservation of the gopher tortoise, a candidate species for protection
under the Endangered Species Act (ESA), thereby providing the
regulatory predictability that commanders require to effectively
operate at installations and ranges throughout the southeast. Through
the 2018 REPI Challenge, a competitive funding process that seeks to
cultivate innovative approaches to sustaining military capabilities,
the Department seeks to fund similar species crediting strategies that
will help reduce existing or future regulatory restrictions to testing,
training, and operational activities.
Within the $424 million for Conservation, $75 million is directed
to the REPI Program. The REPI Program is a cost-effective tool to
protect the nation's existing training, testing, and operational
capabilities at a time of decreasing resources. In the last 15 years,
REPI partnerships have protected more than 510,000 acres of land around
93 installations in 31 States. In addition to the tangible benefits of
preserving DoD's existing training, testing, and operational assets,
these efforts have resulted in significant contributions to the
economic health and recreational opportunities for local communities.
In addition, DoD, along with the Departments of the Interior and
Agriculture, continues to advance the Sentinel Landscapes Partnership
to protect large landscapes where conservation, working lands, and
national defense interests converge--places defined as Sentinel
Landscapes. Established in 2013, the Sentinel Landscapes Partnership
further strengthens interagency coordination and provides taxpayers
with the greatest leverage of their funds by aligning Federal programs
to advance the mutually-beneficial goals of each agency.
Since the initiation of the Partnership, agencies from the three
Departments have designated seven locations as Sentinel Landscapes.
Some of the military's most important installations anchor these
Landscapes: Joint Base Lewis-McChord in Washington; Fort Huachuca in
Arizona; Naval Air Station (NAS) Patuxent River and the Atlantic Test
Ranges in Maryland (Middle Chesapeake Sentinel Landscape); Avon Park
Air Force Range in Florida; Camp Ripley in Minnesota; and two consortia
of installations in Eastern North Carolina and Georgia. Partnerships at
each of these locations are collaborating to preserve, enhance, and
protect habitat and vital working lands near military installations in
order to reduce, prevent, or eliminate military test, training, and
operational restrictions due to incompatible development. At Joint Base
Lewis-McChord, Fort Huachuca, and Middle Chesapeake Sentinel Landscapes
combined, partners have invested more than $86 million between fiscal
years 2013 and 2016 to advance each location's specific military
mission and resource conservation goals. Over $17 million of the total
investment during this period has come from State and local
governments, whose support for the mission of the Partnership has
helped to ensure its success.
In addition to investments made in these areas, partners at each of
the Sentinel Landscapes are working collaboratively on innovative
approaches to better leverage existing efforts to preserve working
lands and promote compatible development. In the Middle Chesapeake and
Avon Park Air Force Range Sentinel Landscapes, partners are working to
improve efforts to match REPI funds with funding from the other
Departments by aligning or merging agency requirements for the
acquisition and monitoring of easements and land interests. This
unprecedented level of interagency cooperation will enable the most
efficient use of taxpayer funding to protect military capabilities and
sustain readiness.
department of defense energy programs
Unlike the Department's MILCON and Environmental Remediation
programs, where the budget request includes specific line items, our
energy programs are subsumed across other accounts, yet are critical to
our support for military readiness, resiliency, and agility.
operational energy -- unleash us from the tether of fuel
Operational energy is the energy required for training, moving, and
sustaining military forces and weapons platforms for military
operations. While energy is an essential component of our warfighting
capability, longer operating distances, remote and austere geography,
and anti- access/area denial threats are challenging the Department's
ability to assure the delivery of fuel. As the ability to deliver
energy is placed at risk, so too is the Department's ability to deploy
and sustain forces around the globe.
Based on his experience in Iraq, then Lt Gen James Mattis, Director
of Marine Corps Combat Development Command, directed researchers in
2005 to identify technological and operational improvements that would
``unleash us from the tether of fuel.'' The operational energy
investments in the fiscal year 2019 budget request are focused on
reducing that ``tether'' and increasing the capability of our forces on
land, air, and sea.
The fiscal year 2019 President's Budget supports a broad set of
investments to ensure lethality in contested environments through
resilient and agile logistics. The Department is investing over$2.8
billion to upgrade and procure new equipment, improve propulsion, adapt
plans, concepts, and wargames to account for increasing risks to
logistics and sustainment, and enhance how the Department considers
energy in developing new capabilities. As the Department responds to
changing threats in Europe, the Indo-Pacific, and the Middle East,
these initiatives are increasing capability and decreasing risks for
warfighters deployed around the globe.
Significant initiatives include:
--Operational Energy Capability Improvement Fund (OECIF): The
Department is requesting $40.6 million in RDT&E funding to
support operational energy research programs that improve
military effectiveness. Ongoing initiatives include efforts to
improve the fuel economy of our tactical vehicle fleets,
increase the energy performance of unmanned systems, enhance
power and thermal management for high pulse power weapons, and
wirelessly transmitting energy in the far field. Our new starts
this year include assessments of operational energy science and
technology gaps in meeting warfighter requirements over the
near-, mid-, and far-term.
--Operational Risk in Wargames: To better plan for the impact of
operational energy in contingencies, we are actively engaged in
supporting war gaming and exercises conducted by the
Department. Recently, my office participated the Air Force's
Global Engagement wargame, the Army's Deep Futures 17 wargame,
as well as the U.S. Pacific Command
--Logistics Wargame: Operational Energy staff continuously
participate in the planning and execution of the games, as well
as the assessment of game results. With the integration of
realistic constraints to logistics capacity and threats to our
fuel storage and distribution, our efforts will improve
Department decisionmaking in operation plans, concept and
capability development, and program investments.
--Direct Support to the Warfighter: In coordination with the
Combatant Commands and the Military Services, my office works
closely with the warfighter to enhance lethality and readiness.
We invested $4 million in 2017 to adapt Service training and
education programs in each of the Services to increase
operational reach and readiness. We have developed a repository
to capture operational energy lessons learned and are using the
information we have gleaned to influence warfighters on the
effects of their energy decisions on risk, reach, and the
readiness of the force. Finally, my team works with AFRICOM,
EUCOM, and CENTCOM to decrease risk to operations by leading
power assessments resulting in improved power reliability and
reduced fuel consumption, which has direct effects on the
reduction of vulnerable logistics convoys while providing more
operational capability to commanders on the ground.
installation energy
Installation energy is the energy used to power our 500 plus
permanent installations here in the U.S and overseas, including the
fuel used in our 160,000 non-tactical fleet vehicles. Our installation
energy bill remains our single largest base operating cost. In fiscal
year 2017, we spent $3.5 billion to heat, cool, and provide electricity
to our facilities. To reduce this cost, the Department is pursuing
energy efficiencies through building improvements, new construction,
and third party financed investments.
The Department of Defense has identified a top priority to ensure
that our military capabilities and our ability to protect our Nation's
interests are assured through the delivery of reliable and resilient
power. Given recent Federal reports on the vulnerability of our
national commercial electrical grid to emerging threats, we have
reviewed the scope of our efforts to concentrate resources on projects
which will enhance the resilience of our defense critical and task
critical assets. These efforts will include the continued development
of distributed energy sources which can be used to power critical
missions regardless of the condition of the commercial grid.
The Department's fiscal year 2019 budget request includes
approximately $726 million for investments in energy resilience and
energy conservation, most of which are directed to existing buildings.
This includes $576 million in the Military Components' Operations
and Maintenance accounts for sustainment and recapitalization projects,
which generally involve retrofits to install improved lighting, high-
efficiency HVAC systems, double-pane windows, energy management control
systems, and new roofs. The remainder ($150 million) is for the Energy
Resilience and Conservation Investment Program (ERCIP), a MILCON
account which funds projects that improve energy resilience and
security, save energy and water, reduce DoD's energy costs, and most
importantly, contribute to mission assurance.
Energy Resilience and Conservation Investment Program
Secure access to energy resources on our installations is critical
to the execution of the DoD mission. The interdependent and vulnerable
nature of existing electric power grids supporting our installations
places risk on our mission capabilities and installation security as
well as our power projection ability and support to global operations.
ERCIP is one of the Department's key tools to enable more robust
energy security. DoD is requesting $150 million for this program for
fiscal year 2019, including $113 million for energy resilience projects
and $37 million for energy conservation projects. These projects
include two microgrid projects, one at Schriever AFB, CO and one at
Camp Williams, UT. In addition, the portfolio includes a project at
Fort Sill, OK, to construct a new underground electric service
connection between an existing substation and a newly constructed
substation. This project will support critical missions of our Field
and Air Defense Artillery Brigades by eliminating the single point of
failure at Fort Sill and providing complete redundancy to critical
missions in the event of a power disruption caused by a natural
disaster, physical attack, or other event.
These resilience projects have a combined Savings to Investment
Ratio (SIR) of 2.26. In other words, every dollar we invest in ERCIP,
generates more than two dollars in savings, demonstrating that, in most
cases, energy resilience does not have to come at a premium price.
Energy Resilience Planning and Facilities Energy Management
In addition to investing in energy resilience projects, the
Department is committed to real-world scenario-based planning,
including using the results of the North American Reliability
Corporation (NERC)-sponsored GridEx and our installation reliability
exercises to drive more sophisticated internal testing and investment
for resilient infrastructure. This improves our installations' security
posture, increases our planning effectiveness, and ensures our ability
to continue critical missions in the face of grid power disruptions
that could occur due to weather events and/or direct physical or cyber
attack. We are also working with the Departments of Energy and Homeland
Security to pinpoint the energy needs of critical defense assets and
national infrastructure in order to maximize the use of reliable
electricity delivered through our national power administrations.
Leveraging strong energy sector relationships of the Critical
Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council, DoD is engaging with
industry and Federal interagency stakeholders to identify opportunities
to enhance the Department's mission assurance through outside-the-
fencesolutions. Inside the installation fence, DoD is actively
improving data sharing between mission operators and installation
owners to use all available technologies that produce energy resilience
solutions prioritized by mission, informed by metrics, and validated by
results. Furthermore, the Department is working with the Department of
Energy to support the early-stage research and development of advanced
reactor technologies, including small modular reactors and very small
modular reactors. DoD envisions potential future use for very small
reactors at remote operating bases and independent strategic sites
where an assured source of power aside from the commercial power grid
is critical for the delivery of national security missions and
capabilities.
Energy resilience includes cybersecurity of Facility-Related
Control Systems (FRCS). FRCS supporting Defense Critical Infrastructure
(DCI) are essential to perform warfighting capabilities, execute
critical missions, and project power; therefore they are actively
threatened by adversaries and are highly vulnerable to cyber security
attacks and failures. Malware such as Stuxnet, BlackEnergy, and
Crashoverride specifically targeted FRCS and the Ukraine electric grid
attack demonstrated the capability to cut power to mission-critical
facilities. Risk to missions increase as more devices are connected to
networks without appropriate security protections, and poor cyber
hygiene persists by system operators without cybersecurity skills.
To build a FRCS defense posture, the Department recently began
developing FRCS cybersecurity plans to account for the capabilities and
resources required to implement cyber security controls on its highest
prioritized assets and systems. We will continue to work with the
Department's Chief Information Officer and Principal Cyber Advisor
toward solutions and resources ensuring FRCS are defensible,
survivable, and resilient to operate and sustain critical functions in
a cyber-contested environment.
The Military Departments are continuing to implement updated energy
resilience policies, which requires plans for energy disruptions and
the capability to ensure available, reliable, high-quality, and cyber
secure power to continuously accomplish our missions from our
installations and facilities. This includes prioritizing installation
missions, conducting assessments, and planning and programming energy
projects that reduce mission risk by improving energy resilience and
security. My office also issued an Energy Resilience: Operations,
Maintenance and Testing Strategy and Implementation Guide last year to
provide installation commanders, mission operators, and energy managers
procedures to ensure that energy generation systems, infrastructure,
equipment, and fuel are available and reliable to support critical
mission operations on military installations. We will be releasing
further guidance this year that enables the Department to identify and
align critical mission operations with critical energy requirements and
effectively plan outage scenarios, which directly translates energy
resilience metrics into tangible improvements in power and fuel
resiliency for mission assurance.
The Department's energy efficiency efforts not only contribute to
energy resilience by reducing critical loads, but also by lowering our
base operating costs, which frees up funds for the warfighter. Since
fiscal year 2005, the Department has continued to reduce facility
energy usage, freeing up approximately $5.4 billion for higher
priorities. To further improve facilities energy management, my office
issued a policy to require the Military Departments to develop
Installation Energy Plans (IEP) by the end of fiscal year 2019. These
plans directly enable installations to plan and carry out investments
to enhance mission assurance for critical facilities.
Smart Financing to Promote Energy Resilience
The Department has broad alternative financing authorities that can
be leveraged to implement installation energy initiatives that assist
in improving energy resilience and mission assurance at our
installations at lower cost to the taxpayer. These authorities allow us
to use performance- based contracts, power purchase agreements,
enhanced use leases, and utilities privatization, among others. Using
Energy Savings Performance Contracts (ESPCs) and Utility Energy Service
Contracts (UESCs), private energy firms or utility companies make
energy upgrades at our installations and are paid back over time using
utility bill savings. Since December 2011, the Department has awarded
$2.6 billion in performance-based contracts, which are expected to save
DoD over $4 billion across the contract terms, which are then used to
pay for energy improvement.
Another way the Department leverages its financing authorities is
non-Federal financing for large-scale distributed energy projects. This
minimizes DoD's capital investment by leveraging smarter contracts that
incentivize industry to fund resilient infrastructure improvements.
When the business case supports it, the Department is pursuing
distributed energy projects with micro- grid-ready applications that
enable the provision of continuous power in the event of a disruption.
For example, the Army leased land to Hawaiian Electric Company to
construct, own and operate an on-site 50 megawatt (MW) multi-fuel/
biofuel generation plant at Schofield Barracks, Hawaii. The on-site
generation system will enhance the resilience of the Oahu electrical
grid and can provide Schofield Barracks, Field Station Kunia, and
Wheeler Army Air Field with one hundred percent of their electrical
power needs in the event of a power grid disruption. Additionally, at
the Pacific Missile Range Facility in Kauai, the Navy signed an
enhanced-use lease with a developer to construct an on-site solar plus
battery energy storage system that includes infrastructure and
contractual rights that allow the Navy to greatly improve power quality
and reduce costs during normal operations. During a power disruption,
this project will operate as a micro-grid to provide a reliable and
continuous source of backup power, directly reducing risk to our
mission.
To maximize opportunities for these types of smart contracts, the
Department is standardizing project information and streamlining
processes to spur investment by the financial services industry. DoD is
initiating a study to accelerate adoption of energy resilience projects
through a shared risk rating, which incentivizes third parties to seek
opportunities that support DoD mission, retains the Department's
control over its assets and operations, and improves facility contract
execution. This will enable low-cost, high-value contracts that make
prudent use of resources and ensure our military's capability,
lethality, and readiness.
high interest programs supporting the national defense strategy
base realignment and closure (brac)
As stated in the National Defense Strategy, the Department is
working to reduce excess property and infrastructure. To achieve
greater performance and affordability, we must ensure that our basing
infrastructure is ideally sized to increase the lethality of our forces
while minimizing the cost of maintaining unneeded capacity, which
diverts resources from critical readiness and modernization
requirements. These efforts will be enhanced by a comprehensive
enterprise review of how and where we base new forces and capabilities
in support of the National Defense Strategy. Emerging technologies such
as hypersonic systems, autonomous vehicles, and cyber forces may
require new basing concepts. Bases may also need to be assessed in
order to optimize the training and deployment of directed energy
programs, electronic warfare, and artificial intelligence systems. In
lieu of another request for legislation in fiscal year 2019 to
authorize an additional Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) round, we
will review our facilities, to include facility usage optimization
review to ensure we have a better accounting of excess infrastructure.
We also have proposed for fiscal year 2019 increased efforts to
demolish unneeded or obsolete facilities over the course of this year.
Our collective efforts will allow us to provide Congress with fair,
objective, and transparent options for future base realignments and
closures, which maximize Department resources while also addressing any
outstanding Congressional concerns.
business operations reforms
In the weeks and months ahead we will relentlessly pursue a host of
initiatives that directly contribute to the SecDef's priorities of
building a more lethal force, strengthening alliances and attracting
new partners, as well as reforming the Department for greater
performance and affordability. In particular, the Deputy Secretary of
Defense established the Reform Management Group to lead the
Department's business operations reform effort. This group, which is
led by the Chief Management Officer in close coordination with the
Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation, consists of nine
cross-functional teams, including information technology, human
resources, community services, contracts, real property, testing and
evaluation, medical services, logistics and supply, and financial
management. They are led by subject matter experts within their
respective fields and call upon their experience and relationships
within their communities to generate ideas for both immediate and
longer term business process improvements.
My Principal Deputy leads the real property management reform team,
which is identifying ``best business practices'' throughout the
Department and across the entire Federal Government that can be applied
toward increasing resource effectiveness and reducing operating costs
on an enterprise-wide basis. Additionally, we are working with local
municipalities outside the gates of our military installations to gain
insights on the ``Smart Cities'' movement sweeping the nation that will
enable us to expand the use of public-private and public-public
partnerships. Further, we are engaging the private sector to identify
and, where feasible, adopt ``corporate best practices'' to enhance the
mission assurance of our installations made all the more resilient
through the application of innovative solutions provided by emerging
technologies and bolstered by the Internet of Things (IoT).
Though the individual teams are responsible for creating
opportunities to increase effectiveness, efficiency, and performance
throughout the Department of Defense, leadership is responsible for
overseeing the execution of these reforms. As we move forward, the
Department will be grading the reform efforts based on evolving
performance and productivity measures, benchmarked from private sector
best practices, with an enduring focus on increased lethality and
improved readiness.
protecting and enhancing our training and test range infrastructure
In addition to test and training lands owned by the Department of
Defense, we have a close, cooperative relationship with the Department
of the Interior to manage public lands and off shore areas for use by
DoD. This relationship is crucial to our ability to protect and enhance
our test and training capabilities across the country. From time to
time, we also have a recurring requirement to renew public land
withdrawals in order to continue military operations. This withdrawal
renewal process can take up to 7 years, significant resources, and
extensive man- hours to undertake an exhaustive environmental review
and other studies for a land use which has been in place for decades
and is still determined to be of critical use by DoD. We also have been
identifying locations where the Department would like to expand ranges,
which will significantly improve the combat credibility of our test and
training ranges by offering opportunities for more realistic maneuver,
attack, and opposing force capabilities. Offering our combatant forces
a combined-arms environment more closely resembling what may be
encountered in a contingency against a peer competitor is a vital
element to increasing the lethality and readiness of our forces. As
such, we are actively engaged with the Department of the Interior on
improvements to streamline the review process, thereby reducing the
time and resources required for execution.
addressing perfluorooctane sulfonate (pfos) and perfluorooctanoic acid
(pfoa)
The investigation and cleanup of PFOS and PFOA in drinking water
where previous Department of Defense activities are determined to be
the source of the contamination continues to be a top priority for my
office. PFOS and PFOA are part of a class of man-made chemicals used in
many industrial and consumer products to make products resist heat,
stains, water, and grease. In the 1970s, DoD began using aqueous film
forming foam (AFFF), which quickly extinguishes petroleum-based fires,
but contains PFOS, and in some cases PFOA.
On May 19, 2016, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
issued Lifetime Health Advisories (LHAs) recommending the individual or
combined levels of PFOS and PFOA in drinking water be below 70 parts
per trillion.
In response, the Department began testing DoD drinking water
systems to identify drinking water that exceeded EPA's LHA. DoD has
tested all 524 DoD-owned drinking water systems worldwide. As of August
31, 2017, twenty-four DoD drinking water systems tested above the LHA
and DoD has followed the EPA advisory recommendations, to include
providing consumers bottled water or additional treatment of water.
Where DoD purchases drinking water, we identified 12 drinking water
systems where the results are above the EPA LHA level. These
installations are working with the drinking water supplier to taking
appropriate actions (such as providing bottled water) to ensure all
personnel receive safe drinking water.
Although the EPA LHA level is only guidance under the Safe Drinking
Water Act (SDWA) and is not an enforceable drinking water standard, DoD
considers the EPA's LHA toxicity information when assessing risk to
human health under its cleanup program. DoD followed a comprehensive
approach to identify installations where we have stored or used AFFF
containing PFOS or PFOA and suspect there was a release that may impact
drinking water.
As of August 2017, DoD has identified 401 active and BRAC
installations where there are one or more areas with a known or
suspected release of PFOS or PFOA groundwater that may impact drinking
water off an installation. The Military Departments are following the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(CERCLA) process. The DoD Components then determine whether there is
exposure through drinking water and, if there is exposure, the
Departments' priority is to cut off the drinking water exposure. As of
August 2017, the Military Departments have sampled over 2,600
groundwater wells for PFOS/PFOA (on 90 installations) with 1,621
sampling results exceeding the EPA LHA. The Military Departments will
prioritize sites for further action using a risk-based approach. The
Department's fundamental premise in site prioritization is ``worse
first,'' meaning the DoD.
Components will address sites that pose a greater potential risk to
human health and the environment first. These known or suspected PFOS
and/or PFOA release areas are in various stages of assessment,
investigation, and cleanup. Throughout the CERCLA process, the
Department will work in concert with regulatory agencies and
communities, and will share information in an open and transparent
manner. Now that we have an initial inventory, it may take a few years
to determine the potential cleanup costs as we collect information on
the nature and extent of the releases. As DoD moves through the CERCLA
process, it will be necessary to understand the regulatory cleanup
standards for PFOS and PFOA.
We are also taking steps to remove and replace AFFF containing PFOS
from our supply system. In January 2016, the Department issued a policy
requiring Service-specific risk management procedures to prevent
uncontrolled land-based AFFF releases during maintenance, testing, and
training activities. The policy also requires the removal and proper
disposal of AFFF containing PFOS from the local supplies for non-
shipboard use where practical. Each of the Military Departments is
taking actions to remove AFFF containing PFOS from the supply system.
In addition, SERDP is addressing environmental issues associated
with PFOS and PFOA and the use of AFFF. SERDP researchers are
developing technologies to quantify and remediate these substances in
both soil and groundwater. SERDP is also researching fluorine-free
substitutes for AFFF which meet the military's stringent performance
requirements. In fiscal year 2019, ESTCP will initiate demonstrations
of existing replacement AFFF formulations at DoD facilities to
determine if their performance can meet DoD's needs.
Finally, we are working with EPA and States to address the many
challenges that have been identified since the EPA issued the LHA.
Likewise, we are working with the Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry (ATSDR) to support the effort to conduct the exposure
assessment and health study required by the fiscal year 2018 NDAA.
Addressing PFOS and PFOA is a priority for the Department, and we are
committed to finding an alternative that meets critical mission
requirements while protecting human health.
focus on the indo-pacific region
Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI)
Our posture in the Pacific must be capable of persistent engagement
with all countries in the Indo-Pacific. The National Defense Strategy
recognizes that China is leveraging military modernization, influence
operations, and predatory economics to coerce neighboring countries to
reorder the Indo-Pacific region to their advantage. As the most forward
U.S. territories in the Pacific region, Guam and the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) are critical to countering China's
influence. To that end, the Department's has three ongoing initiatives
in Guam/CNMI: the Marine Corps relocation from Okinawa to Guam; a CNMI
Joint Military Training (CJMT) proposal to develop ranges and training
areas on Tinian and Pagan Islands; and the establishment of a Divert
and Exercise Airfield on the north side of Tinian International
Airport.
The relocation of Marines from Okinawa to Guam, which is estimated
to cost $8.7 billion and involves 5,000 Marines organized as a Marine
Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF), supports theDepartment's restructured
posture in the Indo-Pacific region and our alliance with Japan. It will
better align our forward-deployed forces to enable us to respond
quickly and effectively to any contingency threatening regional
security, to ensure rapid delivery of humanitarian assistance in
response to natural disasters, and to provide a foundation of stability
for the continued free movement of trade, investment, and commerce. It
will also ensure that we fulfill our commitments to the Government of
Japan and the Japanese people to reduce the number of Marines on
Okinawa.
The relocation is expected to achieve initial support capability
(ISC) in 2024, contingent on affordability and environmental analyses.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request includes $266 million in MILCON and
Planning & Design funding, including $143 million for a multi-purpose
machine gun range on Guam. Last year, the Department awarded
approximately $750 million in construction projects, including the
foundational $309 million utilities and site improvement project for
the future Marine Corps Base Guam. Approximately $500 million of these
contracts come from Japanese-provided funding. Overall, the Government
of Japan has committed $3.1 billion to fund this relocation and has
already transferred $1.5 billion of its commitment to the U.S.
Treasury.
In addition to ranges constructed on Guam for the Marine
relocation, the Department is proposing a $910 million initiative to
develop ranges and training areas in the CNMI to increase joint
military training capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region. The Marine
Corps is leading this initiative on behalf of the U.S. Pacific Command.
While the Marines relocating to Guam will use the proposed CNMI ranges
and training areas, these two initiatives have independent utility and
are being studied under separate environmental analyses.
The Air Force is continuing efforts to establish a divert
capability for up to 12 tankers on the north side of Tinian
International Airport, at an estimated cost of $375 million. It will
also be used for humanitarian assistance staging, exercises and other
aircraft support activities, significantly improving the Air Force's
ability to conduct strategic airlift operations and provide
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. For fiscal year 2019, the
budget request includes $51 million to construct a cargo pad and
maintenance facility. The CNMI's Commonwealth Ports Authority approved
the Air Force's Airport Layout Plan in January and forwarded it to the
Federal Aviation Administration for final review and approval, allowing
us to kick off land lease negotiations. Those efforts are on-going and
we anticipate completion sometime later this year.
Public Infrastructure in the Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands
(CNMI)
U.S. military initiatives are competing with Chinese promises of
significant investments in new casinos and hotel construction. As such,
public infrastructure assistance is a key component of our strategy to
foster commitment and cooperation between the Department and the CNMI.
The Mariana Islands play a critical role in providing a platform
for maintaining a significant forward presence in the Indo-Pacific
region. However, many parts of the CNMI's infrastructure are more than
30 years old, and some portions date back to the end of World War II.
The tropical climate and typhoons, combined with system age and limited
maintenance, have degraded the infrastructure even further. To address
the mutual requirement for adequate transportation infrastructure, DoD
has proposed to partner with the local government and the local
community in the immediate term to carry out civilian infrastructure
assistance projects as training activities for military engineering
units--a win-win for DoD and the community. For fiscal year 2019, the
Department is requesting $10.5 million in investments via the Office of
Economic Adjustment to improve public infrastructure on Tinian.
Providing tangible improvements to the local community not only
supports our military activities on the island, it demonstrates that
DoD is committed to the CNMI's long-term economic growth, advancing
Secretary Mattis' goal of strengthening partnerships.
Workforce Issues in Guam and Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands
(CNMI)
Stable economies in Guam and CNMI, underpinned by a sustained labor
pool, are critical to the Department's ability to implement the
National Defense Strategy and achieve national security objectives in
the Indo-Pacific region. However, both Guam and the CNMI are having a
difficult time sustaining their workforce due to geographic isolation
and a small population base. The initial cost just to get to Guam and
or the CNMI is generally prohibitive for the type of laborer needed,
and people from the U.S. mainland are historically hesitant to move so
far from family and stateside conveniences. These issues will only get
worse when Guam's/CNMI's exemption from the otherwise applicable
nationwide cap for H-2B nonimmigrant workers and the CNMI- only
transitional worker (CW-1) program expires on December 31, 2019.
Without long-term access to a foreign labor pool, the economies of
these isolated U.S. territories will suffer and the cost of ongoing
defense projects could skyrocket beyond their current estimates.
Although Section 1049 of the fiscal year 2018 National Defense
Authorization Act provided some short-term relief, the Department
believes a long-term solution recognizing Guam and the CNMI's unique
challenges is necessary.
office of economic adjustment
The request of $70 million for the Defense Office of Economic
Adjustment directly funds programs to support and preserve our
installations and ranges, including collaborative studies with local
communities to ensure compatible civilian development. We also use
these funds to study and strengthen the resiliency of supply chains to
remain responsive to the needs of our industrial base through
fluctuations in procurement activity. The Office is an essential
interface to promote constructive and mutually beneficial alliances and
partnerships with local communities, States, and territories that
provide critical support to our warfighters. These partnerships have
fostered an unprecedented level of support and preservation of military
installations by States and communities who protect our bases as
regional economic engines.
The Office also provides funds to ensure that adequate planning and
implementation occurs in the expansion of public services and
investments to support our existing and growing missions. Maintaining
support for this Office is crucial to the continued ability of our
installations to safely and securely operate while responding to
fluctuations in military activities, and keeping faith with our service
members and families by addressing quality of life issues in local
defense communities.
military aviation and installation assurance siting clearinghouse
The Military Aviation and Installation Assurance Siting
Clearinghouse is the primary office within the Department of Defense
charged with the mission to support the expansion of commercial energy
development and power transmission in the United States in areas and
using methods that are compatible with preservation and safe operation
of military activities and capabilities. The Department appreciates the
statutory changes made by Congress to Title 49 of the United States
Code. The revised authority increases the public visibility of DoD
impacts from specific projects, increases State engagement in the
impact review process, improves DoD's ability to protect its missions
from incompatible energy development, and strengthens installation
commanders' ability to highlight potential impacts.
As a result of Congressional direction and our own efforts, we are
effectively evaluating the mission impact of commercial energy projects
to identify and implement affordable and feasible mitigation solutions
where DoD missions might be adversely impacted. In 2017 the Department
reviewed over 4,200 applications for energy projects that were
forwarded by the FAA, which nearly matched the high number from 2016.
Due to the extensive collaboration between our office, local
communities, States, and energy developers, no commercial energy
project reviewed in 2017 rose to the level of an unacceptable risk to
the national security of the United States.
conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to present the President's fiscal
year 2019 budget request for DoD programs supporting installations,
energy, and the environment. We appreciate Congress' continued support
for our enterprise and look forward to working with you as you consider
the budget request.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. Lieutenant General Bingham.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL GWENDOLYN BINGHAM,
ASSISTANT CHIEF OF STAFF FOR INSTALLATION
MANAGEMENT, UNITED STATES ARMY
General Bingham. Good morning. Chairman Boozman, Ranking
Member Schatz, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
your leadership, your advocacy, and your support of our men and
women who are serving in harm's way in places all around the
globe.
The U.S. Army is focused on readiness and lethality to meet
combatant commander and National Defense Strategy requirements.
The fiscal year 2018 MILCON Appropriations reflects your
support of Army installations and we are very grateful for it.
The Army's fiscal year 2019 Request for MILCON provides for
ready and resilient installations. This will ensure our
soldiers are properly trained and can be deployed anywhere in
the world in order to fight and win our nation's wars.
We must continue to reduce critical facilities deficits,
recapitalize and modernize our infrastructure, and consolidate
our installation footprint.
The Army's Family Housing Construction budget invests in
the Army's most valuable asset and that is our people. Quality
housing and housing services provides homes for soldiers and
their families living on our installations around the world.
We continue to reduce resilience on external utility
systems for our critical missions, improve energy and water
efficiency, enable operational freedom of action, and
contribute to mission readiness.
The Army request, just over $2 billion in our fiscal year
2019 MILCON Budget, this begins to arrest facility degradation
and improve installation readiness. We appreciate your
continued advocacy of predictable, adequate, sustained, and
timely funding for our installations to continue enabling war-
fighting readiness.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I
look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant General Gwen Bingham
introduction
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and Members of the
Subcommittee: Thank you for your strong support of our Soldiers,
Civilians and their Families who serve on Army installations and
specifically, for funding increases for installations and Military
Construction in fiscal year 2018. We welcome this support as it will
provide greater flexibility to address mission critical infrastructure
requirements that affect warfighting readiness.
Predictable, adequate, sustained and timely funding for
installations enables all aspects of warfighting readiness--our top
priority. Installations support the National Defense Strategy by
generating and projecting ready forces from locations around the globe.
Army installations, National Guard Readiness Centers and Army Reserve
Centers must be ready and resilient to enable the Army to train, fight
and win our nation's wars. We will focus our efforts and resources on
the priorities of Readiness, Modernization and Reform, and an enduring
commitment to care for our Soldiers, Civilians and their Families.
The Army makes deliberate choices to ensure our Soldiers have what
they need to prevail against our adversaries . . .
they deserve
nothing less. While the Army inventory of facilities that are in poor
or failing condition grew from 22 to 25 percent this past year, we have
made significant improvements in our barracks and housing investments.
Specifically, we have improved the quality of our training and
permanent party barracks by 14 percent and 5 percent respectively since
2014. Further, we are on glide path to improve 90 percent of our
overall Army-owned housing inventory to good or adequate quality by the
end of fiscal year 2020. The Army is increasing its facility
sustainment levels and focusing its infrastructure investment on
readiness priorities that enhance lethality and Soldier and Mission
Readiness.
We are encouraged and grateful that the President's fiscal year
2019 budget request will begin to arrest facility degradation and buy
down the maintenance backlog ($11.2 billion). Working with all Army
Commands, we have made great strides over the past year to identify
those facilities that most directly contribute to the Army's
operational missions. We will focus allocation of the funds provided to
us, now and in the future, on facilities that support power projection,
mobilization, and warfighter mission needs such as airfields, ranges,
maintenance facilities and barracks.
mission readiness investments
The Army's request for MILCON provides secure and sustainable
facilities to meet the Army's emergent needs in three critical subsets
of overall installation readiness: critical facilities deficits;
recapitalization and modernization; and footprint consolidation. For
fiscal year 2019, the Army requests just over $2.02 billion for
Military Construction, an increase of 13 percent ($234 million) from
our fiscal year 2018 request. The budget allocates $1,011 million for
the Regular Army (RA); $180 million for the Army National Guard (ARNG);
$64 million for Army Reserve (USAR); $330 million for Army Family
Housing Construction (AFHC); $376 million for Army Family Housing
Operations (AFHO); and $62 million for the Army portion of the Base
Closure Account (BCA).
The $1.1 billion MILCON request for the RA will allow the Army to
move forward with projects such as the Fort Gordon, Georgia, Cyber
Instructional Facility for $99 million; Fort Campbell, Kentucky,
Vehicle Maintenance Shop for $32 million; and the Picatinny Arsenal,
New Jersey, Munitions Disassembly Complex for $41 million.
The ARNG's fiscal year 2019 MILCON request of $180 million
includes: $106 million to build Readiness Centers in Montana, Nevada,
New Hampshire, North Dakota and South Dakota; $12.4 million to
construct two range projects; $27 million to construct an
administrative and warehouse facility; $18.1 million for Unspecified
Minor Military Construction (UMMC); and $16.6 million for planning and
design. Our ARNG budget request is focused on recapitalizing readiness
centers--the heart and soul of the National Guard--as well as ranges to
allow the Guard to be ready to perform state and Federal missions. Many
of these projects will consolidate units and functions into a single
facility allowing the Guard to close multiple older facilities.
The fiscal year 2019 budget request for the USAR totals $64.9
million with two critical projects replacing our most dilapidated and
failing facilities. The two projects are: $34 million to replace an
Equipment Concentration Site in Barstow, California; and $23 million to
replace World War II era Transient Training Barracks at Fort McCoy,
Wisconsin. An additional $7.9 million will support planning and design
of future year projects, and address critical needs through the UMMC
account.
Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization (SRM) accounts fund
investments to maintain and improve the condition of our facilities.
Periodic restoration and modernization of facility components are
necessary to ensure the reliable functionality of our facilities in
support of mission readiness. Efforts are focused on preventing the
degradation of facilities and precluding small maintenance issues from
turning into large and expensive problems.
We appreciate the additional funding Congress provided the Army in
fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2018 to meet the most pressing SRM
needs on our installations. The fiscal year 2019 $4.7 billion budget
request gets us closer to meeting our full SRM requirements. The $1.6
billion request for restoration and modernization funding, an increase
of $735 million over fiscal year 2017 execution, will enable the Army
to address up to 8 percent of our critical maintenance backlog
requirements.
In lieu of another request for legislation in fiscal year 2019
authorizing an additional Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) round, we
will review our facilities, to include facility usage optimization,
ensuring we have a better accounting of excess infrastructure.
Commanders are accountable for making all reasonable efforts to
consolidate units into our best facilities; maximize space utilization;
and dispose of excess assets.
soldier and family readiness
The Army Family Housing Construction budget allows us to provide
homes and related housing services to Soldiers and their Families
living on our installations around the world. For fiscal year 2019, the
Army requests $330.6 million for Family housing construction. This will
fund $85 million for new housing at Camp Humphreys, South Korea and $68
million for replacement housing at Camp Walker, South Korea, which meet
the U.S. Forces Korea Commander's requirements for on-post housing. The
request also replaces poor and failing housing units in Baumholder,
Germany, and Fort Buchanan, Puerto Rico, for $32 million and $26
million, respectively. The Army's request provides $95.1 million for
new housing construction at Vicenza, Italy, and $6.2 million at Fort
McCoy.
An additional $376 million is requested to sustain all Family
housing operations; cover utility costs; ensure proper maintenance and
repair of government Family housing units; lease properties where
required; and provide privatization oversight. Soldier and Family
Housing and Quality of Life programs are an investment in the Army's
most valuable asset--our people.
We are also investing in our deployed Soldier's quality of life by
constructing a $21 million barracks at Soto Cano Air Base, Honduras.
ensuring energy security and resilience
Assured access to energy and water underpins readiness-related
functions that occur on Army installations. Installations and the
missions they support are at risk to disruptions to energy and water
services posed by acts of nature or acts of man.
The Acting Secretary of the Army directed new installation energy
and water security requirements in February 2017. This Directive sets a
requirement to secure critical missions by being capable of providing
necessary energy and water for a minimum of 14-days and sustaining
critical missions through secure access to energy and water; reliable
infrastructure condition; and effective system operations to include
exercising emergency operations plans with scenarios that address grid
outages. Measuring our installation resilience with energy and water
security metrics is vitally important as we inculcate energy and water
security into the total Army readiness posture and make strategic
investment decisions to reduce the greatest vulnerabilities first.
Our installation energy budget request is focused on enhancing
mission effectiveness and is supported by strong business case
analyses. The Army continues to leverage private sector expertise and
investment to improve system reliability; reduce consumption; and
improve energy and water resilience. The Army leads the Federal
Government in the use of Energy Savings Performance Contracts (ESPCs)
and Utility Energy Service Contracts (UESCs).
The Army manages more than 13.8 million acres of land, on which we
interact with endangered species, preserve historic sites and restore
critical or contaminated lands. Performing these functions well permits
continued Army operations and protects our Soldiers, Families and
communities. Our fiscal year 2019 environmental program budget request
of $914 million will keep the Army on track to meet our cleanup goals
and maintain full access to important training and testing lands, which
are integral components of Army readiness.
The Army's energy security and sustainability program has proven
results--reducing our reliance on external utility systems; improving
energy and water efficiency; enabling operational freedom of action;
and contributing to mission readiness. We urge Congress to continue to
support the Army's energy security and resilience initiatives.
conclusion
We appreciate your support for the Army's fiscal year 2019 MILCON
budget and thank you for your continued advocacy. This budget
represents significant and positive steps toward increasing
installation readiness.
Army installations generate and project Army Readiness. We need
ready and resilient installations to ensure our Soldiers are properly
trained and can be deployed anywhere in the world in order to fight and
win our nation's wars.
The Army is methodically increasing its facility sustainment levels
and focusing its infrastructure investment on readiness priorities to
support power projection, mobilization and the warfighter. Predictable,
adequate, sustained and timely funding allows the Army to maintain its
critical infrastructure and to support Soldiers, Civilians and
Families.
Readiness is the foundation that keeps our nation free. Our people
are the blueprint of this foundation. They deserve the best facilities,
programs and services we can afford.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony and for
your continued support of our Soldiers, Civilians and Families.
Senator Boozman. Thank you very much. Vice Admiral Smith.
STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL DIXON R. SMITH, DEPUTY CHIEF
OF NAVAL OPERATIONS FOR FLEET READINESS AND
LOGISTICS, U.S. NAVY
Admiral Smith. Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and
Distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, and I appreciate the
opportunity to provide an overview of the Navy's fiscal year
2019 Military Construction Budget Request.
On behalf of the sailors and their families, thank you for
you and your continued support of the Navy, its Military
Construction Program, and our 71 installations around the world
which enable the Navy the nation needs.
Thank you, as well, for the funding you provided in both
the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus Appropriation and the Hurricane
Amendment.
The fiscal year 2018 Omnibus Appropriation included
critical Navy MILCON projects, such as the Communications and
Crypto Facility in Hawaii, which underpin the Department of
Defense priorities to restore war-fighting readiness and
increase lethality.
Further, the fiscal year 1981 Hurricane Amendment is
enabling us to repair, replace Navy facilities damaged or
destroyed by hurricanes at installations in Florida, Georgia,
Texas, and Puerto Rico.
The Navy's fiscal year 2019 MILCON Budget Request of
approximately $2 billion for 33 projects is the largest in a
decade. Coupled with an additional 2.1 billion in fiscal year
2019 to sustain, restore, and modernize our facilities, the
proposed investments are deliberately targeting to slow further
degradation of our facilities and begin reducing the existing
$14.3 billion backlog of facilities, maintenance, and repair.
While this request would achieve significant progress for
the shore accounts, it is tempered by the reality that these
problems were not created overnight and the path to full
readiness recovery will take a long-term commitment of
resources, predictable funding, and time.
The shore investments are inextricably linked to the Navy
the nation needs to ensure we achieve a bigger, better,
networked, talented, agile, and ready fleet. Indeed, CNO
Richardson recently testified to the importance of the
shipyards as a critical enabler and, as you know, the Navy
recently released our Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Plan
to recapitalize these critical facilities.
This report to Congress outlines a $21 billion investment
plan to improve dry docks, optimize our shipyards, and invest
in capital equipment over 20 years. Approximately $18 billion
of the total is just for infrastructure and that equates to
approximately $900 million per year. These projected funding
levels far exceed Navy's historical investment in shipyards.
In order to optimize our shipyards at a cost above and
beyond our shore investment plan, the Navy will remain closely
aligned with Congress to ensure our path to success.
It is a privilege to testify before this committee today
and share the details of our proposed fiscal year 2019
investments. Congress is our critical partner to achieve the
Navy the nation needs. As the Secretary and CNO testified
Tuesday, we are committed to being good stewards of the
taxpayer dollar. We will invest smartly and will drive
efficiency to ensure the best return on investment for the
nation, our sailors and civilians.
Again, thank you for your support of the Navy Shore
Infrastructure Programs, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Vice Admiral Dixon R. Smith
Chairman Boozman, Vice Chairman Schatz, and distinguished members
of the Committee, it is an honor to appear before you representing the
thousands of Navy Sailors and civilians at our seventy-one
installations worldwide. Thank you for the opportunity to testify about
the Navy's fiscal year 2019 budget request for our shore readiness and
infrastructure programs.
The President's National Security Strategy, clearly sets forth our
priorities directing our Navy to protect the American homeland, promote
American economic prosperity, and advance American influence throughout
the world. Further, the National Defense Strategy (NDS) articulates our
plan to compete, deter and win in the new competitive security
environment of our time. The Navy is supporting the NDS with the ``Navy
the Nation Needs,'' which further details the Navy's role as part of
the broader military joint force.
Our shore infrastructure is an integral component to achieving the
Navy the Nation Needs. It is an enabler to helping us achieve (1) a
bigger, (2) better, (3) networked, (4) agile, (5) talented, and
particularly (6) ready fleet. To enable that ready fleet, the Navy has
a nearly $1 billion increase in infrastructure to fund 33 Navy military
construction projects--the largest such request in over a decade, and
more than double the fiscal year 2018 budget request. The shore enables
military readiness, combat power projection, and the security of
personnel, family members and equipment. Importantly, the shore is
foundational to the fight, as many of the Navy's platforms plan, train,
launch and reconstitute from our installations, and some perform their
entire mission from our bases. Increases in the Navy's fiscal year 2019
budget request begins to improve the infrastructure necessary to
support a more lethal and resilient Fleet.
We thank the Congress for enacting the fiscal year 2018
Appropriations Act and for the additional funding for facilities
sustainment, restoration, and modernization (FSRM) to address pressing
shortfalls, additional BRAC funds to address Hunter's Point and
perfluorinated chemicals, and other additional funding that supports
key areas of shore readiness. We also thank the Congress for passage of
the fiscal year 2018 Hurricane Amendment earlier this year that
provided critical funding for Navy installations in Florida, Georgia,
Texas, and Puerto Rico to enable repair and replacement of facilities
damaged or destroyed by hurricanes.
military construction
For 2019, the Navy made a deliberate investment in military
construction (MILCON) to increase lethality, capacity and capability.
The fiscal year 2019 MILCON budget request includes 33 projects,
planning and design (P&D), and unspecified military construction at a
value of nearly $2 billion.
Nearly half of the MILCON program ($824 million) is in direct
support to the National Defense Strategy's highest priorities of
increasing lethality with new platforms and strengthening alliances
through the European Deterrence Initiative. This program also invests
in restoring warfighting readiness and further advancing the
restoration of our Naval Shipyards and support the Navy Reserves.
Increasing Lethality/New Platform ($609 million, 14 projects)
--Missile Assembly Building and High Explosive Magazine--San Nicholas
Island ($31 million)
--Directed Energy Systems Integration Lab--Naval Base (NB) Ventura
County ($22 million)
--F-35 Maintenance Hangar--Naval Air Station (NAS) Lemoore ($113
million)
--CMV-22B Airfield Improvements--NB Coronado ($78 million)
--Full Motion Trainer Facility--Marine Corps Base (MCB) Camp
Pendleton ($11 million)
--Electrical Upgrades--MCB Camp Pendleton ($4 million)
--Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) Support Facility--Naval Station (NS)
Mayport ($82 million)
--LCS Operational Training Facility Addition--NS Mayport ($29
million)
--Submarine Propulsor Manufacturing Support Facility--Philadelphia
Navy Yard Annex ($71 million)
--D5 Missile Motor Receipt/Storage Facility--Utah Test and Training
Range ($106 million)
--Fleet Support Facility--NAS Whidbey Island ($19 million)
--Next Generation Jammer Facility--NAS Whidbey Island ($8 million)
--Fleet Maintenance Facility & Tactical Ops Center--Naval Support
Activity (NSA), Bahrain ($26 million)
--Tactical Operations Center--Commander Fleet Activities Okinawa,
Japan ($9 million)
Strengthen Alliances/European Deterrence Initiative (EDI) ($215
million, 5 projects)
--Marathi Logistics Support Center --NSA Souda Bay, Greece ($6
million)
--Joint Mobility Processing Center--NSA Souda Bay, Greece ($42
million)
--P-8A Taxiway and Apron Upgrades--NAS Sigonella, Italy ($66 million)
--Port Operation Facilities--NS Rota, SP ($22 million)
--P-8 Base Improvement--Lossiemouth, UK ($79 million)
Restore Warfighting Readiness ($709 million, 9 projects)
--Causeway, Boat Channel & Turning Basin--Naval Weapons Station Seal
Beach ($118 million)
--Harbor Drive Switching Station--NB San Diego ($48 million)
--Pier 8 Replacement--NB San Diego ($108 million)
--Master Time Clocks & Operations Facility--NSA Washington, DC ($116
million)
--Water Transmission Line--Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam ($78
million)
--Transit Protection System Pier and Maintenance Facility--NB Kitsap
($89 million)
--Unaccompanied Enlisted Housing--NB Guam ($36 million)
--Solid Waste Management Facility--NS Guantanamo Bay, Cuba ($85
million)
--AUTEC Austere Quarters--Andros Island, Bahamas ($31 million)
Shipyard Investment ($221 million, 4 projects)
--Dry Dock Waterfront Facility--JB Pearl Harbor-Hickam ($45 million)
--Dry Dock #1 Superflood Basin--Portsmouth Naval Shipyard (NSY) ($110
million)
--Extend Portal Crane--Portsmouth NSY ($40 million)
--Ships Maintenance Facility--NS Norfolk ($26 million)
Supporting the Navy Reserves ($14 million, 1 project)
--Reserve Training Center--Fort Benning ($14 million)
facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization (fsrm)
The fiscal year 2019 budget requests $2.1 billion to sustain
infrastructure, and improves our facility sustainment from 78 percent
of the Department of Defense (DoD) model in fiscal year 2018 to 80
percent in fiscal year 2019. This is the third straight year the Navy
has increased this funding level in its budget request, demonstrating
our commitment to a more balanced investment to support Navy wholeness.
That said, persistent reduced-resourcing of our shore
infrastructure has taken its toll, resulting in a significant
facilities maintenance backlog. The Navy has strived to mitigate this
backlog by implementing a facility investment strategy that ensures our
most critical facilities and components are maintained and secure.
While this has allowed us to triage our facility requirements, it has
accelerated degradation of the majority of our facilities across the
Navy. Deferring maintenance on important, but not mission-critical
facilities, impacts Sailors' ability to train, their quality of life,
and often requires operational workarounds, such as waivers, temporary
facilities, or inefficient processes. While the Navy will begin to
reduce the facilities maintenance backlog with the fiscal year 2019
budget request, maintaining the path to full readiness recovery will
take a long-term commitment of resources, predictable funding and time.
family housing
The Secretary of the Navy has stated that the we must make
strategic investments in recruiting and retaining our Sailors, and our
fiscal year 2019 budget request supports this by providing Sailors and
their families the opportunity for suitable, safe, and affordable
housing. The Navy continues to rely on the private sector to house
Sailors and their families, and when options are not available or are
insufficient, Navy provides government-owned, leased, and privatized
housing.
The fiscal year 2019 Family Housing budget request provides $279.7
million for the operation and maintenance of almost 7,100 government-
owned homes, leases for approximately 1,700 units, replacement and
renovation of approximately 490 units, and oversight of nearly 40,000
privatized housing units. In addition, the Family Housing construction
request of $87 million will assist in the elimination of inadequate
units at Naval Support Activity Andersen, Guam by replacing 96 homes.
base operating support
Our fiscal year 2019 budget request invests $4.5 billion in base
operating support, remaining flat since the enactment of the Budget
Control Act in 2013. This funding level provides minimally compliant
outputs and service levels at our installations, and we prioritize
resources to minimize
impact to mission, force protection, and quality of life at the
expense of other base operating support functions. This long-term
pressurization of base operating support has translated into higher
assumed risk. As this risk becomes normalized over time, it continues
to compound and accumulate. The Navy remains committed to deliberately
and effectively managing these accumulated risks within available
resourcing.
base realignment and closure (brac)
The Navy's fiscal year 2019 budget request includes $152 million
for installations closed in previous BRAC rounds; $142 million of this
is for environmental cleanup. The Navy has completed disposal of 94
percent of property (178,531 acres) with the remaining 6 percent
representing 11,254 acres at 16 installations. Over 50 percent of the
remaining property is at two BRAC 2005 installations (NAS Joint Reserve
Base Willow Grove, PA, and NWS Concord, CA). The majority of the
remaining property transfers are planned to occur by 2026. There are 28
installations with no property remaining for transfer, but still
require environmental cleanup or monitoring.
conclusion
As CNO has articulated, a fundamental principle of our budget
request is that naval power is about maintaining balance across all six
dimensions of naval power. The readiness of the shore is integral to
achieving the Navy the Nation Needs. Further, we seek to optimize the
balance among all six of our pillars--to ensure support to the fleet
and the warfighter to maneuver, respond and win in a short or prolonged
fight. Our shore investments strategy enables and underpins these
investments to increase naval power in a balanced approach to meet our
national strategic objectives. Thank you for your steadfast support of
Navy's shore readiness and infrastructure programs and your unwavering
commitment to our Sailors, Navy civilians and their families.
Senator Boozman. Thank you very much. Major General
Coglianese.
STATEMENT OF MAJOR GENERAL VINCENT A. COGLIANESE, U.S.
MARINE CORPS COMMANDER, MARINE CORPS
INSTALLATIONS COMMAND, ASSISTANT DEPUTY
COMMANDANT, INSTALLATIONS AND LOGISTICS
FACILITIES
General Coglianese. Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member
Schatz, Distinguished Members of the Committee, on behalf of
General Neller and thousands of Marines and sailors, civilians
and family members, we thank you for continued support to
defense of the nation and the United States Marine Corps.
Thanks to your support, your Marine Corps is on track to
make significant improvements in the quality and condition of
our installation infrastructure, which is fundamental to combat
readiness and a generation of combat power.
Our installations provide three critical force-enabling
functions. First, they're the deployment platforms for which
our expeditionary forces fight and win our nation's battles.
Second, they're where our Marine Air Ground Task Force train
and hone their combat skills. Third, they're home to our
Marines, sailors, and families.
As commander, the single authority of the Marine Corps
installation matters the protection of our installations is my
Number 1 concern. There's a myriad of challenges in the current
operating environment and all signs indicate those challenges
will compound and grow.
The fact is our installations are vulnerable targets for
growing hosts for sophisticated threats, the intent to disrupt
and degrading our ability to generate combat power in the
support of national defense. Our installations must prove
resilient in the face of threats we face. We need to invest in
next generation installation infrastructure to match the
growing MAGTF capability.
Your support is crucial as we begin to develop the
installation infrastructure support next generation MAGTF.
The Marine Corps Infrastructure Reset Strategy, which was
signed by the Commandant, will improve the life cycle
management and ensure the infrastructure investments are
aligned with the Marine Corps capability base requirements to
support the war-fighting mission and contribute directly to the
current and future readiness.
PB-19 funds, the Infrastructure Reset, with the realized
long-term savings through reduction of over 1,056 failing
structures, which will recoup 14 million square feet over the
fit-up which will yield a cost avoidance in facilities
sustainment restoration modernization accounts.
Our Infrastructure Reset, if properly funded and executed,
will set us on solid ground as we pivot and set conditions to
fully enable our operating forces. No place to hide, no
sanctuary, no boundaries. This is a new operating environment
and the implications of our installations are profound.
Tomorrow's Marine Corps installation will look much
different than in existence today. Our installations are power
project platforms that are only as lethal as those forces we
project whose training and readiness are key. We must also look
to the modernization, how and where we train. We must advance
our protection capabilities and it's vital to increase the
resiliency in the face of increasing threats.
We are promoting an atmosphere of innovation and
modernization by working with industry to incorporate the
cutting edge technologies across our installations.
I look forward to working with you to sustain the war-
fighting capability of readiness of our power projection
platforms and a quality of life for our Marine Corps.
Thank you for the time and the opportunity to speak on
behalf of the Marines, sailors, families, and civilians. I look
forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Major General Vincent A. Coglianese
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and distinguished Members
of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Marine
Corps installations infrastructure programs which are critical to our
ability to train forces and be ready. Thanks to the strong support we
have received from the Congress, the Marine Corps has been able to make
significant improvements in the quality and condition of our
installation infrastructure.
Marine Corps installations represent an irreplaceable national
asset. They are fundamental to combat readiness, particularly
generation of combat power. Additionally, they are home to our Marines,
Sailors and their families, and will continue to be integral to their
quality of life through the provision of a range of housing, community
support infrastructure.
As Commander, and the single authority on all Marine Corps
Installation matters, the protection of our installations is my number
one priority. There are myriad challenges in the current operating
environment, and all the signs indicate those challenges will compound
and grow. The most recent National Defense Strategy asserts the
homeland is no longer a sanctuary, and recent asymmetric attacks on
military installations across the country highlight the insider threat.
The fact is, our installations are vulnerable targets for a growing
host of sophisticated threats intent on disrupting and degrading our
ability to generate combat power in support of the National Defense
Strategy. Ensuring the protection of life and property serves to ensure
our ability to execute those essential operations that enable the
training and deployment of our combat forces. Maintaining the maneuver
space to adapt and evolve our protection measures must occupy a central
place in our conversations of modernization and readiness. It is
imperative we have the ability and authority to execute investments
that afford protection against both inside and outside threats.
The operation and maintenance of these installations as well as
their future development and use require long-term planning, careful
investment, and timely program execution. Implementation of the
Commandant's Infrastructure Reset Strategy will ensure our
installations are capable of supporting Marine Corps operations well
into the future.
The Marine Corps has installations and support infrastructure
worldwide valued at more than $66 billion that are used to train,
house, and provide quality of life for Marines and their families. This
infrastructure must be properly maintained to prevent degradation of
our capability to support these mission-essential tasks. Adequately
protecting our installations, supporting new warfighting and training
capabilities, and sustaining infrastructure are top installations
management priorities for the Marine Corps.
impact of budget uncertainty
With Congress' strong support, the Marine Corps has made
significant progress over the last 9 years in replacing old and
unsatisfactory infrastructure. We appreciate actions taken by Congress
to enact the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 that provides relief from
the Budget Control Act defense spending caps in both fiscal years 2018
and 2019. However, budget uncertainty beyond fiscal year 2019 will
erode our readiness and will continue to have negative impacts on our
ability to make long-term decisions necessary for a healthy
infrastructure portfolio. Long-term reduced funding of installations
requirements will result in gradual degradation of our infrastructure
and create a bow wave of increased future costs to return these assets
to adequate condition. Your Marine Corps requires continued support
from Congress with predictable budgets over a sustained period are
needed in order to maintain and improve infrastructure readiness.
To maintain near-term operational readiness, the Marine Corps has
been forced to accept risk in its infrastructure portfolio. Taking risk
in the facilities sustainment, restoration and modernization, and
military construction programs has resulted in the degradation of our
infrastructure, which in turn increases lifecycle costs. Improving the
current state of our installations is the single most important
investment to support training, operations, and quality of life.
The Marine Corps has prioritized military construction projects
that support new weapons platforms (primarily the F-35) and other
projects associated with life, health, and safety concerns. Congress
has been very supportive of prior MILCON budget requests. Thanks to the
Congress, the Marine Corps has received funding for many projects that
positively impact readiness and training.
As part of ongoing business reform initiatives, the Marine Corps'
Infrastructure Reset Strategy seeks to improve infrastructure lifecycle
management and ensure infrastructure investments are aligned with
Marine Corps installations that are capable, adaptive, and economically
sustainable platforms from which to generate readiness and project
combat power in a fiscally constrained environment. Implementation of
this strategy consolidates and appropriately resets the infrastructure
footprint within existing installations to improve operational
readiness and generate resources for reinvestment. Successful execution
of this strategy will depend on future budget stability.
We must prioritize Infrastructure Reset--we must improve
infrastructure lifecycle management and ensure infrastructure
investments are aligned with Marine Corps capability- based
requirements to support the warfighting mission and contribute directly
to current and future Force readiness. PB19 funds the Infrastructure
Reset Strategy with realized long-term cost savings through a reduction
of 1,056 failing structures (14 million square feet) during the Future
Years Defense Program (FYDP) and yield savings in Facilities
Sustainment, Restoration and Modernization (FSRM) accounts. Our
installations provide three critical force enabling functions. First,
they are deployment platforms from which our expeditionary forces fight
and win our Nation's battles; second, they are where our Marine Air
Ground Task Forces (MAGTFs) train and hone their combat readiness; and
third, they house our Marines and families.
military construction
The Marine Corps' fiscal year 2019 Military Construction (MILCON)
program includes 16 projects valued at approximately $906 million which
is an 18 percent increase over the fiscal year 2018 budget submission
of $765 million.
Marine Corps MILCON requirements are driven by operating force and
other mission requirements such as: (1) introducing new platforms or
weapons; (2) relocating forces to better position assets to meet the
national military strategy; (3) meeting force protection or safety
standards; (4) enhancing or replacing infrastructure that is in poor or
failing condition; (5) meeting new and improved training standards for
the 21st century Marine Corps; (6) modernizing critical infrastructure;
(7) improving utilities reliability and resilience to support
readiness; (8) meeting environmental regulations and laws and energy
reduction mandates; (9) improving training areas to include aerial/
ground ranges; and (10) acquiring land needed to support training.
The primary focus areas of the fiscal year 2019 Marine Corps MILCON
budget request include: (1) supporting the bed down of new capabilities
and platforms; (2) providing infrastructure to support force
relocations; (3) recapitalization and replacement of inadequate
facilities; and (4) meeting safety and environmental mandates. Our
fiscal year 2019 budget accomplishes the following:
--Supports new platforms such as Joint Strike Fighter (F-35) and
Amphibious Combat Vehicle (ACV) with new aircraft and vehicle
maintenance facilities.
--Provides aviation maintenance facilities to continue support for
the relocation of aviation squadrons to Marine Corps Base,
Hawaii.
--Provides ordnance, training, and quality of life infrastructure to
support the relocation of Marines from Japan to Guam.
--Improves security, safety, and environmental compliance posture at
various bases.
--Replaces and modernizes numerous inadequate and obsolete facilities
and infrastructure in order to improve operations, quality of
life, and training.
--Supports our Reserve component with operational and training
facilities at Seal Beach, California.
infrastructure sustainment, restoration, and demolition
The President's Budget for fiscal year 2019 funds 80 percent of the
OSD facilities sustainment model requirement for the Marine Corps. When
restoring and modernizing our infrastructure, we prioritize life,
health, and safety issues and efficiency improvements to existing
infrastructure and focus on repairing only the most critical components
of our mission critical facilities. By deferring less critical repairs,
especially for non-mission critical infrastructure, we are allowing
certain facilities to degrade and causing our overall facilities
maintenance backlog to increase. We acknowledge this backlog must
eventually be addressed.
The first step in addressing this backlog is reflected in the
Marine Corps request of $77 million in fiscal year 2019 for the
demolition of 1.8 million square feet of failing and obsolete
facilities to enable implementation of the Commandant's Infrastructure
Reset Strategy.
family housing
Our world-wide family housing inventory is 96 percent privatized,
which has improved the homes in which our families live and support
infrastructure such as community centers, playgrounds, and ``green
spaces'' that help create neighborhoods and a sense of community for
our Marines and their families. Combined with traditional military
construction, privatized housing will continue to build and improve the
homes necessary to supplement local community housing.
The Marine Corps is not requesting any new family housing
construction in fiscal year 2019 through either traditional MILCON or
through the use of privatization authorities. However, we are
requesting $16.6 million in the family housing, construction
improvements account for the sustainment and restoration of 44 junior
enlisted family housing townhouse units at MCAS Iwakuni, Japan in order
to continue with the renovation of Iwakuni housing neighborhoods. This
will provide much needed improvements to quality of life for our
Marines and their families stationed overseas.
conclusion
In past years, we took risk in our installation portfolio to
support near-term operational readiness. Continued reduced funding of
our long-term infrastructure needs will create increasingly
disproportionate long-term costs, inconsistent with disciplined fiscal
principles and business reforms prioritized by the Secretary of
Defense. As outlined in the National Defense Strategy, our
installations must prove resilient in the face of the threats we face.
We must modernize our installations to protect our blunt and surge
layer forces and reassure our partners and allies. Our operational
capabilities are adapting to meet these changes, and we need to invest
in a next generation installation infrastructure to match the growing
MAGTF capability. Your support is crucial as we begin to develop
installation infrastructure to support our Next Generation MAGTF. The
fiscal year 2019 budget request supports this premise.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I look
forward to working with you to sustain the warfighting capability, the
readiness of our power projection platforms and quality of life of the
Marine Corps.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. Major General Green.
STATEMENT OF MAJOR GENERAL TIMOTHY S. GREEN, DIRECTOR
OF CIVIL ENGINEERS, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF
FOR LOGISTICS, ENGINEERING AND FORCE
PROTECTION, U.S. AIR FORCE
General Green. Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, and
Distinguished Members of the Committee, I'm honored today to
represent America's airmen and also to discuss the Air Force's
fiscal year 2019 Military Construction and Housing Request.
I want to start with a thank you for your personal support
for the five fiscal year 2018 and 35-A Beddown Projects at
Ellison Air Force Base that we requested as part of the last
and final continuing resolution this year. Your support allowed
us in fact award these projects ahead of the summer
construction season this year in Alaska and you've kept the
beddown on track. So thank you.
I also want to say thanks for your support in giving the
Air Force much-needed budgetary relief in fiscal year 2018 and
2019 through the Bipartisan Budget Agreement. Your support
enables the Air Force to meet the National Defense Strategy
objectives.
The Air Force's fiscal year 2019 Budget Request is rooted
in the realities of our strategic environment and the re-
emergence of great power competition. As we prepared this
budget request, the Air Force deliberately evaluated both
today's needs and the capabilities demanded by anticipated
future threats.
The result is a budget aligned with the National Defense
Strategy to restore readiness, drive innovation, and prepare
the Air Force to win any fight at any time.
Our 2019 Budget Request includes $1.78 billion in military
construction requirements, prioritizing our efforts in three
primary categories: the beddown of new weapon systems,
combatant command urgent requirements, and recapitalizing our
existing mission infrastructure.
At the macro level, the Air Force infrastructure investment
is approximately $887 million in support of the Air Force's
Modernization Programs, including the beddown of the F-35A and
KC-46A.
We request $230 million for Combatant Commander Urgent
Requirements, ensuring the United States is positioned to
project power across the globe.
This year's budget request also includes $377 million to
recapitalize our most urgent existing mission infrastructure
needs, including $225 million to maintain necessary research
and development facilities to ensure we maintain a
technological edge over our adversaries.
Additionally, too often lost in our focus on readiness and
lethality is the importance of the quality of life facilities
on recruiting and retention as they support our airmen and
their families.
The fiscal year 2019 Budget Request includes $395 million
for quality of life funding for military housing construction
and operations and maintenance.
In total, our fiscal year 2019 Military Construction
Request represents a strategic balance for capability and
capacity, ensuring that we are best postured to field a ready
force today while concurrently modernizing for the challenges
of tomorrow.
Chairman Boozman, Ranking Member Schatz, thank you again
for the opportunity to testify today, and I look forward to
your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Major General Timothy S. Green
introduction
The United States now faces a more competitive and dangerous
international security environment than we have seen in generations.
Great power competition has reemerged as the central challenge to U.S.
prosperity and security. As our fiscal year 2019 Posture Statement
states, ``with global trends and intensifying pressure from major
challengers, our relative advantage in air and space is eroding in a
number of critical areas.'' The Air Force requires the right size and
mix of capabilities to compete, deter, and win in this environment,
which includes the necessary infrastructure and facilities support.
As we prepared this budget request, the Air Force deliberately
evaluated both today's needs and the capabilities demanded by
anticipated future threats. The result is a budget aligned with the
National Security Strategy and the National Defense Strategy to restore
readiness, drive modernization, and prepare the Air Force to win any
fight at any time. Our advantage in air and space is eroding in a
number of critical areas. This budget request provides for a lethal and
ready force to compete and win as we return to an era of Great Power
Competition. Air and space power is indispensable to every joint force
operation. The Air Force's first responsibility is to integrate air and
space capabilities across the domains--delivering unmatched global
advantage as an equal member of the joint team. Ready and resilient
installations remain vital to the Air Force's ability to generate air,
space, and cyber effects from a network of globally positioned bases.
As such, the Air Force manages a difficult balance between installation
readiness, capability, and capacity with the need to maintain and field
a credible and affordable force today and into the future. We continue
to tip the investment scales toward operational capability and
readiness while taking risk in installations.
installations
Air Force installations serve as the backbone for Air Force
enduring core missions delivering air, space, and cyberspace
capabilities--underpinning success and serving as critical enablers of
Air Force readiness. These force projection platforms send a strategic
message to allies and adversaries alike; they foster partnership-
building by stationing Airmen side-by-side with our coalition partners
and enable worldwide accessibility to assist international partners or
to repel aggression, if necessary. Unfortunately, years of continuous
combat, a constrained and uncertain fiscal environment, coupled with an
increasingly complex security environment, have taken their toll on Air
Force infrastructure and facilities.
The total Air Force fiscal year 2019 facilities budget request is
$8.75 billion including military construction (MILCON), facility
sustainment, restoration, modernization (FSRM), Housing, and legacy
BRAC cleanup and Environmental Programs. The fiscal year 2019
President's Budget request builds on the progress made in 2018 to
restore the readiness of the force and, in alignment with the National
Defense Strategy, prioritizes long-term competition with China and
Russia, continues to resource readiness, people, nuclear deterrence and
modernization while increasing our investments in space, multi-domain
command and control, air superiority, light attack and science and
technology. As a result, the Air Force facilities budget must continue
to support many critical requirements, while maintaining or modernizing
current requirements.
In order to stretch our facility and infrastructure funding, the
Air Force has employed an asset management framework to shape our
MILCON and FSRM investment strategies. This framework leverages actual
asset condition data, collected by engineers and craftsman in the field
and processed through lifecycle analysis software to identify the right
scope and time and level of investment to sustain our assets at the
lowest possible lifecycle cost. Working with mission owners, we also
evaluate the direct impact of every facility on operational employment
of Air Force air, space, and cyber capabilities. For example, the
Tanker Airlift Control Center at Scott Air Force Base has a greater
direct mission impact than other mission support facilities such as the
base library or comptroller's office. This data driven approach, backed
by innovative analytics, and technical experts ensure we invest in the
right mission critical facilities, at the right time, at the right
scope.
The Air Force's fiscal year 2019 request includes $1.78 billion in
military construction requirements, a 9.5 percent decrease from the
fiscal year 2018 budget request. While the Air Force was able to
address some of our most critical infrastructure recapitalization needs
in fiscal year 2017 and 2018, the fiscal year 2019 budget prioritizes
weapons system beddowns and combatant command support. These projects,
which include critical fifth generation fighter capability in Europe
and the Pacific, directly enhance lethality and enable joint readiness
to maintain the global posture demanded by today's complex security
environment.
To assure continued focus on taking care of our Airmen and their
families, the fiscal year 2019 President's Budget also requests $395
million for Military Family Housing operations and maintenance and
construction.
military construction
The requested fiscal year 2019 MILCON program prioritizes efforts
in four primary categories: Combatant Commander support, facilities and
supporting infrastructure necessary to beddown new weapons systems,
investing in cost-effective modernization of research, development,
test and evaluation facilities and, with a significantly smaller
investment, in recapitalizing our existing mission critical facilities.
Combatant Command Support
This year's President's Budget request includes $219 million for
Combatant Commander requirements. Of this request, $70 million is for
U.S. Central Command (USCENTCOM), $69 million for U.S. Pacific Command
(USPACOM), $76 million for U.S. Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM), and $15
million for U.S. Northern Command (USNORTHCOM). These investments
represent the Air Force's most direct support to Combatant Commander
Requirements while preparing for future investments across the Future
Year Defense Plan (FYDP) ensuring the United States is positioned to
project power and support efforts to protect American interests across
the globe, including the Air Force's continued priority on Asia Pacific
and the European theater.
New Mission Infrastructure
The fiscal year 2019 President's Budget request includes $887
million of infrastructure investments to support Air Force
modernization programs including bedding down the F-35A, KC-46A, and
Presidential Aircraft Recapitalization weapons systems. The Air Force's
ability to fully operationalize these new aircraft depends not only on
acquisition of the aircraft themselves, but also on the construction of
the aircraft's accompanying hangars, maintenance facilities, training
facilities, airfields and fuel infrastructure.
This budget includes $178 million for the beddown of the KC-46A,
consisting of $166 million at Altus AFB, Oklahoma, the Formal Training
Unit (FTU), and $12 million at Travis AFB, California, for two depot
maintenance hangers.
The Air Force also continues to invest heavily in the beddown of
the F-35A, ensuring we are adequately postured to compete and win in
today's strategic environment. The fiscal year 2019 request includes
$315 million for F-35A facilities at four locations consisting of $40
million at Luke AFB, Arizona, $62.9 million at Eglin AFB, Florida,
$63.8 million at Eielson AFB, Alaska; and $148.3 million at Royal Air
Force (RAF) Lakenheath, United Kingdom.
In preparation for the Presidential Aircraft Recapitalization
acquisition, the Air Force's 2019 budget requests $191 million for the
necessary hangar and maintenance space as well as functions displaced
by the new construction at Joint Base Andrews, Maryland.
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation Infrastructure
Our ability to innovate and maintain a technological edge on our
adversaries depends on necessary Research, Development, Test and
Evaluation infrastructure. In the fiscal year 2019 President's Budget,
the Air Force dedicates $225 million to construct new, state-of-the art
laboratory space at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln
Laboratory--a federally Funded research and development center that is
focused on solving problems with direct national security implications.
Additionally, the Air Force has begun to leverage new authorities to
meet our current and future research, development, and test range
needs. For example, our budget requests authorization of a Cyber Test
facility at Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, and two other projects to
establish a Joint Simulation Environment capability, one at Edward Air
Force Base and one at Nellis Air Force Base.
Existing Mission Infrastructure Recapitalization
This year's President's Budget request also includes $101 million
directed to the Air National Guard and the Air Force Reserve's most
critical recapitalization projects. Outside of lab infrastructure, the
Active Duty includes a request for $25 million in additional funds to
award a Basic Military Training (BMT) dormitory project, essential to
the Air Force's sustained efforts to replace outdated and inefficient
Vietnam War-era buildings and continue to producing the high caliber
Airmen necessary to operate in the highly-contested warfighting
environment.
In total, our fiscal year 2019 request represents a strategic
balance for capability and capacity, ensuring we are best postured to
field a ready force today while concurrently modernizing for the
challenges of tomorrow.
european deterrence initiative (edi)
The Air Force remains committed to the Department's efforts begun
in 2015 to reassure North Atlantic Treaty Organization Allies and
European partners of the United States' commitment to their security
and territorial integrity. Our fiscal year 2019 European Deterrence
Initiative (EDI) MILCON program shifts our focus from reassurance to
deterrence and includes five projects spread across four countries to
enhance bilateral and multilateral military exercises and training on
land, in the air, and at sea while sustaining a military posture
reflecting the acknowledgement of long-term competition with Russia.
Thus, our fiscal year 2019 EDI MILCON program enables the Air Force to
set theater conditions that provide greater capability for the United
States and allies to rapidly respond to all threats. The $346 million,
including $48 million for Planning and Design, requested in MILCON
Overseas Contingency Operations investment is focused on continuing the
USEUCOM Commander's efforts to enhance prepositioning options for
airfields, and weapons and equipment storage areas in Germany, Norway,
the United Kingdom, and Slovakia.
The fiscal year 2019 overseas contingency operations funding
request is limited to projects directly supporting the European
Deterrence Initiative. Projects supporting operations in the Central
Command theater are included in our base budget request.
facility sustainment, restoration, and modernization
In fiscal year 2019, the Air Force requests $3.4 billion for
Facilities Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization, approximately
11 percent less than last year's request. This request funds Facility
Sustainment at 80 percent of the Department of Defense sustainment
model, approximately 7 percent over the previous year, while
Restoration and Modernization is approximately 61 percent lower than
fiscal year 2018 levels. The Air Force recognizes a deferred
maintenance backlog of $33 billion. The Air Force is leveraging FSRM to
protect readiness and maintain credible capabilities in other core
missions and increasing FSRM from fiscal year 2019 levels across the
remainder of the FYDP.
housing
It is imperative we get housing right. Occasionally lost in our
necessary focus on readiness and lethality is the potential negative
effects on recruiting and retention of Airmen and their families should
we allow degradation in the Quality of Life facilities that support our
Airmen and families.
The Air Force recruits Airmen that provide combat capabilities
across multiple domains but we retain the families. Regardless of the
location, the mission, or the weapon system, our Airmen provide the
innovation, knowledge, skill, and determination to fly, fight, and win.
The Air Force strives to provide quality housing on our installations
to fill the shortfall of available housing in the local communities.
Adequate housing is often very limited based on where our installations
are located. As communities have grown up around our bases over the
past decades, the number of on-base houses the Air Force is required to
maintain has declined. The remaining homes in the Air Force inventory
represent the Air Force's commitment to provide Airmen and their
families with safe and well-maintained housing communities. For
example, many of our Airmen's first homes are at remote and isolated
bases.
The Air Force privatized family housing at each of its stateside
installations, including Alaska and Hawaii; as such, there are 32
projects at 63 bases, with an end-state of 53,239 homes and we remain
focused on long-term oversight and accountability of the sustainment,
operation, and management of this portfolio.
Concurrently, the Air Force continues to manage approximately
15,000 government-owned family housing units at overseas installations.
Our fiscal year 2019 Family Housing Operations and Maintenance funds
request of $317 million provides a program that supports daily
operations, maintenance, and leasing requirements. It allows us to
sustain adequate units, improve inadequate units, and correct life,
health, and safety issues. Our $78 million request for Family Housing
Construction funds improves 130 single family and duplex units on
Kadena Air Base in Okinawa, Japan and repairs neighborhood parking
deficiencies at Royal Air Force Lakenheath, United Kingdom. It also
support development of housing community profile planning documents
along with planning and design associated with new construction and
construction improvement projects. Combined, these investments support
the needs of Airmen and their families, as well as our sister service
members and their families.
Similarly, our strategic investment strategy for dormitories will
enable the Air Force to focus on sustainment of our existing inventory
to meet the DoD goal of 90 percent adequate dormitory rooms for
permanent party unaccompanied Airmen, while continuing to support
Airmen in formal training facilities. Thus, the fiscal year 2019
President's Budget request includes dormitories to support F-35
beddown. With Congressional support for our fiscal year 2019 request,
we will continue to ensure strategic investment in these quality of
life areas to provide modern housing and dormitory communities, while
being good stewards of taxpayer funds.
conclusion
Air Force infrastructure and facilities are key enablers of
lethality and readiness across every core mission area in support of
the joint team. The fiscal year 2019 President's Budget request
reflects the hard strategic choices critical to achieving readiness and
lethality in today's complex security environment. Our fiscal year 2019
President's Budget request includes MILCON to support Combatant
Commander urgent priority needs, new weapon system beddown, investment
in research, development, test and evaluation infrastructure, and
recapitalization of existing mission critical facilities. We will fully
leverage every dollar available for facility investment amid the many
competing and higher budget priorities.
The Air Force remains committed to our Service members and their
families. Privatized housing at our stateside installations and
continued investment in government housing at overseas locations
provides our families with modern homes and improves their quality of
life now and into the future. We also maintain our responsibility to
provide dormitory campuses that support the needs of our unaccompanied
Service members.
Additionally, I applaud the committee for their work on achieving
the two-year bipartisan budget agreement; however, we need your
continued support for predictable, stable, and flexible budgets to
enable the Air Force to effectively plan for resources that will
enhance our readiness and lethality. For our part, we continue to
carefully scrutinize every dollar we spend. Our commitment to
efficiencies, a properly sized force structure, and right-sized
installations will enable us to ensure maximum returns on the Nation's
investment in her Airmen, who provide our trademark, highly valued
airpower capabilities for the joint team.
Senator Boozman. Thank you very much.
Let me start out. Secretary Niemeyer, I was pleased to see
your support for the Office of Economic Adjustment, OEA, in
your prepared testimony.
OEA's work is important to the state of Arkansas and we are
currently engaged with OEA on several joint land use studies
for installations. I believe maintaining support for this
office is crucial and I'm glad that you view their work in
collaboration with local communities as important and essential
as I do. So, again, thank you very much for your support.
One thing I'd like for us to talk a little bit about and I
think is so, so important, you know, we struck this bipartisan
agreement, budget agreement, additional $165 billion for
Defense, really not a whole lot in MILCON.
Can you talk about why that's the case? I mean, I know we
got all these things going on. Readiness is a huge factor. You
know, we've got depleted munitions and the list goes on and on.
But truly, as we look forward, these are things--to me, what
you get into with infrastructure is you can let things go and
it costs money. You can fix them and it's cheaper. You let them
go long enough and you actually have to replace it, which
you're talking about huge costs.
So if you all would jump in, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, sir. Part of it was a timing issue. We
normally prepare the budget for fiscal year 2019, we start, you
know, pretty much throughout the entire year 2018.
The initial guidance that was given to us within the
services was a little lower. We leave it up to the services at
OSD level to go ahead and determine within the guidance given
how they want to allocate resources, but from my perspective,
been doing this a long time, the numbers were not really
provided to us in time for us to be able to make the
adjustments to those particular investment accounts.
It does take longer than usual to make adjustments in the
MILCON accounts versus operations accounts or otherwise and
that really has a lot to do with it. We just were sent over the
President's budget by the time we got the final budget
agreement and ultimately the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus
Appropriations Bill with the higher dollar amount.
Senator Boozman. Right. And you'd agree with my reasoning
that as you let these things go, it just becomes more and more
expensive, you know, with time?
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, sir. We do our best within the building
to make that clear to our leaders.
Senator Boozman. Does anybody else want to jump in with
that or avoid it?
Admiral Smith. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with you. I
mean, you addressed it. It's about a balance and there are a
lot of competing demands and issues going on right now and so
we've got to balance those.
As I alluded to in my statement, it's $2 billion for the
Navy this year. Is that enough? No, sir. Is that twice as much
as what we've done historically? Yes.
So we're starting to chip away at it. It took us a long
time to get here. It's going to take us time to get out of it,
but, you know, Ranking Member Schatz and I talked about the
other day putting together the shipyard plan. So we understand
it's a challenge. We understand it's an issue. We're not going
to fix it overnight but we are aggressively attacking it, sir.
Senator Boozman. Let me ask you about something else that I
think's really important.
As you're aware, Congress and OMB have opposing views on
incremental funding for MILCON projects. Congress prefers to
incrementally fund large MILCON projects to ensure the maximum
utility for each dollar appropriated in a given year.
Incrementation frees up money that would otherwise not be
executed until future years and allows DOD to fund critical
unfunded priorities that can be executed in the budget year.
OMB has directed that any incremental project not executed
until all increments have been funded, unnecessarily delaying
the project and defeating the purpose of incremental funding.
Tell us your opinion, as best you can.
Mr. Niemeyer. Thanks for that last caveat.
Senator Boozman. Well, tell us the pros and cons of that.
Again, I've laid out the pros.
Mr. Niemeyer. Senator, that's a fantastic issue and having
been on the committee staff, I understand the desire to want to
spend dollars prudently, and it is tough for a large military
construction project to hold potentially hundreds of millions
of dollars until we get a chance to expense that in the future.
So I see both sides.
Now that I'm in the Department of Defense, I understand
that when Congress makes a decision to unilaterally
incrementally fund a project to allow free-up dollars for other
priorities, it does create a budget nightmare for us as we have
to then go find that allocation somewhere else in the
subsequent year.
So I think that's what OMB was trying to get at, was really
trying to ensure budget accountability for each project we send
over is fully funded, while we also understand congressional
concerns about, okay, we've got these unfunded priorities that
come over, we need to fund those, too. They're urgent, as well.
I can see both sides. I'm not sure the best way forward. I
do believe a good policy would be to embrace that over certain
dollar amounts, whether it be a $100 million or whatever the
dollar amount is, when we know we're not going to expense the
majority of those dollars in the first couple years, allow us
the flexibility to bring to you a request that would provide
only a partial appropriation but a full authorization.
That to me probably, having been around this for a long
time, would be the best way to do that, but that's still a
discussion that needs to happen between us, between OMB, and
the committees.
Senator Boozman. Good. Thank you. Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Lieutenant General Bingham, can you just walk us through
the sort of medium-term MILCON needs in Hawaii? I'm thinking
Scofield, Wheeler, and PTA, and why they're important for
readiness.
General Bingham. Yes, thank you, Senator Schatz.
For sure, all of the facilities in the Pacific Theater are
important to our lethality and our readiness, not only in
Hawaii but certainly in Korea, as well, and so what we have
taken upon is an investment plan for Hawaii's infrastructure
revitalization. You and I talked about that a little bit.
That includes operational facilities, maintenance
facilities, Pohakuloa training area, to name a few. It will
take a substantive amount of time, but we have put about $350
million wedge in the FYDP beginning in fiscal year 2020, and so
that theater is vitally critical to our readiness around the
globe and specifically in that theater. So we are committed to
its revitalization.
Senator Schatz. Thank you. Vice Admiral Smith, you and I
have been talking about Red Hill for a little while now.
For the benefit of the members of the committee, can you
just describe what Red Hill is and why it's so important for
the Navy and the Pacific?
Admiral Smith. Yes, sir. So Red Hill is our strategic fuel
reserve in Hawaii that we rely on significantly in the Pacific
for any actions that we might have to take. It's up on a hill.
You can't see it. It's gravity-fed down, so if you lose power
or anything else, it's got the ability to sustain the fleet.
A couple of years ago, we discovered a leak in one of the
tanks, which was from a repair that was happening. That's been
fixed, but obviously it's a significant concern to the citizens
of Hawaii and on the island of Oahu. It sits near an aquifer
that provides the fresh water and so we're working very closely
with the state of Hawaii and the Water Board, Department of
Health, and the Senator and his colleagues to make sure that we
address this, to conduct the appropriate repairs and at an
appropriate cost to ensure this doesn't happen again.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Vice Admiral Smith.
This is a question for Lieutenant General Bingham and Major
General Green. I want to talk about how MILCON dollars are
allocated across components and this gets a little technical,
so you can correct me if I get something wrong, but my
understanding is that the Real Property Asset Database is the
way you determine the allocation between the Active and Reserve
components as it relates to MILCON, and I'm not sure.
It seems to me that that should be a factor but not the
only factor, especially given the sort of pace and the change
in role that the different service branches have undertaken
over the last 15 years, that if you're still looking at real
property as the only way to determine future MILCON, you're not
recognizing that between Active and Reserve, everything has
changed over the last 15 years.
So I guess the first question is, am I getting it right in
terms of the way you make your allocations for future MILCON
and if I am, ought we to change that? I'll start with General
Bingham.
General Bingham. Thank you, Ranking Member Schatz.
Partially true. We use the MILCON process inside of the
Headquarters DA where we bring about or bring together all the
stakeholders and that's a combination of our Active component
commands, our Reserve and our Guard affiliated commands, as
well, and so what we look at is we look at our installation
status report.
We do in fact understand what the condition of our worst
facilities are throughout our portfolio, but we rack and stack,
if you will, what the needs are for each of the services and we
basically have a voting process where we have a rank and file.
Senator Schatz. Right. So, and I'll move to General Green
after I make this comment, it seems to me that if it's based on
real property assets, that would make a lot of sense if it was
an R&M schedule, but if you're talking about new construction,
then what you already have in inventory is not the way you
should determine what else you're building.
So I just want you to, you know, consider whether this
process reflects the current state of affairs. General Green
with the final comment.
General Green. Yes, sir. I think it does reflect the
current state of affairs as a starting point for discussion.
But, for example, when we're bedding down a new aircraft,
like a C-17 at a reserve base, last year the Reserves got more
than what would be considered a fair share because we're
bedding down a new mission. So we do accommodate the things
that I believe you're alluding to.
Another challenge for us today is, as we think about moving
the overseas contingency funds into the base, those overseas
facilities support all of our components, Active, Guard, and
Reserve, and so when we move it to the base, it's counted
against the Active Duty side and therefore you would need to
also raise the Reserve component and, in fact, those facilities
support all of us.
Thank you.
Senator Schatz. Okay. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. Senator Hoeven.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to thank all the witnesses for being here today
and for your service. I want to express my strong support for
several projects in my state. One is a National Guard Readiness
Center in Fargo, which is very much needed. We've had a very
heavy deployment and ops tempo in our Guard in the War on
Terror and this is a facility that is very much needed.
Then, also, for an upgrade to the helicopter facility at
the Minot Air Force Base, which actually serves the missile
fields for the ICBMs. They're still flying Huey helicopters, if
you can believe that. They were probably constructed in the
1960s, and they've kept them flying and they're out there in
all kind of weather covering a huge area. We're talking about
our MPs, and we need a new facility so that we can put the new
helicopter, Black Hawks, in a facility that's large enough to
house them. But it's amazing the work around these guys have
made work. Still flying those Huey helicopters.
When I was governor, we started with Hueys and graduated to
Black Hawks and it's an iconic aircraft but it's older than the
people flying them. So that's a badly-needed upgrade.
Major General Green, along the lines of upgrades, Minot Air
Force Base, Dual Nuclear Mission, Intercontinental Ballistic
Missile (ICBMs), and B-52 with both conventional nuclear
capability. The power lines that go to those ICBM missile
fields were probably put in in the 1960s, I would guess, and as
we work to upgrade the ICBMs, we're going to need to also
upgrade those power lines.
What arrangements are you making to do that?
General Green. Senator, we look at the upgrade of the
missile fields for the GSBD as we plan the future requirement.
All of those considerations are going to be a part of that
beddown of the new missile systems.
So we're looking at it. There's not an immediate
requirement today. They're performing adequately today, but we
recognize that it's something that we need to look forward to
as we think about the next generation of missiles.
Senator Hoeven. Okay. So you're working with local electric
providers on that. They're informed, and you're determining
exactly what is needed and when?
General Green. Yes, sir.
Senator Hoeven. All right. In a Future Years Defense
Program, you don't specify upgrades to Minot's weapon storage
area, and again they have both conventional and nuclear weapons
there, but there are other nuclear upgrades at some of the
other facilities.
So my question would be when would Minot be in line for
upgraded weapons storage?
General Green. Sir, as you know, we're going to redo all of
the weapons storage facilities. Minot is outside of the FY DP.
So it is there in our overall program and, in fact, we briefed
committee staff members at different times. So it's just
residing outside of the FY DP. It is because it's a dual-use,
the B-52s as well as the missile fields. It will be out last,
our final WSF, and it will be the largest one.
Senator Hoeven. Secretary Niemeyer, do we have adequate air
space and ranges to support unmanned flights and the ability to
test various sensors that unmanned aircraft carry onboard?
Mr. Niemeyer. Sir, we have resources available for u
unmanned flight. I think the concern we have right now
nationally, I know North Dakota's leading the lead in the
change in FAA regulations. I know we're doing a lot of test
activities up there.
We do need nationally an updated FAA plan to allow for
unmanned systems. We do have some training concerns around the
country that we have restricted air spaces and other places. I
think that's probably the biggest concern we have right now as
far as air space for unmanned systems.
Senator Hoeven. Right. And we have not only Guard flying
them, we have Air Force flying them, and Customs and Board
Protection flying them.
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, sir.
Senator Hoeven. And 900 miles of border responsibility that
we use.
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes.
Senator Hoeven. So we certainly have the capacity there in
Grand Forks and the interface with the technology part, Grand
Skies, to do a lot of this sensor testing and so forth, air
space restrictions and so forth, that we've worked to get--
restrictions isn't the right word. Opportunities to fly
unmanned.
What are the biggest infrastructure challenges to
increasing the number of unmanned flights as far as an aircraft
in the unmanned inventory for DOD?
Mr. Niemeyer. I would say making sure we've got a basing
strategy in place. Right now, we've got a lot of our systems
are flying overseas. We don't quite have plans in place that
when they do come home, hopefully peace will break out around
the world at some point. We can bring them back to the United
States.
I think we still have work to do within around the country
where best to place those and what locations would best support
their continued training and development next generation of
capabilities for that system.
Senator Hoeven. Well, and that's key, isn't it, because--
we've got to be able to fly them in the NAS for your training
and development, not only the aircraft themselves but sensors
and so now you're talking about either restricted air space or
conquered air space use and ultimately we've got to get to
conquering air space.
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, sir.
Senator Hoeven. And so that's something that we can work
with you to develop and are working to develop.
Any other thoughts you have in terms of how we build that?
Mr. Niemeyer. I would love to have the opportunity. I hate
to put another shameless plug in, but I'd love to be able to
take a look at the entire enterprise for unmanned systems
through a process where I can take those locations that are
most ideally suited for us to be able to support those systems
long term.
Right now for us, a base realignment and closure process
allows that enterprise look, at emerging technologies like
that, and where best to place them.
Senator Hoeven. Are you looking at it without that type
of--in other words, are you actively doing that without a BRAC
process?
Mr. Niemeyer. The services are doing the best they can. As
you know, the Air Force has a basing process to try to identify
locations. I do believe there's some encumbrances to that
particular process that could be solved by taking a wider and
more comprehensive enterprise look.
Senator Hoeven. Okay. Thank you. Again, thanks to all of
you, appreciate it.
Senator Boozman. Senator Udall.
Senator Udall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Senator Schatz, and really appreciate all of you being
here today with us.
General Green, I'd like to start by having a conversation
about the new Space Rapid Capabilities Office at Kirtland Air
Force Base.
The new Space RCO is supposed to play an important role in
the Air Force's attempt to leverage public/private partnerships
and reduce the time to launch national security assets into
space. While Space RCO is just starting to get off the ground,
I believe that it will need funding for new military
construction in order to truly scale up and meet the Air
Force's needs.
For example, there's a lack of building space adjacent to
Kirtland AFRL for companies to utilize. There is also a need
for secure compartmentalized information space, both for the
Space RCO and private companies, to utilize in support of the
Air Force in Albuquerque, and I'm sure there are many other
needs.
Will you make it a priority to stand up the Space RCO
quickly and expedite the military construction priorities in
order to meet the Secretary of the Air Force's goals for space
launches?
General Green. Yes, sir, we will. As you likely know, we've
already identified facilities today as the initial short-term
options and will be studying all of the things that you
described for the way ahead. Yes, sir.
Senator Udall. Great. Do you agree that ensuring access to
space is a national security priority and that a successful
Space RCO will be a key component of this effort?
General Green. Yes, sir, I do.
Senator Udall. Great. And I look forward----
General Green. More importantly, the Secretary of the Air
Force does.
Senator Udall. You know, that's important, too, and I also
look forward to working with you and the Secretary on this.
General Bingham, great to see you again. You announced last
year in this committee that White Sands Missile Range, after a
long drought of military construction, would be moving forward
with the Information Systems Facility included in this year's
budget. The project was originally slated for 2023 but the
needs for better data management made this project a major
priority for the Army and for DOD.
General Bingham, how will this new facility improve White
Sands Missile Range ability to manage and acquire data for
testing?
General Bingham. Thank you, Senator Udall, and great to see
you again, as well.
As you know, I haven't been stationed out at White Sands
for about 21 months. I have really come to appreciate that it's
an absolute national treasure there.
We will be making good use of this new information systems
facility. It will actually displace seven separate facilities,
so that will make it more efficiently use of information
management and its communications capability there on the
range. So I know it'll be quite an asset for the men and women
who will use it.
Senator Udall. Appreciate that answer. And do you believe
that the new facility could enable White Sands to be a more
efficient user of the air space?
General Bingham. Absolutely.
Senator Udall. Mr. Niemeyer, you know New Mexico well. New
Mexico has proudly supported its military bases and I believe
the President's Military Construction Budget does a good job
supporting the troops who work and train in New Mexico.
The budget in New Mexico is also critical to address some
of the training shortfalls for pilots and then this question is
for Mr. Niemeyer, General Bingham, and General Green.
The pilot shortage is a very serious issue. I think many of
you have talked about that before. In New Mexico, the
Department of Defense and all the military branches who utilize
WSMR need to work together to improve this situation.
The F-16 training pipeline through Holloman Air Force Base
is one important component to address the pilot shortage and
for years now, I've pressed all stakeholders to work with White
Sands to do a better job about deconflicting air space with
Holloman in order to ensure access for Holloman's pilots.
In my opinion, the Air Force should move quickly to make
the F-16 basing permanent at Holloman. Moving to another base
will likely cost additional money for MILCON and will sap the
time from the airmen working to alleviate the pilot shortage.
Do you agree that the Air Force needs to do everything it
can to improve opportunities for training and should work to
prevent unneeded future MILCON spending? Mr. Niemeyer, why
don't we start with you?
Mr. Niemeyer. I'll talk more to what I see as what happens
in New Mexico happens around the country where you have a
friendly competition between test requirements and training
requirements. White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) has a long
history of trying to balance that.
As we manage a very important part of our national air
space and training and testing infrastructure, the WSMR, my job
is to work with both services to make sure that we can support
the test requirements, which there's no other test range like
this in the world, what we have at WSMR, along with what is a
very, very desirable piece of air space for training. We work
every day to try to balance that within the Department of
Defense.
I'll leave it up to the services to talk specifically about
the F-16.
Senator Udall. Just brief answers, I'm out of time, but
General Bingham and General Green.
General Bingham. Certainly we want to work with our Air
Force comrades and do on a repeated basis out at White Sands to
do as Secretary Niemeyer mentioned, to deconflict that air
space out there, and I think we've got a good system to do
that.
Senator Udall. Great. Thank you. General Green.
General Green. Yes, sir. We agree about the partnership
with regard to the air space and certainly as we go through the
basing process, the Secretary will announce some candidates
this year and we agree with the need to minimize MILCON.
Senator Udall. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for your courtesy.
Senator Boozman. Thank you.
Senator Moran.
Senator Moran. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Let me first
commend and congratulate you on your assumption of the chairman
of this committee.
Senator Boozman. Well, we've got big shoes to fill but
we're going to do our best.
Senator Moran. I knew you'd say that. That's why I
complimented you.
[Laughter.]
Senator Moran. And let me also thank the staff. Patrick and
his crew have been great to work with and I'm very appreciative
of their help and I look forward to being a valuable and active
member of this subcommittee, and I appreciate Senator Schatz's
comments and I was trying to think if you're my favorite
Ranking Member, but then I have two others that I would have
found. Don't point at Tester. None of them are Tester.
[Laughter.]
Senator Moran. Let me start with Ft. Leavenworth, the 35th
ID Readiness Center.
Secretary Niemeyer, I appreciate the chance I've had to
work with you and the services that you attempt to work with
and coordinate, and I thank you for that relationship.
Let me ask you and General Bingham. Our committee provided
a fiscal year 2017 $31.9 million for a new readiness center at
Ft. Leavenworth. Only this last February has the National Guard
Bureau released a Request for Proposal to award a contract for
construction.
I'm not here to analyze why that's the case. I just would
like to know if you and General Bingham would commit to me to
doing everything you can to see that we make up for the lost
time and that this project proceeds to its rapid completion.
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, sir, I will.
Senator Moran. Thank you. General Bingham.
General Bingham. Thank you. We appreciate the opportunity
through our Army National Guard Master Transformation Plan for
Readiness Centers. We are definitely very much wanting to
improve the readiness of all of those facilities and currently
we are using sustainment dollars as well as R&M dollars and
MILCON dollars to do that.
Senator Moran. Thank you, ma'am. Let me now talk about
Sunflower Army Ammunition Plant, not a conversation that we've
not had previously.
This begins in 2005 when the Army conveyed Sunflower Army
Ammunition Plant, which is over 9,000 acres of land in Johnson
County, Kansas, the suburbs of Kansas City, on the Kansas side,
to Sunflower Redevelopment. This has drug on a very long time,
10 years of back and forth on remediation of the land.
I convened a meeting in 2015 with the Army and brought
officials to Sunflower trying to get everyone on the same page.
Of course that commitment was made to me and to the people in
the room. Three years later, I view the disconnect continues.
fiscal year 2018 MILCON construction has report language, bill
language that directs the Army to conduct an assessment to
ensure that the redevelopment priorities are synchronized with
the developer and the Army.
I don't know that the situation today is any better and it
doesn't seem like anybody is taking charge. It's so slow. The
project managers are running out of funds and the work stops.
It's a waste of time and money.
The Army apparently will be at Sunflower for another decade
cleaning up the site. It's just such a long haul and I would
ask you, General Bingham, I'd like to request that you visit
with me Sunflower and get a picture for what I'm talking about
and then I would ask you to follow up with me that you could
tell me the facts about what the total expenditure on
remediation by the Army has--what's been completed and at what
cost and I need to also highlight for you the specific need for
removal of concrete on the site.
So, first of all, I want to highlight the concrete, second
would like you to agree to come with me and see the facility,
see the location, and, thirdly, if you could tell me at some
point in the near future the amount of money spent on
remediation, where we are in the process, and how you see it
being brought to a conclusion.
General Bingham. Thank you, Senator Moran. I appreciate
that question. I just do want to assure you, though, that the
Army is committed to fulfilling our obligation to clean up
Sunflower.
In point of fact, we are in a three-phase operation. As you
mentioned, it has taken a long time. We're currently in Phase 1
that began in earnest about 4 years ago, which deals with our
planning and documentation.
Our second phase, after we complete this hopefully next
year, we'll move into the execution phase and be able to see
that remediation through to completion, but, yes, I'd be
honored to accompany you to visit that site and we'll schedule
that with your planner.
Senator Moran. Thank you for your response.
Secretary, you instructed me, probably in your words you
suggested to me that I have a conversation on this topic with
the Secretary of Army. That has happened and he indicated an
awareness of the issue and indicated a willingness to become
more aware.
I would ask you if you have any other suggestions of how I
can better address this issue in trying to get the Army to move
more rapidly.
Mr. Niemeyer. As you were discussing with General Bingham,
I made a note to myself to see. I know General Bingham, the
last thing she wants to hear is where OSD staff can assist. I'm
not sure how much we both can provide but I made a note to
myself to making sure that my staff, my expertise that I have
on my staff can be available to General Bingham and yourself.
Senator Moran. Assuming that's fine with General Bingham,
I'm pleased with that because you have an expertise and a
background in this arena and I would welcome your help.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I would concur with you, at least
your line of questioning, about incremental financing. We've
got to get to the point in my view in which we can begin
funding, even though we don't have all funding, and I would
encourage the Secretary's Office and the departments to pursue
that with this Administration.
Thank you.
Senator Boozman. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
you all for being here.
By the way, Mr. Chairman, congratulations on the new
subcommittee.
Senator Boozman. Well, thank you, and I'm going to miss you
dearly.
Senator Tester. I'm going to miss you, too. You are my
favorite chairman, I'm proud to say.
[Laughter.]
Senator Tester. But thank you very, very much.
Senator Boozman. As you talk about your MILCON project.
Senator Tester. Exactly right. General Green, thank you.
Thank you all for being here. I understand that you're going
to--my crack staff tells me you're going to hang up your cleats
here at some moment in time this year. I want to say thank you
for your service and I've looked forward to working with you
and we look forward to working with the person who is going to
take your place.
I want to talk about the ICBMs a little bit. It's what
happens when you have Hogan and Tester on the same
Appropriations Committee. I want to talk about the weapons
storage facility and those projects.
F.E. Warren and Malmstrom is moving forward, although
because of potentially some issues that have come up at F.E.
Warren, we have slid from 19 to 20, and I don't want to put
words in your mouth. You can correct me on that.
Could you give me a brief update, a very brief update on
what's going on with F.E. Warren, if it is going ahead of where
it was initially scheduled, or are we behind? Do we have a
potential slide another year or could we potentially even pick
up a year and start this project towards the end of 2019?
General Green. Yes, sir. So we've got one more request for
reauthorization to come over and the appropriation addition for
the F.E. Warren. We've worked with your staff about that and
that should put it on track.
Where we've been importantly is the Commander of Air Force
Global Strike Command, the Commander of Air Force Materiel
Command convened a working group, and they went very
deliberately through each and every requirement of the
facilities, and I won't go through all the details, but what we
came out with in the end is really the validation of many of
the requirements from security, operational, and safety. Those
were the three big rocks.
So I think we have a good definition of what we need in the
future. We've made the adjustments that we can within the F.E.
Warren and we're ready to move forward and we're confident that
we can continue to learn.
Senator Tester. But have you started construction on Warren
yet?
General Green. No, sir, we have not awarded the contract.
Senator Tester. But you anticipate now that that contract
will start on time and end on time and we'll get to Malmstrom
Air Force on time?
General Green. Yes, sir. I'm confident we'll get to
Malmstrom Air Force on time.
Senator Tester. Okay. Which is 2020.
General Green. Yes, sir.
Senator Tester. Secretary Niemeyer, look, there are
regional threats and emerging global threats, quite frankly,
all over the world. We have had a tendency, and I still think
we do, to disproportionately foot the bill in both manpower and
equipment. We're talking about equipment here today.
I think it is our obligation as the leader of the Free
World to do our fair share and maybe even a little more, but
the question is, is time and time again, I think we put
ourselves on the line, taxpayer dollars, American lives. I
don't think there's any doubt about that.
Meanwhile, our allies are freed up to spend a lot of those
dollars that they maybe should be spending on some of the stuff
we're spending on education and infrastructure and research and
development and all the things we need to spend money on, too.
So the question is, in terms of the Overseas MILCON, does
this budget exacerbate our allies over-reliance on the U.S.
military to provide their security, and could you tell me why
or why it doesn't do that?
Mr. Niemeyer. So we've spent a lot of time in the last
year, Secretary of Defense has, working with NATO allies to
ensure that we do have some concerns with the size of the
military, the spending by our allies. We continue to make those
points that we do need to see a greater commitment on the part
of our NATO allies particularly in providing for their defense
as well as the common defense of NATO.
We do have still requirements that we are asking for your
support for within the Overseas Contingency Construction
Account for select projects that we believe are needed to help
us with allies which are increasing their support for us and in
countries we haven't traditionally invested in.
We do believe those are prudent investments to provide the
Secretary of Defense his goal within the National Defense
Strategy to provide for more adaptive and disbursed basing
opportunities to allow us to be able to work with a greater
number of allies in Europe specifically as we try to deter
Russian aggression.
Senator Tester. So to put it very bluntly then, do you
believe that this budget is a fair balance between what we're
spending and what our allies are spending as far as the threats
that are occurring around the world?
Mr. Niemeyer. I have not made personally the determination
whether it's fair. I do know why we are asking for the funds
and why they are in concert with the National Defense Strategy.
Senator Tester. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me add my
congratulations to you as you take over the chairmanship of
this important subcommittee, and I can assure you that at this
particular hearing that you and the Ranking Member are the
favorites of all of us here on the panel both before us and the
panel of your colleagues. But truly it is great to have you
here.
Admiral Smith, as you know, Maine is the proud home of the
Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery and I'm very pleased that
the Navy and the Defense Logistics Agency have requested $162
million in total for much-needed improvements at the shipyard
this year.
These projects will help ensure that the Portsmouth Naval
Shipyard can effectively dock both Los Angeles Class and
Virginia Class submarines and conduct their maintenance,
support the requirements to execute the Los Angeles Class
service life extensions in the years to come, and expand an
outdated warehouse facility that will help the shipyard
receive, inspect, and distribute submarine components for
worldwide fleet support.
These modernization and infrastructure investments are
desperately needed. They've been needed for a long time to help
the shipyard conduct the availabilities necessary to improve
and maintain fleet readiness. So it's very much a step in the
right direction.
I'm particularly supportive of the more mature dry dock
revitalization portion of the Navy's overall shipyard
modernization plan. That will restore 67 of the 68 deferred
maintenance availabilities over 20 years. So that's a great
return on investment for the Navy.
My one question for you, and I am getting to a question, is
that the modernization plan was completed before there was the
additional funding and in light of the fact that the size of
the fleet is likely to be larger than the plan's initial
assumptions, are you taking another look at the adequacy of the
current modernization plan?
Admiral Smith. Senator, yes, that shipyard is great. I've
had a chance to visit it several times and it's great to be
able to see that we're putting the resources into it that we
need to put into not only that shipyard but all four shipyards.
Yes, you're correct. The shipyard optimization plan came
out before we identified where we need to grow to 355. So we
are relooking that with a growth of the fleet. What's in the
plan right now, what meets the future requirement, what doesn't
meet the future requirement, what's that delta, what has to be
added or changed to do that? So that analysis is going on,
being led by Naval Sea Systems Command right now, ma'am.
Senator Collins. I'm very glad to hear that. The other
issue I wanted to follow up on Senator Moran raised and that
has to do with incremental funding.
One of the projects for the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard this
fiscal year is to build a super flood basin at Dry Dock Number
1 and the long-term goal is to make it fully capable of docking
the Virginia Class submarine and eventually this is going to
require building a partition within the super flood basin which
the Navy is planning to fund in fiscal year 2021.
So I understand the cost of the project is what has caused
the Navy to split the project into two phased projects over
fiscal year 2021 and 2022, but my concern is that a phased
approach could introduce unacceptable risks to the tight
schedule required to make sure that the project is complete
when the Navy needs it for fleet maintenance beginning in
January of 2024.
So rather than splitting the project, which significantly
increases the risks to the scheduled completion date, would the
Navy consider two options? One, either fully funding it in a
single fiscal year as a single project rather than a two-phased
project, or, if that isn't feasible, providing incremental
funding at 65 percent in fiscal year 2021 and then 35 percent
in fiscal year 2022?
Admiral Smith. Yes, ma'am. Thank you. So as you state, this
is going to be an expensive project but it's much needed. We
have not built a dry dock in 30 years. So we're going through
the engineering analysis right now to figure out how to
properly do this. That engineering analysis will help us
determine what is the best way to fund that to make sure we get
that done when it's needed?
Senator Collins. Great. I would ask that you keep us
informed as that engineering study progresses.
Admiral Smith. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely.
Senator Collins. Thank you, and thank you all for your
service. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you. Senator Murphy.
Senator Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Welcome
all of you. Thank you very much for being here. Admiral Smith,
good to see you again.
I wanted to stay on the topic that Senator Collins raised
and ask the flip side of it coming from the perspective of a
state with a private shipyard. I'm very supportive of the
efforts to try to make up for this deferred maintenance at our
public shipyards, but, as we know, that's a long-term project,
and even if you stay on schedule, the Navy has projected that
there's going to be a large percentage of maintenance work that
just simply won't be able to be done at the public shipyards.
Thus it brings me to my question. As you know, we've got
this workload valley in Connecticut at Electric Boat as we seek
to ramp up to the point at which we're going to be producing
many times two submarines in that yard at any one given time
and, you know, we are very worried about the likelihood of
losing some really important skilled workforce during that
period of valley and so we've talked previously about
maintenance projects, like the Boise, and I'm glad that that
contract's got awarded to the wrong shipyard but Virginia does
decent work, as well.
The question is just this. Wouldn't it be wise to fill this
private yard workforce valley now with some backlog maintenance
to make sure that that trained workforce is there when we have
that ramp-up as the Columbia starts to come into view?
Admiral Smith. Thank you, Senator, for the question, and,
sir, it's good to see you again.
Obviously the readiness of our fleet is Number 1 priority
and also the skill and the talent of our nuclear repair force
in both our public yards and our private yards.
I know that the Navy is looking now at--I mean, we look at
how to properly balance across our public yards and I know
we're looking to how to potentially use the private yards and,
if I may, I'd like to take the remainder of that question for
the record and get back to you with more detail.
Senator Murphy. I'd be happy to do that. My second question
is still focused on Groton and New London and I'll bring in
Secretary Niemeyer for this one. This is a really good study
that was done by the Navy regarding the housing situation in
Southeastern Connecticut and so wanted to just get your
thoughts on how the Navy and the Department of Defense can
continue to work with us in Southeastern Connecticut to solve
what is going to not be a crisis but a challenge moving forward
because, as you're aware, Navy's going to start production on
Columbia in 2021 and is considering adding a third Virginia
Class and so you're going to have two boats under construction
and each boat is going to have a pre-commissioning crew, about
250.
Thus conservatively, we're talking about an additional 500
families, not to mention all the junior sailors that are coming
in, at the same time that EB is ramping up production. So
you're requiring more and more workforce housing.
So this report is a good start, but I wanted to ask you
about, you know, plans to do a broader analysis of the impacts
expected over the next few decades on Southeastern Connecticut
and wanted to ask for your commitment to work with us to try to
come up with some really good plans to make sure that we have
adequate housing for all of the Navy personnel that are going
to be onsite.
I understand, you know, your book is not to make sure that
EB has private sector housing but their ramp-up is going to
affect the availability of affordable housing for Navy
personnel, as well.
Admiral Smith. Yes, Senator, thank you. Well, given that my
nephew works at EB, I'm also interested. But, no, you have my
commitment. I was actually on the phone yesterday with the
executive officer for the base talking just about housing. So,
yes, you have our commitment as we move forward to make sure
that we're working together to make sure we can help solve what
is potentially a housing challenge here in the future.
Senator Murphy. Secretary Niemeyer.
Mr. Niemeyer. So what we also have at the OSD level, we
have the Office of Economic Adjustment that allows us to work
with communities and states to look at all collectively what
does an increase in DOD activity, potentially what can we do to
mitigate the impacts, to work with the community to see what
improvements can be made and look forward to using that office
to work with you on assessing what potentially can be done in
Southeast Connecticut.
Senator Murphy. We're ready. As you know, the state has
made unprecedented investments in the sub-base and we're going
to do whatever is necessary to make sure that we have what our
Navy workforce and our private sector workforce needs but doing
that in coordination with both of you and others is helpful.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the committee.
Mr. Niemeyer. One thing, Senator Murphy. I do appreciate
the opportunity to testify before the next generation. My 17-
year-old son might be asleep by now. So it's a testament.
Senator Murphy. I'm going to ask him how I did when I'm
done here. So thanks, guys.
Senator Boozman. The Senator from Alaska, Ms. Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
congratulations to you. I think you and your Ranking Member
will learn that when my priorities come up, they always start
with an A and it's not Arkansas, no offense, but it's Arctic,
and my friend from Hawaii, I think, has learned that this big
Pacific Ocean has warm spots and colder spots, but from the
Defense perspective, it is clearly an area of interest.
So I want to start my questions directed to you, Secretary
Niemeyer, and this relates to our Arctic Strategy. Last May,
Deputy Secretary of Defense Work spoke about the Arctic not
being a central concern in the 2014 National Defense Strategy.
We now have the newly-published 2018 National Defense
Strategy Summary. It also does not specifically highlight the
Arctic Region nor address the Arctic Infrastructure. So I'd
like it if you can provide me just a brief update on the
Department of Defense's vision for posture and infrastructure
in the Arctic Region and I'll ask specifically, when I'm
talking about infrastructure, it's more than just installation.
I think it was just a couple days ago, I read an article
about Russia's plans to lay transArctic fiber cable that will
link the military installations starting in Western Russia,
bordering Norway, across the Arctic, to the Pacific, and
supposedly it's going to allow them real-time monitoring of the
operational situation in the Arctic.
As you know, we're pretty limited in the U.S. Arctic when
it comes to infrastructure in general. We're making some good
developments with fiber, but should we be prioritizing linking
our installations with high-speed fiber?
So we don't have too much time to talk about it, but if you
can give me your views, that would be appreciated.
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, ma'am. I'll keep it short and sweet. The
questions about an Arctic policy, that's a little bit beyond my
capability versus the DOD position. I'm the Installations and
Energy guy.
I will say that from our perspective in our world, Alaska's
the center of the known universe right now.
Senator Murkowski. Music to my ears.
Mr. Niemeyer. We have a missile field we're putting in, the
fourth missile field at Greeley. We have a billion dollar long-
range munitions radar that we're trying to get installed. We
have a backup power supply in this year's budget to go ahead
and support that.
Ellison's get two F-35 squadrons. I'm actually going up to
Alaska in June specifically because I want to make sure that
these projects are on track. They're absolutely critical to our
nation's defense. So I can't really attest to the fact of that.
I do know that the National Defense Strategy says that our
homeland's along our sanctuary. Alaska's part of our homeland.
I do know that it is very high on my priority list for making
sure that we are delivering capabilities within the state of
Alaska.
We're also working on innovative potential power solutions
to include what we can do for more dedicated power sources for
our critical assets there. We've been studying that area for
small modular reactors for years. We do believe that there's a
potential for us to be able to take advantage of the emerging
technologies there.
So Alaska is always in our thoughts as far as what we're
working day to day within my portfolio.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I'd like for the conversation
about just that broader view because I think we recognize that
we can put in that hard infrastructure but you also have to
have the reliable power in a cold place and so the exploration
into this idea of what we might be able to do with SMRs or the
micro-reactors, but also from the broadband capacity
perspective, you need to have reliability, as well, and so
these are key strategic investments that we'd like to have
further focus and conversation.
General Green, thank you for noting what we were able to do
in the CR, making sure that the approaching arrival of the F-
35s, that that is going to be staying on time, on track. We are
very keen in our focus on, as you say, Secretary Niemeyer,
making sure that that moves forward without complications.
Two things. We've heard that with the prospect for steel
tariffs that this might impact the cost of the projects related
to the beddown. Do you expect any reprogramming that will be
necessary within the budget or having to involve us in that
aspect of it?
General Green. Ma'am, we're watching that closely along
with our friends and we have not seen an indication yet that
that's going to be required.
Senator Murkowski. Good, good. Appreciate that. And then
with respect to the beddown itself, I continue to hear concerns
from folks in the community up there, the builders
particularly, that the risk of constructing off-base housing is
higher without the assurances from the Air Force that you're
not going to move forward with new privatized housing on base
that would then compete with the off-base construction.
So this is something that I may raise again with the
Secretary when she comes before the Defense Subcommittee, but I
hope that you could convey my interest in providing the
community builders the assurances that they're hoping for.
It seems that the discussions are a little bit better right
now. I'm going to be up there next Friday for our Annual Salute
to the Military. That again gives me an opportunity to be
intersecting with not only the folks on the civilian side but
our military in these discussions.
So I'm hopeful that we're going to be in a good place but
any assurances that you can give the community about the Air
Force intent on the housing side, I think, is greatly
appreciated.
General Green. Yes, ma'am. We have not begun any
discussions about increasing housing privatization there, to my
knowledge. So I will go back and ask the question again, but
I'm not sure where this keeps coming from.
Senator Murkowski. Okay. Good. Well, I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, I have two more quick questions that I'd just
like to raise for their awareness and we can do follow-up.
One is Galena Forward Operating Location and this again is
for you, General Green. A few weeks ago, I was up in Galena
which hosted the former Galena Forward Operating Location. The
Air Force has some site restoration obligations. The RAB was
out there just after my visit. So I'm hoping that we can get
some kind of a brief on what came from those conversations just
so I can understand where the Air Force and the community are
coming from and if we're all on the same page.
General Green. Yes, ma'am. We can get you a brief on that
and we certainly work hard to stay aligned with the community.
Senator Murkowski. I appreciate that, and I know that they
do, as well.
And then final question. General Bingham, this is related
to the Fort Greeley School, you may be familiar with it, but
this is something that is an issue that just seems to defy
resolution.
The rural school district inherited the building which was
constructed by the Federal Government to educate the kids there
at Fort Greeley. The district can't afford to maintain the
school. They've moved out. The Army's proposed to send the
school district the bill for demolishing the building. The
school district can't afford it. They can't deal with the
disposal of the asbestos.
So we've been in extensive discussions with the Army. They
just haven't gone anywhere, but I just don't see where it's in
anyone's best interests to put these small rural school
districts in financial peril.
So I'm just hoping that we're going to be able to come to a
more amicable solution and look forward to working with your
teams on this.
General Bingham. Thank you, Senator Murkowski, and I
remember last year when you asked me that question and I
remember saying that we wanted to be good neighbors.
We wholeheartedly, too, appreciate the school district
educating our children there at Fort Greeley and so to that
end, we've done a couple of things, though, since we last
talked about this.
Working with the school district at the request of the
garrison to extend the lease to provide us additional time to
help work through an amicable solution, we in the Army have
offered to defray costs associated with the landfill there, and
I'm wondering, though, if we might continue to work with you
and your team to help perhaps look at a legislative solution
for local educational agencies for this type of unique
situation.
Senator Murkowski. We are happy to explore solutions that
will work for the community, for the school district, and for
Army.
General Bingham. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski. So thank you. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I promise next round I will not go over my allotted
time by four minutes. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. That's fine, and we appreciate your
leadership on the Arctic and the Homeland Security
Subcommittee. We were able to, with your leadership, to push
forward the icebreakers and hopefully we can get----
Senator Murkowski. We were so, so appreciative of that.
Senator Boozman. Well, it's so needed and again e
appreciate your leadership on it very much.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. I've just got a couple more things real
quick and I think Senator Schatz does, also.
Major General Green, let me ask you a question concerning
Little Rock Air Force Base, which certainly, you know, is
important to the state of Arkansas, but it's also very
important to the state, not only the state but to the country
because of its mission.
As you know, we've had an airport runway situation going on
since 2014 that, you know, got into the middle of it and it
wasn't going well and essentially now we're in the situation
where we're almost starting over again.
I think the contract will be awarded for redesign in
September, environmental assessment. A couple things. We've
been frustrated with it, you know, with the movement of the
project again since 2014. So let us help you. If you run into
environmental issues as far as anything that has to do with
assessments, redoing those, let us help you with those.
Hopefully there's not going to be a bunch of that.
The other thing that we'd like is at some point fairly soon
to know what we anticipate the cost and then also how it's
going to be paid for. I mean those are fairly basic things.
So again, like I say, if you'll just commit to kind of
shepherding that and making sure that we stay on track and do
the things we can do, we would greatly appreciate that.
General Green. Yes, sir. That's an easy commitment to make.
We are all paying a great deal of attention to that runway.
It's been on my radar since I was at Air Mobility Command back
in 2011. We've been watching this. So it's of great importance
to the nation as well as to Little Rock Air Force Base.
Senator Boozman. Good. Thank you very much. And we do
appreciate your service and you are going to be missed. That's
a great compliment coming from an old University of Arkansas
Razorback fan to a Texas A&M aggie.
General Green. Yes, sir. I realize that.
Senator Boozman. But like I say, thank you so much for your
service and all you represent.
The other thing is I'd like to ask about--hold on--
accountability and, you know, you mentioned, Vice Admiral
Smith, you certainly haven't got the money that you'd like but
you got twice as much as you've had.
When we look at the projects that are going out, we've got
all these projects that are exceeding a $100 million, big
projects. We've got the increase in the economy with the market
fluctuating that way, which makes a huge difference as you go
forward with these projects.
So I guess my question is, you know, what are you doing,
what tools do we need to give you, if we need to give you some
more in regarding maximizing the ability to get the best
prices? How do we hold our contractors accountable? You know,
those kind of situations. So, again, if you'd like to jump in,
we can start with you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, sir. Unfortunately, the Little Rock
runway is a perfect case where we probably should have done a
better job overall. I think there's a frustration there, even
at my level, about how that project was carried out and why we
didn't do a better job working with the requirements, working
with the program manager, making sure we had a contractor
onboard who could do the work, but that's endemic of some of
the concerns we have right now and some of our execution across
the board.
We do have a commitment to the Secretary of Defense to
deliver military construction projects on time and under
target. That's probably the best thing we can do. Your
continued oversight on that is good. I'm not sure we need any
additional authorities right now or flexibility.
I think we just need to be able to do a better job of
working with our construction agents, making sure our
requirements match what we ultimately build, and then we're
working with the contractor community to resolve any concerns.
My concern here is right now, we have contracting officers
in some cases who are running projects versus the program
managers, the engineers, and we've got to get a handle on that.
We've talked to the committee about this before. You've put
some good language in the past to help us there.
Continuing with some oversight there, I think, would be
very beneficial for us so we have to come in and explain
ourselves, I think, ultimately is good for the American people
and making sure we're spending dollars prudently.
Senator Boozman. No. We appreciate that and certainly
anything we can do language-wise or whatever to be helpful
would be.
Vice Admiral Smith, like I say, you've got additional funds
to go around. What are some of the things that--better
forecasting? How do we prevent overruns and things like that?
Admiral Smith. So in the pressurized environment, we've
been shortchanging ourselves in planning and design and not
putting enough money into that. So part of this is we've
increased up to eight percent, from 5 percent to 8 percent of
the project now for planning and design. So we're going to do a
better job upfront.
The other thing we've done, we stole from the acquisition
community, we weren't doing this on the construction side, is
as the plan's going on, both Navy Installations Command and
Navy Facilities Command are going to do gate reviews. So as the
project goes forward and develops, the commanders and their
teams of both those organizations are going to review the
projects to make sure that they're progressing properly so we
don't find surprises in the backside which is where we have not
been very good in the past.
Senator Boozman. Right. Very good. Anybody else?
[No response.]
Senator Boozman. Evidently not. Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you. Let's start with Mr. Niemeyer.
Can we expect fiscal year 2019 Budget Amendment with MILCON
requests to reflect the current budget agreement?
Mr. Niemeyer. I'll have to go check with the comptroller. I
don't know if we have any particular budget amendments in place
right now or plans for those.
Senator Schatz. Okay. I want to talk to you a little bit
about energy. I know that the department is investing in energy
resiliency sort of on base in installations.
I'm wondering what the thinking is outside of the fence
line, especially to the extent that bases or installations are
in the United States or on the commercial grid. It seems to me
we have to worry about outside of the fence line, too. So
what's your thinking along those lines?
Mr. Niemeyer. Yes, sir, completely agree. First of all,
we're really proud what's going on in Hawaii right now working
with Heiko and collaboratively working together to address any
issues that occur.
Senator Schatz. I was hoping you would say that.
Mr. Niemeyer. I think it's going to end up being a
fantastic example of how we can work together with the local
utility to address the concerns in Hawaii, on Oahu, in addition
to providing energy security that we need to power our critical
missions up there.
But on the larger scale, you did hit upon a fantastic
point. We do have specific requirements for the country where
we only allow for MILCON inside the fence line. There might be
a need for a transmission line for maybe two or three miles to
get us to a substation that might give us a significant amount
of redundant capability. Right now, our ability to do that is
limited.
Senator Schatz. By statute.
Mr. Niemeyer. By statute and correctly so. I think we need
to come back to Congress and explain why we want to do this.
Senator Schatz. But a sort of limited waiver authority, you
know. This isn't going to be dozens of requests. It's going to
be only in those instances where it's technically necessary.
Mr. Niemeyer. Right. What I like, we have a similar program
for transportation improvements where we need to build a road
off base. We go through the defense access roads. We come to
you with the military construction request. Once you
appropriate funds, then we transfer those funds over to the
local department of transportation. I would love to have a
similar authority where we can then come to you, you all can
authorize and appropriate it, and then we can then work with
the utility, okay, where we need that last bit of line or that
last bit of a substation that's off an installation that gives
us energy security.
Senator Schatz. And the vote is coming up. So I'll take the
next two for the record and the first question is for Mr.
Niemeyer and Major General Coglianese.
You know, I continue to worry about the plan to relocate
Marines to Guam. I think that it is fraught with technical,
political, logistical funding challenges, and I think we've had
stars in our eyes about how easy this was going to be for the
last--you know, as long as it's been the plan, it's been a,
relatively speaking, unrealistic plan.
Now I think we've getting closer to being able to execute,
I understand that, but there are still pretty big challenges on
the plan, training ranges, and Commonwealth of Northern Mariana
Islands (CNMI), and my question specifically is do you have
contingency plans if Tinian and Pagan can't be built? How do we
maintain our ability to train if National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA) or local politics or logistics or contractor
availability or whatever it may be cause us to have to move the
timeline to the right? So that's one for the record.
Senator Schatz. And then, finally, I just wanted to echo
the Chairman's enthusiasm for the Office of Economic Adjustment
and I'll offer a question for the record, but I know that
there's been discussion sort of at both sides of this dais
around the Office of Economic Adjustment, but from the
policymakers' perspective, I think it's at least pretty nearly
unanimous.
Mr. Niemeyer. Thank you for the support for that office.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Senator Boozman. Well, thank you all so much for being here
and I think we had a really good hearing. I know you all are
busy, you got lots to do, but it's so important to come over
and tell us what's going on and also for us to figure out how
we can help you. That's really what's all about, is trying to
make the branches that you all represent as efficient as
possible and making the life of the men and women that serve in
uniform as easy as we can, also, in the sense of that
commitment.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
So, again, we appreciate very, very much. For members of
the subcommittee, any questions for the record should be turned
into the subcommittee staff no later than Friday, May 4th, and
with that, the meeting adjourned.
Questions Submitted to Lieutenant General Gwendolyn Bingham
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard Shelby
Question. The FBI has significant ongoing construction at Redstone
Arsenal, including $103 million for fiscal year 2018. It is my
understanding that the Army also has Military Construction planned over
the course of the Future Years Defense Program that will further
enhance and support the FBI's mission. Please describe your efforts to
collaborate with the FBI, as well as what synergies exist between FBI
and DoD efforts at Redstone.
Answer. The construction efforts by the Federal Bureau of
Investigations (FBI) on Redstone Arsenal are a result of extensive
collaboration between FBI planners and United States Army Garrison
Redstone Arsenal master planners. While the FBI missions are varied in
scope and complexity, they have found many partners, such as Redstone
Test Center and Aviation and Missile Research Development and
Engineering Center, on the arsenal performing complimentary missions.
Redstone Arsenal is the home of explosive operations ranging from
propulsion research, development and manufacturing, to reverse
engineering of explosive systems. These operations are in line with the
operations of the FBI at Redstone Arsenal.
An example of a future years MILCON project is the Propulsion
Systems Lab at the Arsenal that includes the construction of an
intentional detonation range which is proposed to be co-utilized by the
FBI. Additionally, this project will remove explosive operations off
the Redstone Road corridor, and allow the FBI's Hazardous Devices
School to fully utilize their campus.
______
Questions Submitted to Honorable Lucian Niemeyer
Questions Submitted by Senator Brian Schatz
realignment of marines to guam
Question. Please provide the latest force flow timetable for the
realignment of Marines to Guam, to include an update on current force
structure expectations.
Answer. The flow of forces is expected to begin in the mid-2020s
and will take approximately 2 years to complete. As of this date, no
decisions to change the force mix of the Marines relocating to Guam
have been made. Within the Program of Record, a Marine Air-Ground Task
Force (MAGTF) will be established on Guam. This MAGTF will consist of a
Marine infantry regiment, a combat logistics battalion, and a composite
aviation combat element under the supervision of a Marine Expeditionary
Brigade command element.
training ranges
Question. What is the status of the planned training ranges in
CNMI?
Answer. The USMC is leading this initiative on behalf of the U. S.
Pacific Command. The Department is proposing a $910 million initiative,
with a Government of Japan contribution of $300 million, to develop
live fire ranges and training areas in the CNMI to increase joint
military training capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region. The
environmental analysis for these ranges is on-going as required under
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process. We anticipate
completion in 2020. Department leadership is tracking this requirement
very closely.
tinian and pagan ranges
Question. Are there any contingency plans to develop alternative
ranges to ensure unit-level training for Marines on Guam if the ones on
Tinian and Pagan cannot be built?
Answer. INDOPACOM has conducted multiple training studies and has
identified the need for the training capabilities offered by CNMI Joint
Military Training in the Marianas. As the westernmost U.S territories,
Pagan and Tinian would be the only U.S. venue in the region able to
fully meet INDOPACOM's training requirements.
marine relocation plan
Question. Would the overall scope of the projects requested this
year and over the next few years change, or could they even change,
under any modifications to the Marine relocation plan?
Answer. The scope for projects requested this year will not change.
Since the plan's inception in 2006 we have consistently worked with our
Japanese partners to ensure we have the best operational laydown and we
will continue to do so, making adjustments when necessary. At this time
we are not seeking changes to the current plan.
oea support for installations
Question. How does OEA support our installations and improve
readiness?
Answer. The support of defense communities and States are
absolutely essential to protect our military installations and ranges
in the Department of Defense. In addition, these same communities will
have a critical role in the enhancement of training and readiness
activities and the resilience of military infrastructure to support the
priorities of the National Defense Strategy. OEA is the Secretary of
Defense's primary office for interaction and collaboration with the
states, territories, and hundreds of defense communities around the
country on initiatives to preserve and enhance military capabilities.
OEA's current mission lines: 1) directly support lethality and
readiness, quality of life, and collaboration and alliance; 2) are
neither duplicated, nor replicated, elsewhere in the Department; 3)
leverage other Federal, state, and local resources to support the
Department; and, 4) routinely lessen the political cost to any
Department effort that impacts states and cities. Specifically, the OEA
program of assistance includes the following efforts: Provides
essential planning assistance to defense states and communities to
support safe and secure military operations at our installations and
ranges by promoting compatible development near these facilities and
working to alleviate instances of incompatible development. Often these
efforts lead to civilian activities in addition to the assistance
provided that directly benefits the Department. Works with states and
communities to help strengthen the resilience of their supply chains to
withstand the fluctuations of Defense spending. These efforts maintain
the effective delivery of goods and services for our installations and
warfighters. Often these efforts also include strengthening and
sustaining civilian activities to make these supply chains more
resilient so they can effectively function under the current
cybersecurity environment. Helps defense communities effectively work
with the Services to facilitate the prompt transfer of surplus and
excess property, which frees up critical resources to be used to
support the warfighter. This program allows defense communities to
leverage Federal, state, local, public, and private resources to
effectively redevelop the base property, which minimizes the economic
impact of the closure.
oea elimination
Question. Please detail potential impacts on our installations and
readiness if OEA programs were eliminated.
Answer. OEA's mission is neither duplicated nor replicated
elsewhere in the Department--it is the Secretary of Defense's primary
office for interaction and collaboration with the states, territories,
and hundreds of defense communities around the country on initiatives
to preserve military capabilities. Great care has been taken through
OEA's existence to ensure OEA's mission has not be duplicated in the
Services and that its capabilities support and benefit the Services.
The costs of eliminating OEA would result in additional costs to
establish the capability elsewhere, and could result in redundant
efforts across each of the Military Departments. OEA's program of
assistance is the only means for the Department--and the Federal
government as a whole--to directly impact civilian activities that, in
turn, provide direct value and savings to the warfighter by allowing
the Department to reduce costs through shedding excess infrastructure,
engaging a more resilient supply chain and competitive defense
manufacturing sector, and enhancing lethality of our assets.
______
Questions Submitted to Major General Timothy Green
Questions Submitted by Senator Jon Tester
unfunded program list
Question. The Air National Guard lists two MILCON projects on its
Unfunded Program List located in Puerto Rico. Both of those projects
list ``Hurricane Maria'' in their project name. Why weren't these
projects funded out of the emergency military construction funds
provided in response to the 2017 Hurricane season?
Answer. Both projects were submitted for inclusion in the Hurricane
Supplemental through the Air Force to OSD. OSD determined that the
projects were not executable in fiscal year 18 and did not submit them
as a part of the supplemental to Congress.
Question. Is the Air National Guard prepared to, and will the
recovery situation on the ground allow, for this military construction
right now if they were funded and authorized?
Answer. The ANG is actively working through the Navy Facilities
Engineering Command (NAVFAC) to ensure that these project are awardable
in fiscal year 2019 if funded and authorized. NAVFAC has indicated that
they can execute the projects via Design-Build.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Boozman. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:04 p.m., Thursday, April 26, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]