- COOPER AND GENATOWSKI NOMINATIONS
[Senate Hearing 115-369]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-369
COOPER AND GENATOWSKI NOMINATIONS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
to
CONSIDER THE NOMINATIONS OF MR. WILLIAM COOPER TO BE GENERAL COUNSEL OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AND MR. LANE GENATOWSKI TO BE DIRECTOR OF THE
ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY-ENERGY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
__________
AUGUST 16, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-318
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
STEVE DAINES, Montana
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Kellie Donnelly, Chief Counsel
Mary Louise Wagner, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Cantwell, Hon. Maria, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
Washington.....................................................
7
WITNESSES
Cooper, William, nominated to be General Counsel of the
Department of Energy...........................................
9
Genatowski, Lane, nominated to be Director of the Advanced
Research Projects Agency-Energy, Department of Energy..........
14
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Air-Conditioning, Heating, & Refrigeration Institute:
Letter for the Record........................................
3
American Public Gas Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
4
Cantwell, Hon. Maria:
Opening Statement............................................
7
Cooper, William:
Opening Statement............................................
9
Written Testimony............................................
12
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
37
Electric Reliability Coordinating Council:
Letter for the Record........................................
5
Genatowski, Lane:
Opening Statement............................................
14
Written Testimony............................................
16
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
41
Interstate Natural Gas Association of America:
Letter for the Record........................................
6
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
COOPER AND GENATOWSKI NOMINATIONS
----------
THURSDAY, AUGUST 16, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:20 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone.
The Committee will come to order.
We are here today to consider two nominees for the
Department of Energy (DOE): Mr. William Cooper, to be General
Counsel, and Mr. Lane Genatowski, to be Director of the
Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy. We know it around
here as ARPA-E.
Welcome to you both. Thank you for your willingness to
serve.
To our Committee members, we are happy to be back here in
Washington, DC, in August. Not.
[Laughter.]
I can think of so many other places that I would rather be,
should be. King Cove, Gustavus, Metlakatla, Valdez--those were
all the places that I missed in this week, but that is my
problem not yours. I know that you all have given up your time
to be here, so I appreciate the fact that you are here.
Hopefully, we will be able to conclude our business
expeditiously this morning, demonstrating once again that the
Energy Committee is here to work, here to serve, any time of
the year.
You may notice that I, as the founding member of the
``Coalition of the Cranky,'' am going to continue in that
honorary title. Gentlemen, with that, believe me I am not going
to take it out on you. I do appreciate your willingness to
serve. I also appreciate the opportunity to introduce both of
you today and to hear from you as you respond to our questions.
I will say that I am impressed with the experience and the
qualifications that each of you bring to the table.
Mr. Cooper, if you are confirmed to be General Counsel, you
will be tasked with providing legal advice to the Secretary and
ensuring that the Department's operations are compliant with
the law. This requires an independent individual who is
committed to a careful interpretation of both the law and the
precedent, regardless of how that advice may be received. That,
in turn, requires both confidence and backbone, but your years
of experience in the House of Representatives and in private
practice bode well.
I would note that we have received several letters in
support of Mr. Cooper's nomination, and I would ask unanimous
consent that those be added to the record of today's hearing.
They will be.
[Letters of support for Mr. Cooper follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Mr. Genatowski, I have to like you already--
``owski'' is as good a way to end any name--Cantwellowski,
Hironowski. We could really make this work all around the
Committee.
But, aside from the name, I am actually envious of the job
that you have been nominated for because ARPA-E, in my view, is
a place where great things happen, great energy happens, so you
are going to be in a good place. ARPA-E is not well-known
outside of academic and entrepreneurial circles, but to me it
is both critical and fascinating.
ARPA-E is helping to bridge the gap between high-risk
research and development technologies that have promise but
might otherwise not be pursued. We know this is difficult work,
but the program is pushing boundaries and producing results,
and that is why it has garnered strong support from both sides
of our Committee.
While a few have questioned your background in finance, as
opposed to being a scientist, I happen to think that your
private-sector experience could be useful as projects and
companies seek to navigate the so called ``valley of death.''
While much of what you encounter may seem esoteric, whether
it's advanced carbon capture materials or efforts to turn
seaweed into biofuels, you will be right on the cutting edge,
working with many of our nation's best and brightest minds, to
develop those technologies that can transform our world for the
better. So again, a pretty neat place to be.
If members have additional questions after our hearing
concludes, any questions for the record will be due at the
close of business today.
With our extended August session, it may be possible to
move these nominees this work period, should they prove
qualified and have sufficient support in Committee.
I also want to note my growing concern about the number of
nominees that we have reported from the Committee, who are
still pending on the Senate calendar. We now have six nominees
waiting for confirmation, with one of them having waited more
than a full year, and the nominees before us today--so that
brings us to a total of eight. We have been doing our job here
in the Committee. We have been cooperative, but I think we have
to do better on the Senate Floor. Given the backlog of nominees
awaiting consideration, I am hopeful we can reach agreement to
move nearly all of ours by unanimous consent, and I would urge
all members to help us with that effort.
Senator Cantwell, I turn to you this morning for your
opening comments.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
holding this important hearing on these two very important
nominees. I thank the nominees for their willingness to serve
in these very demanding capacities.
As the Department's Chief Lawyer and General Counsel, Mr.
Cooper, you will be responsible for providing sound legal
advice on questions of law spanning the broad range of the
Department's mission. The job requires not only a broad
knowledge of energy law but a deep respect and appreciation for
the rule of law.
Representing the state with the largest radioactive cleanup
in the nation, I am particularly interested in making sure the
Department's next General Counsel is firmly committing to
upholding the Department's legal obligations both to cleaning
up Hanford and to protecting the health and safety of workers
who are cleaning it up. I cannot emphasize enough the
importance of taking care of our cleanup and the workforce that
represents that.
We have authored legislation to help create a department at
the Richland Center that assists both current and former
Hanford workers as they navigate complicated health claims. It
is a collaborative effort between the Department of Energy,
Hanford contractors, trade councils and since its opening in
the spring, it has proved to be very successful. Within the
first month, it helped enable over 600 people moving through
the process.
I am also interested, Mr. Cooper, in your thoughts and
scope on the Department's authority as it relates to
electricity markets. There have been reports in the news that
the Administration is planning to invoke some emergency
authorities to give preferential treatment to high cost
generation in the name of grid resilience. I have a number of
serious concerns about this, primarily that it would be very
costly to ratepayers. We know the Department has been asked
about this and obviously FERC has weighed in, so the fact that
the Administration continues to pursue what we think is a
wrongful policy is very concerning to us.
A Republican senator from New York, more than a century
ago, observed that a good lawyer has to spend half his time
telling his clients they cannot do what they want to do. The
same might be said of the Department's General Counsel. It is
the General Counsel's job to keep the Department within the
bounds of the law and make sure that no one goes beyond it. So
I intend to ask you questions about that and certainly
questions about the responsibility of DOE in the tri-party
agreement to cleaning up Hanford and meeting that obligation. I
guarantee you every Energy Secretary has some idea about what
they think is a faster way to clean up Hanford, but most of
those have not been successful ideas. The point is, it costs a
lot to clean up Hanford, but you have to live up to the tri-
party agreement to do that. Trying to shorten that is not going
to be a successful strategy.
Mr. Genatowski, I certainly appreciate your willingness to
serve and to help with the ARPA-E mission. Congress established
this in 2000 to overcome technological barriers in the transfer
of important technology. I know for our state, we have had a
lot of important issues on distributed generation, energy
storage, fuel cell and building efficiency, lots of success
stories, and we want to continue to see those success stories.
It was first recommended by the National Academy of
Sciences as a way of enhancing science and technology for the
21st century. The Committee has had a long history, as the
Chairwoman said, of supporting its current mission and some of
its successes in the past. We will be looking forward to
hearing from you on assurances that this mission will be led
aggressively by DOE.
It is no secret that the President has not been as
supportive of this agency and organization, yet we believe it
is very much about the Department delivering for the future of
energy needs for this nation. So thank you for your willingness
to serve.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for the hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
The rules of the Committee which apply to all nominees
require that they be sworn in in connection with their
testimony. At this time I would ask that you each rise and
raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about to
give to the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
[Witnesses respond, I do.]
The Chairman. You may go ahead and be seated.
Before you begin your statements, I will ask three
questions addressed to each of you.
Will you be available to appear before this Committee and
other Congressional committees, to represent departmental
positions and respond to issues of concern to the Congress?
[Witnesses respond, Yes.]
The Chairman. Are you aware of any personal holdings,
investments or interests that could constitute a conflict or
create an appearance of such a conflict should you be confirmed
and assume the office to which you have been nominated by the
President?
Mr. Cooper?
Mr. Cooper. No.
The Chairman. Mr. Genatowski?
Mr. Genatowski. No.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Are you involved or do you have any assets held in blind
trust?
Mr. Cooper. No.
Mr. Genatowski. No.
The Chairman. With that, Mr. Cooper, why don't we begin
with you. I would encourage both of you, if you have family or
invited guests that you would like to introduce to the
Committee, you are certainly welcome to do that. We welcome
your comments, your introduction, before the Committee.
All members have seen a copy of your backgrounds and your
resumes that are extensive.
So please, Mr. Cooper, if you would like to lead off?
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM COOPER, NOMINATED TO BE GENERAL COUNSEL OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. Cooper. Thank you.
I'd like to introduce my wife, Denise, and my colleague,
Jason Knox. They're here with me today to provide moral
support. I think I'll need it.
[Laughter.]
Good morning, Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Cantwell,
members of the Committee, committee staff and personal staff,
thank you for the opportunity to appear today as the nominee
for the position of General Counsel at the United States
Department of Energy.
It is an honor to appear before the Committee. And I'm
grateful to President Trump and Secretary Perry for the
confidence they have in me to fulfill the duties of the office,
if I am fortunate enough to be confirmed by the Senate.
I'd also like to thank my wife, Denise, for her support
over the years, as well as my children, Clay and Laura. The
support of my family is critically important to me to have
success in my various endeavors and, particularly, this one.
When I was admitted to practice law several years ago, I
swore an oath to support the Constitution of the United States
and I pledged that I would truly and honestly conduct myself in
a proper manner in the practice of my profession to the best of
my skills and abilities.
I spent the first 16 years of my professional career
interpreting the law on behalf of clients, whether as a
transactional lawyer or as a litigator, mostly for oil and gas
clients and a natural gas utility district. When I accepted a
position as counsel on the House Energy and Commerce Committee,
my policy responsibilities, mainly in the areas of oil and gas
and pipeline safety, included drafting legislation that would
change the law. While at the Center for Liquefied Natural Gas,
I frequently commented on the law, relying on the
Constitutional right all Americans enjoy, the right to petition
the government for redress of grievances. Then, back to Capitol
Hill to work for the House Natural Resources Committee, where
my responsibilities again included drafting legislation that
would change the law. While at the Committee, my focus was on
oil and gas, coal and mineral management on federal lands and
Puerto Rico. Most recently, I have been with the law firm of
McConnell Valdes, addressing my attention to the issues in
Puerto Rico.
Now, with this opportunity, should the Senate provide its
advice and grant its consent for me to assume the position of
General Counsel, I will have come full circle, with the
opportunity to interpret the law on behalf of a client.
The mission of the Office of General Counsel is ``to
determine the Department's authoritative position on any
question of law'', providing ``legal advice, counsel, and
support to the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, and program
offices throughout DOE.''
I do understand that I will no longer be in a policymaking
role but in a role to render legal advice based upon the plain
meaning of the statutes, rules and regulations governing a
particular set of circumstances. And, where the meaning of a
statute, rule, or regulation is not plain, to make a reasonable
interpretation, using the four corners of the text, along with
judicial precedent, to render sound legal advice as required by
my client.
As John Adams articulated in Massachusetts in the 1700s,
our government is one of laws, not of individuals. But in
government it is populated by individuals, individuals who need
to know the law and the ramifications of particular actions as
applied to the law. The duty of the Office of General Counsel
is to provide that legal advice within the Department of
Energy.
My pledge, just as it was when I first took the oath to
practice law, is to support the Constitution of the United
States, and to truly and honestly conduct myself in a proper
manner in the practice of my profession to the best of my
skills and abilities.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today. I ask for
your favorable consideration of my nomination, and I look
forward to your questions and working closely with you and your
staffs, if confirmed.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cooper follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Cooper, and again, thank you
for not only your willingness to serve in this position but for
your prior service.
Mr. Genatowski, welcome to the Committee.
STATEMENT OF LANE GENATOWSKI, NOMINATED TO BE
DIRECTOR OF THE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS
AGENCY-ENERGY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
Mr. Genatowski. Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member
Cantwell, members of the Committee, and staff, thanks for the
opportunity to appear before you as the nominee to be Director
of ARPA-E at the Department of Energy.
I'd like to thank some of the staff members who met with me
prior to this hearing to discuss your concerns and your ideas
concerning ARPA-E and the work they do and the comments you
both made here today at the start of the hearing.
I'd like to thank the President and Secretary Perry for
their trust and confidence in nominating me, and I'm deeply
honored to be considered for the position. If confirmed, I look
forward to working with this Committee, the Secretary and the
leadership and the workforce at the Department to serve the
American people.
With your approval, I'd like to introduce my wife and best
friend, Robin Schuman, without whose love, wisdom and unfailing
encouragement, I wouldn't be here today. I appreciate her being
here today and allowing me the opportunity to potentially serve
the country.
By way of background, I was born and raised in New York
City and attended both City University of New York and Fordham
Law School. After graduating and spending the first five years
of my career as a lawyer drafting documents in infrastructure
and energy financing, I went over and learned all the skeletal
skills that you see in documents related to financing
transactions which has served me well in the second step of my
career as an investment banker. At that point after five years,
I worked for 30 years in the investment banking divisions of
Kidder, Peabody, JPMorgan, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, and
Wells Fargo. At each firm I executed transactions and managed
business units focused on power and energy within the context
of large global organizations. I had the opportunity to lead
energy sector investments in over 45 states and on four
continents, related to renewables, oil and gas production,
electric grid, as well as a significant volume of generating
facilities, both nuclear and fossil. Most recently, I founded
an investment management firm where I am responsible for its
portfolio of investments in investment in energy and utilities.
I think as a result, I've gained a lot of experience as a
manager in the energy sector, as an investor, knowing where and
when to invest capital to make a difference and in knowing what
investors look for in their energy investments. As a lawyer I
think I've learned how to make agreements palatable to
investors while making sure that the mandates of my clients,
which in many sectors, were public sector clients, their
mandates were enforceable with promises against the investors
borrowing money.
Early in my career, I added a nuclear engineer and an
electric engineer to my investment banking units to provide my
clients and my investment bankers with a deeper insight into
work that we were doing and the impact it was having on the
physical environment. I learned invaluable lessons how to
manage a nuclear engineer and electrical engineer which was
different than managing investment bankers and lawyers.
If I'm fortunate enough to be confirmed and appointed, the
first thing I would do is turn my attention to my statutory
responsibilities under the act. I would direct the staff,
particularly, to come up with proposals that would accelerate
ARPA-E achievements into being known and available in the
marketplace, taking a fresh look at marketing ideas and legal
documentations.
I'd like to thank the members of the Committee for allowing
me to be here today. It's an honor to come before the
Committee, and I ask for your favorable consideration of my
nomination. I look forward to hearing your questions and
learning more about the challenges facing the Department and
ARPA-E.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Genatowski follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you so much, Mr. Genatowski.
We will now turn to a period of questioning. Members will
have about five minutes each for a round and, if necessary, we
will go for a second round.
Mr. Cooper, let me begin with you.
I would imagine you are going to get a number of questions
regarding the Department's actions on grid resilience. Senator
Cantwell had raised it as well.
Last September, the Secretary invoked his authority under
the Federal Power Act to propose a rule to the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) to stem the retirements of nuclear
and coal plants with onsite fuel supply in the organized
markets. FERC unanimously rejected the NOPR. Then this past
June, the President directed the Secretary to stop the loss of
these generating assets and it was about the same time that
there was a memo leaked from the Department of Energy, about a
40-page memo, suggesting the Department is analyzing locations,
specific vulnerabilities and contemplating some kind of action
based on authorities under the Federal Power Act or the Defense
Production Act.
The question to you this morning is what is your
interpretation of the Department's statutory authority under
both the FPA and the DPA, and in your opinion what are the
parameters for Secretary Perry's anticipated recommendation?
Mr. Cooper. As I understand it, the Secretary has the
authority to propose regulations to, excuse me, propose
regulations to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission under
the Organization Act which he did with the NOPR. Then it's the
responsibility of FERC to consider that within the confines of
the Federal Power Act which it did. And then taking to heart
the concern about grid resiliency has expanded the scope in a
separate docket that it has recently ordered.
And other than that, I'm not aware of if the Secretary has
taken any other action, but a lot of times these things turn,
not on what the law says, but on what the facts are. And there
may be facts in existence that I'm just not aware of and won't
be until I get there and then therefore, I can't make the
application of the facts to the law to render a legal opinion
until then.
The Chairman. But do you believe that the statutory
authority exists within the Department under both the FPA and
DPA?
Mr. Cooper. Depending on the facts.
The Chairman. Okay.
Well, that is something that, I think, you will hear this
Committee raise again, not only in your confirmation, but it
obviously has been a subject of great discussion.
Mr. Genatowski, you will find that in this Committee there
is strong bipartisan support for ARPA-E. We have been, I think,
very consistent in letting the Administration know, very
clearly, that we think this is important.
On the appropriations side, Senator Alexander, who also
serves on this Committee, along with Senator Feinstein, have
been good to ensure that ARPA-E maintains a level of robust
funding. But we are up against an Administration that has
presented a budget request these past two years to eliminate
funding for the agency.
What I want to hear from you today, you have indicated that
one of your first tasks is to look at the administrative budget
and the program details and I understand that, but I would like
to know your views on whether or not you think ARPA-E has
received sufficient funding, robust funding, as an agency and
what you will do to make sure that the Administration
understands that this is an agency that deserves to be
supported by the Administration?
Mr. Genatowski. Thanks for the question.
Of course, I support the President's budget, but if
appointed and confirmed or confirmed and appointed as ARPA-E
Director, I think I would try to get my hands around exactly
how much budgetary strength they have to follow out their
projects. They're doing a great job with what they've got and
if I was confirmed as Director, I'd obviously be an
enthusiastic supporter of ARPA-E and all their projects to
continue moving forward.
The Chairman. Well, keep in mind that if you are confirmed
you will be that advocate.
Mr. Genatowski. Correct.
The Chairman. Within the Administration.
You will be the one that will go to the President with,
again, that support for an agency, and I would like to think
that you would aggressively advocate for a strong budget to the
Administration.
Mr. Genatowski. If I were confirmed and I were the
Director, yes.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just on this issue as it relates to the persistent attitude
of the Administration trying to raise ratepayers' cost with
coal, it has to stop.
I get that you are going to have to look at the language,
but we need the President to stop proposing to raise
everybody's cost of electricity by mandating coal and get him
to focus on the reliability and resiliency of the grid as it
relates to cyberattacks. So if you could help deliver that
message through the agency, we would so appreciate it.
On the tri-party agreement you, as the Chief Counsel for
the agency, are aware that Hanford is one of the largest
cleanup sites in the country.
Mr. Cooper. Yes.
Senator Cantwell. Actually, in the world.
We have a tri-party agreement that requires DOE to
basically clean up 99 percent, basically it says the tanks must
be cleaned up to 99 percent and use all available technologies
or otherwise renegotiate with the State of Washington. Do you
believe in upholding that tri-party agreement?
Mr. Cooper. I think the Department should honor its
commitments in the agreement.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
And so, do you commit to fully consulting with the State of
Washington, tribes and public interest, before making any kind
of determination on tank waste?
Mr. Cooper. I think it's important for the Department to
reach out to all stakeholders to get their input in advance of
any decisions.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
And so, you believe in making the milestones of that kind
of agreement?
Mr. Cooper. I don't know what the milestones are in there,
but if it's in the agreement and the Department has agreed to
it, it would be my advice to strongly try to adhere to them,
yes.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
We might ask you follow up for the record because these
milestones are what have been agreed to, and I appreciate that
you believe the agency should adhere to them. The challenge
that we face is obviously these milestones in the past have
been missed and we want to make sure that contaminants not only
reach the plans, but that the plans are actually real and in
place. Obviously cleaning up Hanford and protecting the
Columbia River is very important and the health and safety, as
I mentioned in my opening statement, of the workforce there. So
all of these are very, very important responsibilities of the
general counsel.
I have already said what I wanted to say about grid
resiliency. I just think the Administration is getting itself
into--it needs to go in the opposite direction. It needs to
realize that the future investment in the grid in resiliency
from cyberattacks is just so, so important to us as a nation.
Mr. Genatowski, you had a lot of experience on one side of
the equation, signing on the dotted line to say I will support
and sign off on this investment. On the DOE side, a lot of
times it is the exploratory side of the equation. How do you
look at that change in responsibility? When I look at all of
the things that have happened as it relates to advanced
research, when I look at various ideas that really would not
have been there, on some of the renewables or efficiency. It is
not that they panned out, it is that we made a breakthrough in
science. How would you describe where you are on that
philosophy?
Mr. Genatowski. Well, I think ARPA-E has got a very
talented group of scientists, not only at the project level and
the program level and the administrative level, that are able
to, I think, advise me in areas where I'm, perhaps, not an
expert.
And I've invested my money and my client's money and my
firm's money over the years in technologies that are risky.
Over the course of my career I did the first initial public
offering for a geothermal company which then had some problems
in the State of Hawaii, then came back and did another IPL and
now it's the largest geothermal company in the world. It was a
risky investment at the time and my responsibility in that
particular instance was to understand the technology they were
using to acquire the geothermal asset in the ground and to
translate it into thermal content and move it into a generator
and onto the grid. And I had to explain that to the investors.
So, I think that was an important, actually, milestone for
me personally, in understanding investing in something that
was, at the time, it seems now quite normal, at the time it was
pretty cutting edge. We had to deal with fluids. We had to deal
with steam, dry steam. And I convinced the investors to do
that.
Chairman Murkowski was talking about the valley of death,
in terms of these investments that are large, they're long-term
and they need people on the other end to catch them and sustain
them that, I think, goes beyond just the venture capital
typical, size of investment and duration of investment.
So I think in that regard one of the things I can bring to
help the agency is my familiarity with, kind of, what works on
the back end to actually take what the scientists do and
translate it into a piece of equipment or a methodology or
piece of IT that tells people how to drive, to make things more
efficient, to place that in the hands of people that can
actually put it in the marketplace, sell it to people and
either reduce greenhouse gas pollution or increase efficiency
in the real world.
Senator Cantwell. Well, we have had lots of discussions
over my time on technology transfer and what works and what
doesn't. And yes, there has been a fair amount of critique of
our national labs at various points of time about how much
technology transfer they do do and whether they do it well, so
I have no doubt you could probably add something to that
discussion.
But I guess before the valley of death comes this decision
about investment, writ large. I do think that you have a
background in these subject areas that will be helpful for
that. I just want to make sure that we are looking at that in a
broad scale perspective of what the biggest opportunities and
payoffs are and that we listen to groups and organizations
about that level of investment, because I like the fact that
you said you wanted to listen to the scientists because they
are the ones who are going to tell us where the big
opportunities are.
I am a big believer in science, and I am a big believer in
listening to scientists.
So thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cassidy.
Senator Cassidy. Let's continue, kind of, on this.
It is rather nebulous what you just laid out. I am not
criticizing you, but I like to have more detail.
When you look at a project and you say this truly can
translate into something which is commercially viable, what are
you looking at because that gives us a sense of whether or not
things are being looked at correctly. If you follow what I am
saying?
Mr. Genatowski. Sure.
Part of the ARPA process in evaluating projects up front is
to evaluate initial commercial-ability, viability, in the
marketplace.
I think up front, it's extremely hard to put a panoply of
144 projects or 150 projects out there and make the judgment
that they're all going to end up being commercially viable
because they have a lot of hurdles to go through.
I think the first question you have to ask is, is it
scientifically viable and that's where I get the advice. Then
the question is, is it something to be used in the real world?
Will it displace something that's meaningful in terms of a cost
factor? If you've got customers that have invested equipment in
the cost base and the equipment is long-lived, you've got to
feel that you're comfortable coming out the back end with
something that is revolutionary and not micrologically
evolutionary.
In other words, it's got to make a cost difference for
somebody to take a piece of equipment that they've not fully
amortized, write it off and put a new piece of equipment in.
So, that's one of the things, I think, that I'd be looking
for and to see that at the end of the day, not only does it
make a difference, but the difference isn't marginal or the
difference has the potential for not being marginal. The
difference has a potential for being revolutionary enough to
actually be bought and paid for by someone who takes an
existing piece of equipment who moves it out and puts a new
piece of equipment in.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
So, if you will, looking at the impact this could have, it
is not that, for example, coal-fired plants are being replaced
with combined cycle and natural gas probably before they have
been completely paid for. But that is probably related as well
to natural gas being a lower cost input as well as it is a
better environmental profile.
I am just trying to understand this practically.
Mr. Genatowski. I could give you an example.
Senator Cassidy. Please.
Mr. Genatowski. There's a program on methane detection
which is very important to keep greenhouse gases out of the
atmosphere. It doesn't require large capital expenditures on
the back end. It requires a lot of science on the front end to
get the sensors to the stage where they can detect, not only
the methane from, let's say a--flying over in a probe or being
on a worker's uniform or cap. That's not a very large
expenditure on the back end. So that's something where you
might take more risk on the front end and say, that can easily
be viably commercial.
If you were looking at something that was larger, had a
larger expenditure, then you'd want to be a little more certain
on the front end, that it would be something that could
displace a larger piece of equipment.
And that's in, I guess what I'm trying to say is those
would be things you'd weigh and it's very hard to quantify
something like that if you're 10 years away or 15 years away
from commercialization.
A lot of risks have to be taken, I think, in an ARPA-E
environment to see how things develop as they go.
Senator Cassidy. So let me ask because these questions are
obviously focused on ARPA-E--one of the challenges it seems
that you have is how to convince us and the taxpayer of the
value of what you were doing, if that makes sense. It is one
thing if you are an angel investor because you are getting a
return on your investment, perhaps not as much if you are a
taxpayer and you are wondering what is happening with it.
Any thoughts how to take these highly technical issues and
break them down so that folks like us can understand and then
in turn it translates to the taxpayer, this is a good value for
your taxpayer dollar?
Mr. Genatowski. I think the way you can explain it is as
the projects go along they first have to have some type of
scientific validity and some reason to start the experiment
because if 100 percent of ARPA's experiments end up in the
marketplace they're not doing their job, they're really just
doing a job for industry. If none of them end up in the
marketplace, they're not following the statutory obligation to
basically place something in the marketplace to actually
benefit the environment or to reduce the importation of fuel or
oil or reduce--or increase the efficiency of energy
consumption. So, I think, there's some blend.
And I don't know you can tell at the initial starting gate
if you've got 144 projects which ones are going to make it and
which ones aren't. If they all make it, you've not done a good
job selecting enough science. If none of them make it, you've
not done a good job selecting enough commerce.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
Mr. Genatowski. I think it's something that you, kind of,
figure out as you go along, quite frankly.
Senator Cassidy. Okay, well, thank you.
I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thanks to both
of you for being here today and for your willingness to serve.
I appreciate that very much.
I would like to start with Mr. Cooper, if I may.
I am interested in hearing your views on the question of
natural gas exports and the impact of natural gas exports on
domestic prices.
This is a big deal in Minnesota where two out of three
homes in my state depend on natural gas heat to get through our
famously cold Minnesota winters. Of course, if the price of
natural gas goes up that is something that Minnesotans feel
directly.
The biggest consumer of natural gas in Minnesota is
actually our industrial sector, and there has been a study by
the U.S. Energy Information Administration which found that
increasing natural gas exports raises prices for consumers.
That makes sense. More demand, supply, you know, kind of basic
economics.
My question for you as you think about this role of general
counsel where I understand your job will be to interpret the
law and then reflect that to the policymakers and the
Administration. But could you talk to us a little bit about how
your background leading the Center for Liquified Natural Gas--I
keep wanting to say national gas, liquified natural gas--just
explain to me how you will jive that experience with your new
role as General Counsel in the Department of Energy.
Mr. Cooper. Some folks would say that natural gas is the
national gas.
[Laughter.]
The role of general counsel would be to advise the folks
within the Department about the law and its implications given
a particular policy initiative.
Up until this point in time and certainly as LNG exports
gained momentum, I'll say, as natural gas reserves in the
United States has really multiplied at an exponential scale,
the Department has to look at what's in the public interest.
That's kind of a vague, broad analysis that's in the Natural
Gas Act for the commodity.
The Department of Energy authorizes the export or import of
the commodity. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
authorizes the design, construction and operation of the
facility itself and that facility's impact on the surrounding
environment. So the DOE's role is limited to the commodity and
its impact on the marketplace.
There are several factors that have been developed over the
last few years that the Department looks at. One of them is the
cumulative impact of LNG exports as each new project is being
considered and the consequences on the supply.
Senator Smith. On price?
Mr. Cooper. Well, supply and price are----
Senator Smith. Right.
Mr. Cooper. ----linked together, obviously.
Senator Smith. Right, obviously.
Mr. Cooper. It's tight and the price goes up to reflect
that in the marketplace. And if supply is abundant, then that's
also reflected in lower prices absent some externality that
would influence the market.
Senator Smith. But do you see that, sort of, increased
exports has the impact of raising prices for----
Mr. Cooper. I have not. I have not.
Senator Smith. So, you would not agree with this.
Mr. Cooper. Since my time at the Center for Liquified
Natural Gas and when exports really were beginning to be an
idea, natural gas prices in the United States, as a whole, even
cash prices and the forward pricing, has remained under $3.00.
There are a month or two in the wintertime that I've seen on
the forward strips, it might actually hit $3.00 or $3.10.
Generally, what drives the spikes would be pipeline
constraints in the Northeast, but we have not seen any evidence
that LNG exports is driving the market, as far as pricing goes
anyway.
Senator Smith. I wanted to raise this because I think that,
certainly me and I think many of us on this Committee think
about this in terms, as Senator Cantwell is saying also, think
about this in terms of price for our consumers and our
constituents.
I am appreciating this and I think it is important that we
keep it, that you keep a keen eye on this as well as you are in
this role.
I just have a couple more seconds, but I would like to--
Senator Murkowski maybe I should go for the rest of this month
as some Senator Smithowski.
[Laughter.]
Just for August, just for August.
Mr. Genatowski, I would like to just add my strong interest
in support of the work of ARPA-E. This is really important in
Minnesota. The University of Minnesota is actively involved in
ARPA-E grants and I am one who believes strongly that the
future of energy is going to happen, and the question is only
whether we decide to lead or whether we end up following.
You would have the unenviable role of advocating for work
that apparently this Administration wants to zero out. I just
want to reiterate how important it is to me and to Minnesota
that you are in a position to be a strong advocate.
Mr. Genatowski. Yes, Ma'am. Thank you.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Smithowski.
Senator Hironowski.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Genatowski. This is a first.
[Laughter.]
Senator Hirono. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I ask this of all nominees who come before any of the
Committees on which I sit. I ask the following two questions.
So, I will ask the two of you, and I will start with Mr.
Cooper.
Since you became a legal adult have you ever made unwanted
requests for sexual favors or committed any verbal or physical
harassment or assault of a sexual nature?
Mr. Cooper. No.
Senator Hirono. Mr. Genatowski, same question.
Mr. Genatowski. No.
Senator Hirono. Have you ever faced discipline or entered
into a settlement related to this kind of conduct?
Mr. Cooper. No.
Mr. Genatowski. No.
Senator Hirono. This is question for Mr. Cooper.
I think that Chair Murkowski also referred to this. On June
1st President Trump directed Secretary Perry to take, and I
quote, ``immediate steps to prevent the loss of fuel secure
power plants.'' Basically this is really what amounts to a
bailout of unprofitable coal and nuclear plants. In a leaked
DOE draft memo, it would require electric grid operators to
purchase power from coal and nuclear plants.
In a Committee oversight hearing on June 12th, several
Federal Energy Regulatory Commissioners seemed very dubious
about the order. For example, Commissioner Glick noted that it
would stifle development of innovative new energy resources
like energy storage, while costing the public billions of
dollars in higher energy costs.
Mr. Cooper, what do you know about the Department's plans
for carrying out the President's order on basically,
subsidizing coal and nuclear plants?
Mr. Cooper. Not having been confirmed yet and not being
made privy to all of the facts, I really don't know what their
plans are other than what has been publicly stated.
Senator Hirono. So, should you be confirmed then, would you
go about helping the Department implement the President's
order? Would you consider that part of your job?
Mr. Cooper. My role would be to advise the Department on
the law and ascertain what the facts are surrounding that
particular circumstance and advise the Department on the
application of the facts to the law. And at present I don't
know what the facts are.
Senator Hirono. Well, as you go forward, should you be
confirmed, I would be interested in how the Administration
intends to proceed with this, basically subsidizing coal and
nuclear plants.
You indicated in your testimony that your job would be to
provide legal advice based on the plain meaning of the law that
confronts you and if the meaning is not plain, you would make a
reasonable interpretation using the four corners of the legal
text. So, by four corners do you also include legislative
history?
Mr. Cooper. I'm sorry, I didn't hear the last part.
Senator Hirono. You said in your testimony that in order to
interpret the statute, a relevant statute, then your job is to
provide advice. And in terms of the interpretation, if the
statute itself is not clear so, the plain meaning, that you
would look at the four corners of the text.
My question is do the four corners include legislative
history?
Mr. Cooper. If legislative history is a means by which we
can try to interpret what the statute says, then by all means
we would go there. The very first place, of course, is the
statute itself.
Senator Hirono. Yes. I don't mean to interrupt. I only have
a minute left.
So yes, I understand about the plain meaning, but I just
wanted to know what the four corners of the legal precedent are
because you would only apply to four corners if the
legislative, if the statute itself, is not clear on its face.
Let me move on.
For Mr. Genatowski, I thought it was very interesting, of
course, coming from Hawaii that you had a part in providing
some funding for geothermal. Unfortunately Puna Geothermal has
been overtaken by lava, but that doesn't mean that geothermal
is not, would not be, a reliable source of energy.
You do have a long background as an investment banker. Do
you agree with the mission of ARPA-E, established by Congress,
to take on the high potential, high impact energy technologies
that are too early for private sector investment?
Mr. Genatowski. I do.
Senator Hirono. I like the framing that you said if
everything that ARPA-E invests in becomes commercial or if
nothing that it invests in becomes commercial that ARPA-E is
not doing its job.
I think you do need to listen to the scientists to make
sure that what you are supporting under ARPA-E has a potential,
but not 100 percent potential for commercialization. There is a
risk taking involved in moving us toward an energy self-
sufficient future, and that's something that Hawaii is very
interested in because we have received ARPA-E funding. You
probably know that Hawaii has the most forward thinking, as far
as I am concerned, energy goals. We want to be 100 percent
energy self-sufficient in electricity by 2045 and we rely on
ARPA-E for a lot of the cutting-edge support that we want to
move forward on.
So in spite of the fact that this Administration is peopled
by folks who are very much invested in the fossil fuel
industry, I would want to have your commitment that you would
do everything you can to articulate support for ARPA-E and its
mission.
Mr. Genatowski. Yes, Ma'am. All the projects that come into
ARPA-E would all be evaluated by the scientists and by a merit
committee. They respond to the FOAs or the OPENs and then they
would get the funding.
Senator Hirono. You are going to need to become a very
strong voice and advocate because the President wants to cut
back or wipe out ARPA-E.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Hirono.
Senator King.
Senator King. Mr. Cooper, I'm sure you are aware of Section
717b of Title 15 in the Natural Gas Act and that it states that
an export license for an LNG terminal shall be, ``consistent
with public interest.'' Do you consider potential effects on
domestic gas prices as part of the public interest analysis in
making that decision?
Mr. Cooper. Well, there are two different analyses that
occur if it regards the facility, the design operation,
construction of the facility and its impact on the surrounding
environment----
Senator King. No, no, I am not asking that question.
I am not asking that question. I am asking about the
Department of Energy permit under 717b that an export facility
would be consistent with the public interest. Do you consider
potential effects on domestic gas prices as part of the
analysis of the public interest?
Mr. Cooper. I think that the precedent within the
Department is on the economic impacts of the marketplace which
would include pricing.
Senator King. It would include effect on domestic prices?
This is a very specific question because----
Mr. Cooper. I understand.
Senator King. You are going to be faced with this question.
Mr. Cooper. I understand.
Senator King. Does consistent with the public interest
require analysis of effect on domestic prices by increased LNG
exports?
Mr. Cooper. It's my understanding that the parameters that
the Department applies includes the impact on the economy. I
would assume there would be some analysis of pricing, but I
would reserve the right to review those policies and the
section of the Natural Gas Act you're referring to before I
could make a definitive statement.
Senator King. I would like you to make that analysis and
provide it to the Committee for the record in this proceeding.
I think this is a very important question.
There are now pending, as of June 28th of this year, 57
billion bcf per day of export, of LNG export applications.
Total production is now 90. That is more than half. It is
strange credulity to assume that that level or anything close
to it would not affect domestic prices. So this is a very
important question, you are going to be faced with it as
General Counsel, what the meaning of that provision is. I would
like your view on the meaning of the ``consistent with the
public interest'' phrase and whether specific economic analysis
of effect on domestic gas prices is part of a public interest
analysis.
Okay? Thank you.
Mr. Genatowski, the first words out of your mouth when
asked by the Chairman about ARPA-E was, of course, I support
the President's budget. My first thought is then why are you
sitting here? The President's budget zeros out this agency. You
cannot be two people. Do you support the President's budget or
do you think ARPA-E has an important mission?
Mr. Genatowski. I support the President's budget and I'm
here because I'd like to get a chance to run ARPA-E and put my
oar in the water and help it out to be as better as it can be.
Senator King. Well, you understand the nature of the
question.
Mr. Genatowski. The dichotomy?
Senator King. Yes.
Mr. Genatowski. I do.
Senator King. I am seeing two guys sitting at the table
here. You either support the President's budget which is zero,
or you want to run an agency that has an important mission in
this country that is supported year after year by this
Congress.
Mr. Genatowski. I guess in my mind I can hold both concepts
and they wouldn't be inconsistent.
If the Congress votes to appropriate money and authorizes
money to be appropriated to run ARPA-E, the President signs the
bill. There will be a budget for ARPA-E, and I'd like to be the
person that runs it.
Senator King. And you would run it consistently with
Congressional appropriations and with the provisions of the
statute?
Mr. Genatowski. Absolutely. It's the law.
Senator King. Next line of questioning is, you are a
finance guy, not a scientist. ARPA-E is a science agency. Why
should we confirm a guy to one of the most important science
positions in the government who is not a scientist?
Mr. Genatowski. Well I think ARPA-E has a lot of scientists
in and out of ARPA-E that work with it, give it a lot of input.
I think one of the obligations of ARPA-E is to, as I said
before in reaction to another question, try to deliver some of
the products into the marketplace so the citizens can realize
the benefits in the environment and in the economy of more
efficiency and less greenhouse gas and pollution. And I think
that I understand what the ultimate buyers do, what they look
at, to purchase the equipment and implement the scientific
discoveries into the real world, in the real operating world.
Senator King. Thank you. Well, I will be interested in
that, how you navigate that and I appreciate your answer.
Mr. Cooper, one final quick question. In your prior
position, well, let me broaden it. Do you know of any studies
published or unpublished of effects of natural gas exports on
domestic prices at varying levels?
Mr. Cooper. There have been a couple of studies performed
in the last three or four years, I believe, that were filed as
part of the docket at the Department, of the LNG export docket.
I can't remember the name of the consulting firm that
prepared them, but yes, I'm aware that there are studies.
Senator King. In your prior work for the Trade Association
did you all prepare any studies, do any published or
unpublished studies of that question?
Mr. Cooper. No, we did not.
Senator King. Do you have an opinion as to what level of
exports, in terms of a percentage of production, would be,
would produce significant increases in domestic prices?
Mr. Cooper. I think it's difficult to do that because as
pricing triggers increase in the development of supply, the
development supply triggers the decrease in pricing. It's
difficult for me, not being the economist or person who does
modeling to be able to do that.
Senator King. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Mr. Genatowski, the only thing I would ask
to follow up on what Senator King has asked is, did you seek
this job or did they seek you out? Is this something you put
your name in for that you would be interested in or it just,
kind of, came up?
Mr. Genatowski. It, kind of, came up.
Senator Manchin. It, kind of, came up. So, you won't say
your expertise is in this, as you mentioned, it's----
Mr. Genatowski. Can you repeat that, Senator?
Senator Manchin. Would you acknowledge that this is not
your expertise in ARPA-E, Department of Energy?
Mr. Genatowski. I think my expertise would be valuable to
ARPA-E.
Senator Manchin. You do. From what----
Mr. Genatowski. Well, I've managed various groups of
professionals in the energy sector for 30 or 40 years. I've
been an investor in the energy sector, and I know the investors
in the energy--I've invested my money, client's money and firm
money in the energy sector for 30 or 40 years.
And I understand, having been a draftsman of drafting
documents in the energy and infrastructure sector for five
years and reading them for 35 years, what documents our
investors are amenable to sign and also what promises you can
put in those documents that are enforceable.
Senator Manchin. Let me speak about one in particular,
carbon capture utilization (CCU). The Carbon Capture
Utilization Research Council in the use and deployment of the
CCU is what we consider to be one of the tools in the tool
boxes.
You are familiar with the carbon capture utilization and
sequestration. As you see it, what is the greatest challenge
that has limited this technology from greater commercialization
to date? Why have we not been able to use this on a commercial
scale and why have we not promoted and developed any commercial
use with carbon capture utilization? And do you believe that
ARPA-E can and should be playing in low emissions fossil fuel
generation?
Mr. Genatowski. On the first question, I don't have the
technical knowledge, and I'd have to ask the staff at ARPA-E to
help me out to answer that question.
And then I'd ask you to repeat the second question.
Senator Manchin. What role, well, the second one would be,
probably the same answer. What role do you believe that ARPA-E
can and should be playing in low emission fossil fuel
generation? Do you believe there is a role for ARPA-E in that?
Mr. Genatowski. I think ARPA-E has a role in terms of
reducing greenhouse gases. It's in their research mandate. And
I think if proposals come in through OPENs or FOAs and they
pass through the review process, ARPA-E would fund the
research.
Senator Manchin. I am thinking like Senator King, my friend
mentioned, that it has been zeroed out. So the intent is to
close down ARPA-E, intent from the Administration which must be
coming from the recommendation from Secretary Perry or from the
Department of Energy or someone within the White House. Did
they bring you in to close it up, just, kind of, put the nail
in the coffin, as we say?
Mr. Genatowski. No, sir.
Senator Manchin. When you were vetted for this position did
they talk to you about we have zeroed it out so we want you to
put it to bed, lay it to rest?
Mr. Genatowski. Not one minute was I talked to about
closing it out.
Senator Manchin. Did you know at the time that you were
being vetted that it had been zeroed out?
Mr. Genatowski. Yes, I did.
Senator Manchin. What were your questions?
What would be your question to them, whoever vetted you,
why did you pick me since you want to close the system down?
Mr. Genatowski. Well, the people that vetted me, I guess,
picked me because they thought if it wasn't closed down I could
add something. And I'd add something in terms----
Senator Manchin. Was it the White House? Was it White House
staff who vetted you or Department of Energy?
Mr. Genatowski. I don't necessarily know who ended up
vetting me. I spoke to people at the Department of Energy, and
I spoke to people at the White House.
Senator Manchin. Okay.
Mr. Cooper, as General Counsel you are going to be
responsible for providing legal advice throughout the agency.
How do you intend to support the culture that prioritizes
accountability and transparency? I think your role would be to
Secretary Perry, I believe, to recommend and advise?
Mr. Cooper. I'm sorry, I lost a little bit in the
translation. Could you repeat the question?
Senator Manchin. Well, the question was how do you intend
to support a culture that prioritizes accountability and
transparency?
Mr. Cooper. I think first of all the General Counsel's
office needs to look at what policies and procedures are in
place and then reinforce those policies and procedures to
further a culture of accountability and transparency.
Senator Manchin. The Department of Energy, alongside with
the White House and National Security Council, are examining
ways to ensure a level playing field for coal and nuclear power
plants that are in danger of retirement. Are you moving up on
that? Have they talked to you about that or have you followed
that?
Mr. Cooper. I've followed it from afar as a private
citizen.
Senator Manchin. We are talking about the plants that
provide resiliency and reliability to our grid, and that means
they are important to the national security.
So with your background in energy, I am interested to know
whether you agree with the President that these power plants
are critical for national security? That would be nuke and
coal.
Mr. Cooper. In my role as the General Counsel, I'd have to
have access to the facts that I don't have today to be able to
make that determination.
Senator Manchin. It came from the Department of Energy. It
came from the Secretary, himself, who basically said that our
grid could be in jeopardy without the baseload fuel of coal and
nuke plants. The coal plants mean ones with all the pollution
controls on and the nuclear and all those up-to-specs and up-
to-date.
Are you concerned or have you followed that, I know you
have an energy background, correct?
Mr. Cooper. I have an energy background.
Senator Manchin. Are you concerned about the reliability of
the grid?
Mr. Cooper. I am concerned about the reliability of the
grid. I think the Department is as well.
Senator Manchin. So, we will see, we will have to see which
way that goes.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Genatowski, let me follow up on some of the questions
that Senator Manchin asked you with the ARPA-E program.
What would you do in your capacity as the Director to
advocate the value of the ARPA-E's program to the Secretary and
to the President?
Mr. Genatowski. I would play to the external management
evaluation National Academy of Sciences used. They've got a lot
of research that they've done, many publications. They've got
companies that have been formed. They've got products that have
gone into the marketplace and actually changed the environment.
I think there are other citations of major publications.
There are patents applied for, et cetera. There are a lot of
different external goals, I think, that the National Academy
had--about seven or eight--that they looked at. A lot of those
are interim goals that are adding to knowledge which is
important and some of them are, I'd say, ultimate goals which
address the phrase and the statute of deployment, a deployment
of the assets.
Some of those things are the geothermal well with the laser
beams going down the middle to soften up the rock. There's the
BASF venture capital where--to increase the viscosity and then
not have any kind of attachment against the walls of a pipe or
whatever. There's smart wire. There are many things that have
made it to the end of the marketplace that have actually
changed the way the market works and changed the way
electricity moves, the way power moves and the energy moves and
helped the environment.
Those are a handful of things out of a lot of projects
which seems to me like the right ratio. Some failures, some
projects that add to knowledge that haven't yet hit the market
and then some things in the marketplace.
So, I guess, it seems to me they're doing their job and
they should be continued for that reason. That's why, that's
how, I guess, I would advocate it.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Cooper, would you please share your general position on
whether Yucca Mountain in Nevada should be a federal repository
for the nation's nuclear waste?
Mr. Cooper. My position would be that the Department would
follow the statutory mandates on Yucca Mountain, and I would
advise the Department to do so.
It's the role of Congress to speak to that and I think
Congress already has.
Senator Cortez Masto. Would you recommend that the
Secretary accept the framework established by the Blue-Ribbon
Commission which was later accepted by your General Counsel
predecessor and the Secretary's predecessor?
Mr. Cooper. I'd have to review the Commission's findings,
and I haven't done so.
Senator Cortez Masto. Would you support legislation
requiring consent by state and local governments?
Mr. Cooper. By all means that's a decision for the Congress
to make and it would not be a decision that I could make in my
role as Office of General Counsel.
Senator Cortez Masto. You do not think the Department of
Energy would take a position one way or the other on whether or
not there should be consent-based siting?
Mr. Cooper. I'm sure that it would depend on the
particularities of the proposed legislation.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
On January 8th, FERC unanimously rejected DOE's grid
resiliency proposal to provide support for failing coal and
nuclear plants saying that there is no evidence that any past
or planned retirements of coal-fired power plants pose a threat
to reliability of the nation's electric grid.
Subsequently, a leaked DOE memo dated May 28th stated they
would compel grid operators to buy electricity from at-risk
plants under the auspices of national security.
Considering there is no existing emergency to respond to,
it is hard to envision how propping up those at-risk coal and
nuclear plants might be implemented.
In your legal opinion, what would such an emergency look
like that would keep these plants online that could not be
rectified with the grid system and resources we already have
today?
Mr. Cooper. I really couldn't speculate on the fact pattern
that I haven't seen that exists today or what might occur in
the future. All I can commit to is that I would advise the
Department of what the law says and then try to make a
reasonable application of the facts to the law.
But at this point I'm not in a position to give an opinion.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
On August 14th Secretary Perry was quoted as saying, ``the
government must ensure that the U.S. has baseload capability
that only coal and nuclear can bring. The wind doesn't always
blow. The sun doesn't always shine and gas pipelines are
interruptible.''
From your experience in the natural gas industry would you
agree with this assessment?
Mr. Cooper. At a top line level, yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. And any other comments? At a top line
level, yes, what does that mean?
Mr. Cooper. Well, I'm saying that the energy sector is
robust, it can be complex. I think that to do a full and
complete analysis of how each part of the energy industry fits
into the whole is more than I can succinctly state here today.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay, thank you.
I notice my time is up.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
I have one last question for you, Mr. Cooper, and this has
been raised a little bit by Senator Cantwell and some others.
As we are all aware, the Department of Energy has stood up
a new Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security and Emergency
Response, the CESER. This is going to be a program, or an
office I think, that we are all paying very, very close
attention to.
You have a lot of overlap between electricity delivery,
reliability and cybersecurity. There are those who would
suggest that cybersecurity has to be, kind of, designed into
every aspect of system operation and that a separate program
might actually be counterproductive. I hear that argument. I
happen to look at this and say, we have a significant issue
going forward, and I think that an office is important.
A question for you is whether or not you agree with me on
that and then, when it comes to cyber issues on the energy
grid. You have a situation where you are going to be
effectively managing different relationships between the
Department of Energy and other agencies that are operating in
this sphere, whether it is the FERC, you have the Department of
Homeland Security, you have the NERC, the North American
Electric Reliability Corporation, and then you have the private
sector in there. Can you just speak to the issue of cyber, the
new office itself, as well as the interplay with these other
departments and programs as it relates to how we respond
effectively on matters of cyber?
Mr. Cooper. I'm aware that the Office has been established.
I'll leave it to the policymakers as to whether there should be
an independent office or whether it should be integrated,
absent such an office. I think they have spoken.
My role would be to advise and consult the Department in
the development of that and all I can do is pledge that I'll do
my best to fulfill the mission of the Department in that
respect.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate that you will, in your
role as General Counsel, have the opportunity to weigh in on
many of these issues and I guess I'm just putting out a concern
that this is something that we do not want the DOE to be shut
out.
I feel pretty strongly that when it comes to issues of
cyber, as they relate to energy and energy security and
reliability and resiliency here, that it is extraordinarily
important that the Department of Energy be at that table in
those discussions and really a strong participant.
Senator King or Senator Manchin, any follow-up?
Senator Manchin. I just have one thing. You can tell we
have an interest in an all-in, and some of us do, an all-in
energy policy.
I want to make it very clear, in my state we have 90
percent coal-fired plants because we are a state that is rich
in coal.
We are also one of the states that has been blessed with
natural gas, and we also believe in wind. We have one of the
largest wind farms east of the Mississippi. So we are all for
all of this.
The only thing that we are saying is to basically take a
perfectly good, modern coal plant that has been upgraded with
all the new modern technology for pollution control, SOX and
NOX and all the things that we do, offline could jeopardize the
grid because the only two products that you have that are base
loaded right now is coal. You have 60 days of coal laying
there, that plant will run 60 days uninterrupted. If you have
90 or more, the same. If you have nuke plants up to speed, they
are going to do the same if they have nuclear fuel.
Wind doesn't blow all the time. Sun doesn't shine all the
time. We do not have the technology to date for the storage
that is needed. Natural gas lines can be interrupted. We are
trying to build more gas lines and develop them, especially up
into the Northeast where the product is needed.
So, with that being said, that was why the question I was
asking, I think, by my dear friend, Senator Cortez Masto, was
coming at a different angle at this, but we are just wanting
people to be honest. You have to have baseload fuel to run the
grid system, or if not, the well-being of our country and the
security of the grid and the security of our nation could be at
risk.
We are hoping with your knowledge of energy you will be
looking into that and the advisement would be not to take any
of these plants that are up to speed and up to the latest of
technology offline until there is another baseload fuel to run
24/7, dependable, reliable and affordable. That is where, I
think, we were trying to get to and hopefully you would
consider that.
Mr. Cooper. I would look forward to working on the issue. I
really do.
Senator Manchin. Thank you.
The Chairman. Well, gentlemen, thank you again for
appearing before the Committee and your willingness to respond
to the questions.
As I mentioned in my opening, it is my hope that members
will have an opportunity to weigh in if they have additional
questions to be submitted for the record. We would ask that
those be submitted by close of business today.
Mr. Genatowski, I think the only follow on comment that I
would add is, again, an imperative. I hope that you feel from
this Committee, and I think that you will feel from many in
this Senate, again, on a bipartisan basis, there is a support
for ARPA-E. There is a role for ARPA-E. We have seen it
demonstrated.
While I understand that there is an expectation that you
would say you support the President's budget, my hope is
certainly that when you have the opportunity to weigh in as
that budget is being formulated that we won't be looking at
next year's budget coming out of the White House and seeing
ARPA-E recommended to be zeroed out. We will then know that you
have really put your shoulder to it, you have helped educate
those folks, and you have shown them what value you can bring.
I do believe that you can bring that value. I do believe that
your focus from the investment side can be exactly that that we
are hoping to be able to address.
You point out that there are many smart scientists at ARPA-
E. You are right. I have met many of them.
I also know that as smart as they are as scientists, they
might not be the best in the financial world. Those that can
knit together the financing opportunities, we need to help
figure out how to make those connections as well.
ARPA-E's role is not to be the financer, but it is to be
the one to be the facilitator. I am encouraged that you have
had some experience in facilitating just that. I am encouraged
to know that as an investor you looked at some risky energy
projects and chose to advance them. Some of them do not always
work, but if they always worked they would be easy to finance.
So you bring a different perspective, I think an important
perspective, and my hope is that you will share with the
Administration that there is strong, strong support for ARPA-E
within the Congress and that you look forward to helping to
advance that.
Mr. Cooper, again, thank you for your efforts previously in
the Congress. We wish you both well.
With that, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:36 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]