- WALLACE NOMINATION
[Senate Hearing 116-305]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-305
WALLACE NOMINATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
TO
CONSIDER THE NOMINATION OF GEORGE ROBERT WALLACE TO BE ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR FISH AND WILDLIFE AND PARKS AT THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERIOR
__________
JUNE 5, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-311
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
STEVE DAINES, Montana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Kellie Donnelly, Chief Counsel
Lucy Murfitt, Deputy Chief Counsel
Sarah Venuto, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Manchin III, Hon. Joe, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
West Virginia..................................................
7
WITNESSES
Enzi, Hon. Michael B., a U.S. Senator from Wyoming...............
16
Barrasso, Hon. John, a U.S. Senator from Wyoming.................
17
Wallace, George Robert, nominated to be Assistant Secretary for
Fish and Wildlife and Parks at the Department of the Interior..
18
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
American Fly Fishing Trade Association, et al.:
Letter for the Record........................................
11
Barrasso, Hon. John:
Introduction.................................................
17
(The) Coalition to Protect America's National Parks:
Letter for the Record........................................
13
Ducks Unlimited:
Press Release for the Record.................................
3
Enzi, Hon. Michael B.:
Introduction.................................................
16
Manchin III, Hon. Joe:
Opening Statement............................................
7
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
National Parks Conservation Association:
Position on Nomination of Rob Wallace........................
4
Letter for the Record........................................
9
National Shooting Sports Foundation, Inc.:
Letter for the Record........................................
15
National Wildlife Refuge Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
40
Rio Blanco County (Colorado) Board of County Commissioners:
Letter for the Record........................................
41
Wallace, George Robert:
Opening Statement............................................
18
Written Testimony............................................
21
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
38
Wayne County, Utah Board of Commissioners:
Letter for the Record........................................
43
WALLACE NOMINATION
----------
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 5, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order. This is a rare Wednesday session of the Energy
and Natural Resources Committee.
Before we begin, I want to recognize and provide a tribute
to two Park Service employees, Jeff Babcock and Charles Eric
Benson. They tragically passed away in an airplane crash in
Whitehorse, Canada, just a week ago, last Monday. They were not
on official business, they were ferrying a private aircraft
from the Lower 48 up to Alaska, as so many Alaskans do. Both of
these individuals had extensive time within the Park Service.
Jeff, in addition to being with Park Service for years, had a
distinguished career in the military and with the Troopers in
the state. Eric Benson was also in the Air Force and the Army.
Truly, truly great individuals, longtime Alaskans, and just
a reminder to us of just the inherent risk that sometimes we
experience in more rural places--but both individuals who
served their country and the agency very well. We were very,
very saddened in Alaska by this news, and our thoughts and
prayers are with their families and loved ones.
We are here this Wednesday morning to consider the
nomination of Robert Wallace, Rob, to be Assistant Secretary
for Fish and Wildlife and Parks at the Department of the
Interior.
This is, for me, a critical position. This is a nomination
that we have been waiting for anxiously, I might add, for some
period of time. And Mr. Wallace, I want to thank you for your
willingness to serve.
This is one of five Assistant Secretary positions at the
Department. And the individual who holds it oversees two key
agencies, the Fish and Wildlife Service as well as National
Park Service--of course they have numerous and wide-ranging
responsibilities. But together they administer nearly 170
million acres of lands in the United States, including 129
million acres in Alaska alone.
So just to put it into context, colleagues, roughly 75
percent of all of the acreage of national parks and wildlife
refuges in the country are in the State of Alaska. And Alaska
is home to the largest National Parks and refuges--we have 7 of
the 12 National Parks that exceed one million acres.
I am just putting it in context for the rest of you, when I
say that the Department of the Interior is like our
``landlord,'' we really mean it because Alaskans need the
people that are in charge to recognize that their decisions
have a significant impact on our lives and our livelihoods.
We have had some highs and some lows within the Department,
where again, it was more of a landlord, ``mother may I,'' type
of relationship instead of a partnership. We want to return to
that partnership relationship, and I think we have seen
continuing improved relations.
With so much land administered by the Department, Alaska
has a wide range of issues that need to be addressed. I don't
think I need to tell you, Mr. Wallace, but you are probably
going to be spending a lot of time on Alaska-related issues--it
is just the nature of it.
But we have some things that are on deck, most notably a
life-saving road to connect King Cove and Cold Bay. We also
need to stand up the oil and gas program that Congress
authorized for the 1002 Area, which is supported by nearly 70
percent of Alaskans, including many Alaska Natives who actually
live within the 1002 Area.
At the national level, we need to address the multi-
billion-dollar maintenance backlog at our land management
agencies, particularly for the National Park Service and for
our wildlife refuges. This is something that many of us have
been talking about, how we move forward on that. We need to
provide access for hunting and fishing and promote outdoor
recreation. There are also many other provisions from our
recent lands package that we need to get implemented for the
benefit of those communities and the people who live there.
So again, these are just a few of the imperatives that we
have in place and why it is so important to fill this position.
Mr. Wallace, you need to know that I am very confident that you
have what it is going to take in order to succeed within this
position. You bring decades of experience in public life,
including your time at the National Park Service as well as
here in the Senate. You are no stranger to folks around here,
including right here on this Committee. Mr. Wallace understands
the importance of public lands and the complex issues that
affect them, so it is no surprise that a wide range of
stakeholders, from Ducks Unlimited to the National Park
Conservation Association, are supporting the nomination.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Interior Department has actually been without a Senate-
confirmed Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife since 2011.
That is a long time to have a vacancy in a very key position,
so I look forward to moving Mr. Wallace's nomination quickly.
For those who have questions this morning, know that I am
going to stick around for as long as it takes. We are going to
have a series of votes beginning at 11:00 which will kind of
interrupt things, but my intention is to conclude this hearing
rapidly this morning, and then to report Mr. Wallace's
nomination as soon as possible.
I am going to turn to my Ranking Member for his opening
comments, and then I would invite Senator Enzi and Senator
Barrasso, as the Senators from Mr. Wallace's home state, to
provide further introduction.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE MANCHIN III,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for holding
this hearing today.
Welcome to the Committee, Mr. Wallace, and thank you for
your willingness to serve and appear before the Committee.
The position of Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife
and Parks, as we know, was created by Senator Tom Udall's
father, Interior Secretary Stewart Udall, in 1965, when he
assigned responsibility for the National Park Service to the
Assistant Secretary for what was previously only Fish and
Wildlife.
It is a big job, as the Senator has mentioned. The
Assistant Secretary is responsible for overseeing 418 national
park units with 85 million acres throughout all 50 states and 4
of our territories, which are visited by upwards of 300 million
people a year, and 567 national wildlife refuges covering
nearly 150,000 acres, which provide hunting, fishing, and
recreational enjoyment to another 55 million people a year.
In my little State of West Virginia, we have six national
park units and two national wildlife refuges. I am sure Mr.
Wallace agrees with me that they are some of the greatest areas
of the country. Like all the Senators, I believe the parks in
my state are the best and the most important compared to
everyone else's. So you will have not heard this for the first
or last time.
Unfortunately, this important job has been without a
Senate-confirmed office holder, as the Chairman has just
mentioned, for eight years, nearly eight years. If confirmed,
it will be on Mr. Wallace to provide the proper stewardship of
some of the most iconic places in the country, which have been
set aside for this and future generations.
I am pleased that we have a nomination for this important
post. I am particularly pleased, Mr. Wallace, to be able to
consider you for this position with the caliber and background
that you have. I will read off a few. You know the National
Park Service. You got started fresh out of college as a
seasonal Park Ranger in the Grand Teton National Park. You
later went on to serve as the Assistant Director for the
Legislative and Congressional Affairs for the National Park
Service. Equally important, you know the Senate and this
Committee. You were a Legislative Assistant to Senator Malcom
Wallop and later went on to become Senator Wallop's Chief of
Staff. In '91 you became the Committee's Republican Staff
Director, a post you held for four years. During that time, the
landmark Energy Policy Act of '92 and nearly 100 park and
public land bills under the Committee's jurisdiction were
enacted into law.
As if those ties to the Committee were not enough, your
wife, Celia, used to work for the Committee and later for
former Senator Craig Thomas. So you are well involved, and we
have no way to have any excuses we can tolerate, okay? You know
all the secrets.
I have not had a chance to meet with you personally until
today, but I know our mutually good friend, Dave Freudenthal,
recommends you at the highest level. Coming from my friend,
Dave, who is a former governor of the State of Wyoming and dear
friends of both Senator Enzi and Senator Barrasso, I take that
considerably to be a compliment. One constant in your life,
Governor Freudenthal wrote, ``is a deep dedication to the
nation's park system.''
With that, I finally note that the Committee has received
letters of support for your nomination from the National Parks
Conservation Association, the Coalition to Protect America's
National Parks and National Shooting Sports Foundation.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
I truly believe that you are going to be a bipartisan
builder here bringing us all together, which is something that
we do not have too often and which is extremely important to
all of us. But we want to thank you again for being here and
letting us consider you for this important position for our
country.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
Let's turn to the Senior Senator from Wyoming to provide
the first introduction, and then we will turn to Senator
Barrasso.
STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL B. ENZI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WYOMING
Senator Enzi. Thank you, Chairman Murkowski, and thank you,
Ranking Member Manchin, for your comments.
It's my privilege to introduce Mr. Rob Wallace, who is
testifying in front of the Committee today on his nomination to
serve as Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and for
National Parks at the Department of the Interior.
I've known Rob for many years, and I don't think there
could be a better choice to fill this position.
Now, Tom Bodett of Alaska, known for his Motel 6 ads with
``leave the light on,'' wrote a humorous book--the name of it
is ``The End of the Road.'' And he begins that, ``I'm writing
about some of my friends. Please be kind to them.''
I know you'll be kind to my very qualified friend, who is
here today, and as a result I won't ask to read into the record
all of the letters of recommendation from all of the people
from Wyoming and across the country, so.
The Chairman. They will be included as part of the record.
Senator Enzi. Now I'm going to say some of the same things
that Senator Manchin said. I'm a retailer, and I know when you
run an ad the first time hardly anybody gets it. If you run it
again, a few more will do, and I'll be willing to run this
several times if it will help with Rob's nomination.
I'll be hitting the highlights. My colleague, Senator
Barrasso, will fill in the details. We're a team, and our whole
delegation supports this nomination.
Rob was born and raised in Wyoming where he quickly learned
the important role the Department of the Interior plays in the
upkeep of the state's natural beauty. In fact, Rob's first job
after college was with the National Park Service where he
served as a seasonal ranger in Grand Teton National Park. For
five years Rob helped with the preservation and maintenance at
one of our nation's finest parks.
His passion for our nation's public lands sent him here to
Washington where he handled energy and environment issues for
former Wyoming Senator Malcolm Wallop. Before leaving Capitol
Hill, he served as a Staff Director of the Energy and Natural
Resources Committee.
He returned to Sheridan and the incredible Big Horn
Mountains until Rob once again came back to Washington where he
has served as Assistant Director of the National Park Service
for Congressional and Legislative Affairs. During this time, he
supervised the Reagan Administration's legislative agenda for
national parks which included readjusting visitor entrance
fees, providing resources to fight the 1988 forest fires and
adding several new units to the National Park System.
In 1989, Rob became Senator Wallop's Chief of Staff before
heading back to the Senate Energy and Natural Resources
Committee in 1991 to again serve as Staff Director. I first met
Rob in 1995 when he served as Chief of Staff to Wyoming
Governor Jim Geringer, and I was in the state legislature.
These days Rob is still involved in Wyoming in the
management of public lands. Rob serves as the President of the
Upper Green River Conservancy, a sage grouse habitat bank that
partners with ranchers, energy companies and conservation
groups that work together to protect critical sage grouse
habitat in Wyoming.
Rob's career and character reflect a man willing to step up
and serve his community and country. His years of experience at
Interior and in the Halls of Congress have well suited him for
this new chapter.
I'm pleased to introduce him to you today, and I hope you
will give his nomination full and fair consideration while
you're kind to my friend.
The Chairman. We look forward to doing just that. We
appreciate your sage counsel and advice, Senator Enzi, and
thank you for being here before the Committee this morning.
Now let's proceed to Senator Barrasso.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN BARRASSO,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WYOMING
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and I
appreciate the opportunity to join my colleague, Senator Enzi,
in introducing our friend, Rob Wallace, as President Trump's
nominee to serve as Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife
and Parks at the Department of the Interior.
Rob has had a very busy two days here in the Senate, Madam
Chairman. Yesterday I chaired his nomination hearing upstairs
in the Environment and Public Works Committee because our
Committees both have jurisdiction over this. Of course, Rob did
a great job discussing his experience and views on issues
facing the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
So today, I expect the Committee is going to focus more on
the Assistant Secretary's role to oversee the national parks
which is actually where Rob began his career.
Madam Chairman, Rob Wallace is the right person for this
job. His 45-year career is comprised of service at nearly every
possible, relevant level of state and Federal Government as
well as the private sector.
He has been on both sides of the legislative table in
government relations at the Park Service and during his service
here in the United States Senate. He led the staff for this
very Committee for former Senator Malcolm Wallop from Wyoming,
and I know your father was Chairman of the Committee and at a
point worked very closely with Senator Wallop as two solid
Westerners focused on the major issues that our nation faces.
Rob knows the challenges facing the Department from his
time as a seasonal ranger in Grand Teton National Park and as a
long-time resident of Teton County, Wyoming.
And from his time in the private sector, Rob has continued
to demonstrate his commitment to this nation's parks as one of
the founding members of the Grand Teton National Park
Foundation. And he spent many decades in leadership of
organizations that promote conservation and cultivation of our
natural resources for use in the future.
One could argue that Rob's entire career has prepared him
to serve at Interior.
I have known Rob for more than 35 years. I know him to be
pragmatic, fair, innovative. His dedication is second to none.
It is a pleasure to join Senator Enzi in introducing him
here today, and I look forward to working with him after the
Senate confirms his nomination.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Barrasso.
Thank both of you for the introduction. You have not left
much for Mr. Wallace to speak to in terms of his background,
but we appreciate that because it is helpful to the Committee
for those who know him and apparently know him well.
The rules of the Committee which apply to all nominees
require that they be sworn in connection with their testimony.
So I would ask, Mr. Wallace, that you please rise and raise
your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about to
give to the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
Mr. Wallace. I do.
The Chairman. You may be seated.
Before you begin your statement, I will ask you three
questions addressed to each nominee who comes before this
Committee.
First, will you be available to appear before this
Committee and other Congressional committees to represent
departmental positions and respond to issues of concern to
Congress?
Mr. Wallace. Yes, I will.
The Chairman. Are you aware of any personal holdings,
investments or interests that could constitute a conflict or
create an appearance of such a conflict should you be confirmed
and assumed the office to which you have been nominated by the
President?
Mr. Wallace. I do not.
The Chairman. Are you involved or do you have any assets
held in a blind trust?
Mr. Wallace. No.
The Chairman. Mr. Wallace, you may proceed. If you have any
individuals that you would care to introduce, you are certainly
welcome to do so. We are pleased to have you before the
Committee.
STATEMENT OF GEORGE ROBERT WALLACE, NOMINATED TO BE ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR FISH AND WILDLIFE AND PARKS AT THE DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR
Mr. Wallace. Well, thank you, Chairman Murkowski. I was
talking to Sam Fowler a minute ago. I've probably been in this
Committee 100 times and this is the first time I've actually
looked at Senators in my testimony. So you look differently in
the front than you do from behind.
[Laughter.]
Senator Manchin. We have been told that.
Mr. Wallace. But Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member
Manchin and members of the Committee, thank you for having me
here today. I am grateful to the President for nominating me to
this position and thank Secretary Bernhardt for his support.
I would also like to recognize my family that's here today.
We've shrunk by one since yesterday as my wife is ill today and
can't make it. But my daughter, Morgan----
[Laughter.]
----you moved.
The Chairman. Welcome, Morgan.
Mr. Wallace. My daughter, Morgan just completed her
sophomore year at Wake Forest as an engineering student and is
doing an internship up in New York and is down here to support
her dad today. So Morgan, thank you for coming along.
The Chairman. We appreciate that, and we hope that your
wife gets well.
Mr. Wallace. And my youngest daughter, Ella, just finished
the eighth grade. She's not here. She's studying for the SSAT
under the event that she may have to apply for a new school
next year. So she couldn't join us today either.
But I'm going to jump through my opening remarks because
Senator Enzi and Senator Barrasso and even Senator Manchin
mentioned much about my career.
But I would like to highlight that we're privileged, the
four of us, to live just south of Grand Teton National Park.
It's in the Yellowstone ecosystem and each year our community
hosts millions of visitors who come to visit two of the world's
most majestic national parks. They also marvel at the abundance
of wildlife we all enjoy thanks to wise management by state and
federal officials and the National Elk Refuge that's located in
the heart of our valley.
But I know simply living in a special place is not
sufficient justification to ask for your support for this
important position overseeing the National Park Service and the
Fish and Wildlife Service.
As Senator Enzi mentioned, my journey here began several
decades ago when I was hired as a Park Ranger in Grand Teton
National Park. There I patrolled the park's rivers and lakes,
worked with the mountain rescue team, enforced game and fish
regulations, performed law enforcement operations and emergency
medical services on the park's highways and traveled for days
at a time in the backcountry on skis as part of my job. And
then in the winter and in the fall, if my job ended early, I
worked at an elk hunting camp in the nearby national forest.
But it wasn't those daily adventures that made the most
profound impact on me, it was the number of issues that swirled
around the park when I was there. It was a place where
dignitaries from around the world traveled to attend the Second
World Conference on National Parks and where the President of
the United States came to relax.
Up the road in Yellowstone a raging debate was underway
about how to wean grizzly bears off human garbage. And in the
Tetons, a vibrant conversation was underway about fire
management, search and rescue and visitor use and resources
protection. Trying to figure out how to become more involved in
these debates that were so interesting to me prompted me to
quit that job, volunteer on a campaign for the United States
Senate which I arrived in Washington, had a job as an LA for
the EPW Committee and eventually as Minority Staff Director of
this Committee and along the way. It's been a fascinating
journey about the important mission of the Park Service and the
Fish and Wildlife Service, a very important role that both the
Federal Government and Congress plays in solving these
complicated problems. And knowing that winning everything,
people seldom win by winning everything, and it's the
bipartisan decisions that are the lasting ones.
And if confirmed for this important position, I'm committed
to working constructively with Congress on behalf of the parks,
refuges, fish and wildlife because I strongly believe well-
meaning people engage in good faith and communicate effectively
the opportunity to do good things for these special resources
are unlimited.
So thank you for the opportunity to be here, Madam
Chairman, and I look forward to answering questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wallace follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you so much, Mr. Wallace.
I am going to start my questioning by taking it back home.
I mentioned in my opening that the Department of the Interior,
particularly Fish and Wildlife and the National Parks, play an
outsized role in Alaska.
So a very broad question for you is, recognizing that, how
do you intend to approach this relationship with Alaska? I will
make it a little bit more specific in stating for the record
something that you have heard and you have learned. Alaska is
different. It includes laws that govern federal land management
within the state, like ANILCA, that seeks to strike the balance
between conservation and economic development and striking that
balance is not always easy. With the last Administration we had
a real difficult time trying to find any balance there.
So as you share with me and the others how you will
approach this relationship with Alaska, if you can, incorporate
into your response also what you intend to do to help exercise
the federal authorities in Alaska under ANILCA to, again,
achieve and strike that balance.
Mr. Wallace. I think, Senator, my first trip to Alaska
occurred almost 30 years ago and I got my first schooling on
the question you just asked me from another Murkowski that held
that position.
The Chairman. You have probably retained that lesson for
some time.
Mr. Wallace. Well, we went to the final exam at the Chena
Pump House after the first three or four hours of the lesson,
so----
The Chairman. Enough said.
Mr. Wallace. He got me early in my career. And I do
recognize the special relationship between Alaska. You've got
probably, what, 55 or 56 percent of all of the wildlife refuges
and national parks in the system.
And one of the things that I plan to focus a lot on, if
confirmed for this position, is the role of partnerships. I
mean, partner is an easy word to say, but as you probably know
more than most, it's a hard word to implement and especially
respecting the government-to-government partnerships between
the state and the Federal Government, the tribes and the
Federal Government, local communities and the government
because the Federal Government always shows up as the alpha,
you know, a partner in some of these debates. And that's a
model that I will work very strongly to better equalize, if
confirmed.
As I said in my opening statement, I've been around the
Alaska issues for quite a while back in the 1980s but I'm going
to have some dusting up or some boning up to do too and I hope
to be up in your state soon after being confirmed and perhaps
help you and, you know, suggest some itineraries for me when I
get up there.
The Chairman. We have it mapped out for you already in
anticipation of your confirmation.
But specific to, kind of, boning up on ANILCA and some of
these other specific land management provisions that are unique
to Alaska, we have made some headway in requiring that all
department employees in the Alaska region attend ANILCA
training. This has been beneficial. They need to understand the
implications.
What I would hope is that you would be able to commit to
ensuring that Fish and Wildlife and Park Service employees
attend the same type of ANILCA training that other Department
of the Interior employees attend. Again, just so that they can
be knowledgeable in these areas of law.
The other thing, and you have raised it, is the
relationship with the tribes. Consultation is, of course,
required with our Native peoples. Some federal agencies do
consultation better than others. We have been fighting this for
years now. Consultation needs to be more than just, kind of, a
check the box exercise. And one of the agencies where the
consultation has been frustrating is within the Fish and
Wildlife Service. They don't currently have any agency policies
that address consultation with our Alaska Native Corporations
(ANCs). It is my understanding that Fish and Wildlife has
acknowledged that this is lacking, but they don't have any
specific plans to address it within a timeframe.
So I would ask for a commitment that you will look into
this to direct Fish and Wildlife to address the consultation
issue with the ANCs in official agency policy so that we can
implement better and meaningful consultation.
Mr. Wallace. I do commit to that.
I look forward to meeting Tara Sweeney, if I'm confirmed. I
know she's highly respected in the world of tribal relations
and I want her as an advisor to me on how, you know, the
agencies I'm responsible for are doing with her and her
coalition and constituency. So I look forward to that
relationship.
The Chairman. She will be a good guide.
Let me turn to Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Wallace, as you probably noticed if you kept tabs on us
here in Congress, things can become a little unreliable at
times as far as the job we are supposed to do, like keeping the
government open.
Mr. Wallace. Senator?
Senator Manchin. Like keeping the government open.
So what happened, we had a shutdown in 2013. We shut all
the parks down at that time. We just shut it all down.
Then last year we come back with another shutdown because
of the inability for us to do our job. The last time, Mr.
Bernhardt at that time, moved in and kept the parks open to a
point to where the sanitary conditions became intolerable. He
had to make a decision. He made a decision to reach into the
entrance fees of the parks and spent about a quarter of a
billion dollars to try to pay people to come in and clean the
bathrooms and clean the garbage and things of that sort.
I am not saying that this might not happen again. I hope it
never does, but if it does, have you given it any thought, how
you would handle that or would you keep the parks open and try
to ask for compensation for that or the flexibility or
basically just shut them down? It is a tough one.
Mr. Wallace. It is a tough one, Senator.
And I haven't been down to the Department yet. I think this
is my 23d day as being a nominee which included about three
round trips back home to negotiate with my 14-year-old on her
life, but I know it's an important question.
I talked to superintendents that used fee money to keep
their parks open during the shutdown.
Senator Manchin. Last year.
Mr. Wallace. And it's a question I'd like to get a little
bit more educated on before----
Senator Manchin. Well, we would like to work with you on
that because we don't think that the citizens of this great
country should pay the price for our inability to do our job.
Mr. Wallace. Right.
Senator Manchin. It is a shame. I hope we never have
another shutdown, but as toxic as things are from time to time,
it could happen. We have to work through that and, basically,
provide the fees to keep the parks sanitary if we are going to
keep them open, but that decision has to be made.
Mr. Wallace. I understand.
Senator Manchin. So that is a tough one.
I am going to defer because I know we are running for
votes. I have a lot of our Senators here that want to ask
questions, so I will basically yield my time to Senator
Heinrich right now if he would like to go with his.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wallace, are you a big fan of the North American model
of wildlife conservation?
Mr. Wallace. I am. The tenants that--yes, sir.
Senator Heinrich. I am not surprised by that answer. And I
am as well. I think it is that we are frankly the envy of the
world because of that model.
And a lot of people today, I think, lack perspective on the
history of that and don't realize that there was a time in this
country when white-tailed deer were almost wiped out. It is
kind of hard to imagine that. We had not a single elk in New
Mexico. Today we have 70,000, and that is certainly something
to be very proud of. The exception to that success, I think,
has been ironically our national mammal, the American Bison.
And I actually don't have a question on this, I just want you
to think about the fact that that is a somewhat embarrassing
omission in our history.
I think it is long past time that we start to find a path
with all those partners you mentioned, with states, with tribes
and the Federal Government, Fish and Wildlife, to recover
something more than a postage stamp, ecologically significant
public land, a huntable, wild bison herd somewhere in North
America because I think when Teddy Roosevelt put us on this
path, that would have been one of the things that he would have
had out in the future.
So that is not a question, that is one of those things for
you to think about because you don't have enough on your plate
already.
I want to ask you about the maintenance backlog real quick.
We hear so much about the park's backlog and that is critically
important. But we also have enormous backlog on our wildlife
refuges, in our national forests, on BLM lands. We have closed
campgrounds and unusable trails and all of that has enormous
economic implications for our states.
I would just ask that, if confirmed, would you support
working with us on a maintenance funding solution that
addresses all of those public land agencies and not just the
National Park Service?
Mr. Wallace. I certainly will, Senator.
I think the work that you all did with the 115th Congress
with that lands package was historic. I mean, it's something
everybody, you should all be proud of going home to say, this
is what we did. 116th is a chance to do the same thing with the
maintenance backlog.
And I agree, it's not just the national park areas. It's
BLM. It's clearly the Fish and Wildlife Service areas and yes,
sir.
Senator Heinrich. I will just leave you with this thought.
You know, some of that needs to be done directly through those
agencies. We often forget that a huge part of that backlog is
also road maintenance and much of that is supposed to be
actually paid for out of the Highway Trust Fund. We need to
think about both of those pieces as we work together on the
backlog issue.
Thank you, Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator. And know that we are
planning on having an oversight hearing in the next week or so,
and we are focused really keenly on this transportation piece
of things.
Let's go to Senator Hyde-Smith.
Senator Hyde-Smith. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Wallace, congratulations so much on your nomination to
be the Assistant Secretary for Fish, Wildlife and Parks, one of
my very favorite agencies, no doubt, and it is so important for
us to have these Senate-confirmed leaders over this agency that
have such an impressive resume as yours. I think you are just
the right person for this job, and thank you for willingness to
take it.
You know, Mississippi is very proud of its national parks
and wildlife refuges. And with the enactment of the lands
package earlier this year, the establishment of the Medgar and
Myrlie Evers Home as a national monument and, you know, whether
it be the bird depredation for our many catfish farmers as we
produce more catfish than anyone in the country. These things
are certainly important to my state and federal duck hunting
regulations and the recreational opportunities at Mississippi's
15 national wildlife refuges, the programs and activities
carried have such an impact on our state. So thank you for
being willing to do this.
One issue, in particular, I would like to highlight is
obviously catastrophic flooding that is occurring right now in
Mississippi in the delta. Hundreds of thousands of acres have
been underwater now for more than three months affecting, of
course, our timberland, our wildlife habitat and the homes and
communities. I have been over there multiple times and the
devastation is truly real.
Included in the flooded area are a number of national
wildlife refuges with more than 100,000 acres of prime wildlife
habitat. I am not suggesting you can fix this problem, but you
need to be aware of the significant damages that are occurring
right now.
I certainly want to invite you to travel to Mississippi in
the coming months, not only to observe the flooding issue but
also to meet with Mississippians on various issues that are
very important to them. So I extend that invitation to you, and
I certainly hope that I can visit with you while you are in our
state.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Wallace. I gratefully accept.
The Chairman. Let's go to Senator King.
Senator King. Thank you.
Mr. Wallace, I did not realize until Senator Enzi's
introduction that you had worked with Jim Geringer. Jim and I
were governors together for eight years. He was one of my
favorite people in the country. I hope you will give my warmest
regards to Jim and Sherri, please, when you see them.
Mr. Wallace. I will.
Senator King. We had a great relationship.
This has been, sort of, touched on, but the Secretary and
his predecessor were big supporters of the Restore Our Parks
Act which has the potential to be a historic action,
bipartisan, to really make a difference to deal with this 30-,
40-year-old deficit. I hope you will be a strong voice on that
subject as well.
Mr. Wallace. I will, Senator.
Senator King. Thank you.
I have dealt with few issues as complicated as fish passage
and which fish should be allowed where. We have one of these
disputes going on in Maine now between U.S. Fish and Wildlife
and the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife where
FERC has recently issued an order to essentially open up fish
passage into a lake that has been blocked to certain species,
alewives, in particular, for many years to protect the
landlocked salmon and bass fishery.
I don't expect you to wade into this except I would ask
that you would use your good offices, if confirmed, to try to
facilitate discussions between our state Fish and Wildlife
folks and the federal agency to see if there is some way to
find a solution to this issue, because there are people in
Maine who feel that if this is opened up, as has been proposed,
it will destroy a very well-established and important fishery
in landlocked salmon and bass. Would you give me your
commitment to take a look at this issue and try to foster some
discussions?
Mr. Wallace. I will, Senator.
As you correctly noted, it's an issue that I'm not familiar
with but I know it's important to you and I commit to learning
more about it and being back in touch with you about what I've
learned.
Senator King. And I just wanted to add my voice to those
who have been very impressed by your background, your approach
to these issues.
National Parks are very important in Maine. We have two
national park units, Acadia National Park, one of the original
national parks dating back to 1916, and one of the newest park
units which is Katahdin Woods and Waters which is inland in
Maine. I invite you to come and visit either or both of those
wonderful spots. I think you'll see how important they both are
to their communities and to the region and to the State of
Maine.
Mr. Wallace. You know, I would like to choose both.
Senator King. Thank you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wallace. I would also say, Senator, two of the finest
superintendents spent time in Wyoming, Kevin Schneider at
Acadia and Timmy Hudson that's up in Katahdin. Both were, you
know, got steeled a little bit. They were working in Wyoming
years ago.
Senator King. That is right.
Kevin Schneider is doing a wonderful job, and I am thinking
of introducing legislation that will disallow Tim Hudson from
retiring because he is doing such a great job.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wallace. Well, he's doing--he's been trying for a long
time. So the bully pulpit seems to be working.
Senator King. I know. I know.
Well, thank you very much, Mr. Wallace, for your commitment
and your willingness to work with us. I look forward to working
with you on those park units and other issues that arise, both
in the parks and also with U.S. Fish and Wildlife.
Mr. Wallace. Well, I look forward to that. Thank you,
Senator.
Senator King. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator King.
Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Mr. Wallace, welcome. Congratulations on your nomination.
Welcome to your family, those that are here and those that are
listening, I am sure, intently.
I am very impressed with your background and want to bring
something to your attention, particularly in Nevada.
I am the Senior Senator from Nevada and, you may or may not
know this, I would assume on your background you know something
about this. But 87 percent of the land in Nevada is owned by
the Federal Government. That means that we have to really bring
key stakeholders together, including the Federal Government,
when we have issues that are contradictory or issues that we
need to deal with when it comes to land and land management.
One of the issues I am going to just bring to your
attention and ask for your support, and it deals with the
Desert National Wildlife Refuge in Southern Nevada. It is a
very unique place. It is the largest wildlife refuge in the
Lower 48 states, encompassing roughly 1.5 million acres in the
State of Nevada. It is predominately known as the home to
Nevada's iconic bighorn sheep, although numerous other plant
and wildlife species also share the range. Much of the range,
though, is jointly administered with the Air Force as part of
the Nevada Test and Training Range which is used as a proving
ground and flight test area. The NTTR, the Test and Training
Range, is the largest air and ground military training space in
the contiguous U.S. and has no interference with commercial
aircraft for that reason. And right now, both the Desert
Wildlife Refuge and the NTTR contribute to this unique
character of Nevada where we have competing interests, and we
have to have everybody work together.
The challenge we are having right now is that the Air Force
is seeking a land withdrawal and part of that land withdrawal
is seeking to expand into the national wildlife refuge. This
has required all of our stakeholders to come together and
really figure out how we address this issue. Many are opposed
to it and so much so that our legislature, the Nevada State
Legislature that just finished since sine die this past week,
they issued a resolution opposed to any land withdrawal taking
away from that national wildlife refuge.
I bring this to your attention because so far, in respect
to this issue, the Interior Department has been largely silent.
So what I am asking from you is help. I need your commitment
that you would be willing to come to the table, sit with all of
us, figure out how we address this, bring all these competing
interests together and have this conversation so that we can
all walk away knowing that voices were heard and we can come to
some final solution addressing this land withdrawal. Are you
willing to do that?
Mr. Wallace. I am, Senator.
I think it goes back to what I mentioned early on to
Senator Murkowski, you know, partnerships are sometimes easy to
say and hard to do, but I'm committed to making them work. It's
the secret sauce in almost all public policy. If you can get
the right group of people together in good faith, remarkable
things happen.
There may be issues within the Department where we've seen
this before, where other military withdrawals have occurred
with wildlife refuges, maybe there's a lesson learned out there
that we can bring to Nevada. But I'm happy to learn more and
committed to working with you.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Congratulations again on your nomination.
Mr. Wallace. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Wallace, it is great to have you here today.
In looking at your bio, I believe you truly have the
knowledge, the experience, the expertise, the service, of the
Assistant Secretary of the Department of the Interior.
I do have a few Montana priorities I would like to discuss
with you though. I recently spoke with Secretary Bernhardt on
the importance of addressing workplace and sexual harassment in
our national parks. I believe it is one of the most important
issues for you to focus on in your new position. In fact,
Montanans and employees deserve a safe work environment. We
must do all that we can to ensure that. We also discussed the
need to address the growing maintenance backlog in our national
parks. The Secretary committed to me to continue to work on
these two important issues and in your new position you would
also play a very key role.
My question is, if confirmed as Assistant Secretary for
Fish, Wildlife and Parks, do I have your commitment to work
with me to address harassment as well as the maintenance
backlog in our parks?
Mr. Wallace. Absolutely on both, Senator.
I, you know, as a father of a couple of pretty capable
daughters, I can't imagine. I'd love them to have a career in
the National Park Service some day and the fact that they may
find themselves in the bottom of the Grand Canyon for two weeks
in a predatory environment, it just is disgusting and something
that I am fully committed to making sure that, from the top to
the bottom, that policy is well underway in being implemented.
And the maintenance backlog I talked about earlier, what a
great legacy for all of us to work on together.
Senator Daines. Well, I count myself very fortunate to have
the Ranking Member, Senator King, on the National Parks
Subcommittee with me. And I know it is a passion we share.
We want to see this actually get done. I think it is a
great opportunity, tremendous bipartisan support. Egos are set
aside right now. I think we can actually get something done
here in the Senate. So thank you.
We also share being fathers to a couple of daughters, so I
share your passion for your daughters as well.
I recently visited Libby, Montana, to discuss with
community members the importance of getting the Rock Creek and
Montanore mines up and running. Literally, over three decades
in regulatory process at this point. These are over 400 jobs
for a part of Montana that some describe as poverty with a
view. We need these jobs badly. They are a critical part in
Northwest Montana. They are heavily supported by the local
community. We had Democrats, we had Republicans, all there in
support of this when I was up there recently, elected
officials, school administrators, many more.
And despite these decades, decades of permitting, these
mines are still years away from being fully operational. We are
talking about hundreds of high wage jobs, large increases in
local tax revenues, all put on hold because of lengthy and
burdensome permitting and endless litigation, often politically
driven.
While I understand it is the Forest Service we are
currently waiting on for this specific project and we hope to
have a supplemental EIS out any day now for the Montanore mine,
the Fish and Wildlife Service plays a really important role in
permitting projects on federal lands.
My question is, if confirmed, what modernization and
streamlining would you like to undertake to improve the
coordination and the consultation with other agencies to speed
up the permitting process?
Mr. Wallace. You know, Senator, this is one of those issues
I'd like to come back with you and learn a little bit more
about to make sure we're focusing on the right issues and that
I'm in a position where I can be of most help to you.
But again, it goes back to the state and the partnerships.
It's the secret sauce. And we all, sort of, have a commitment
to finding a way to make it work.
And in your particular--I look forward to coming back and
hopefully even seeing you out West to talk about it.
Senator Daines. That would be the best place to talk about
it. Thank you.
Mr. Wallace. Thank you.
Senator Daines. The last thing I want to talk about is the
Endangered Species Act reform needed.
The Endangered Species Act (ESA) has been successfully used
to recover endangered and threatened species for decades.
However, excessive litigation--and we see that in Montana as
part of the Ninth Circuit Court--and other abuses has led to
delays in delisting recovered populations.
Despite the Fish and Wildlife Service proposing the
delisting of the Greater Yellowstone grizzly bear and the gray
wolf in the Lower 48, their progress has been caught up in more
litigation.
It is my opinion that sound science should derive the
listing and delisting of species, not fringe litigation and
personal opinions. If the science shows the species has
recovered, it is quite quantitative at the end of the day, we
should be able to delist and use these resources to recover
species that are actually endangered.
We should celebrate the fact that the grizzly bear has
recovered. It is exceeding all the targets that were set when
it was listed.
My question is, if confirmed, how will you address ESA
abuses and continue to promote sound science to delist
recovered species?
Mr. Wallace. Again, this would be a question that I, having
not been at the Department and having a chance to, kind of,
really, look under the hood to the degree that I think your
question requires, to just speak in general terms that I
completely agree that the idea that the Endangered Species Act
has worked. We've seen some remarkable examples of that in the
areas where we live, the bald eagle, the peregrine falcon, the
black-footed ferret, the whooping crane, the grizzly bear. And
for it to continue to work, people have to have confidence in
the transparency, the science that goes in front of a listing
decision, the science that goes on a recovery, the transparency
of how it goes. But once it's recovered it needs to go back to
the management of the states or the tribes as envisioned.
So I'm going to look under the hood more, have a look at
more detail, but in principle for it to work it has to be
transparent and once a species is recovered, it needs to go
back under the management of the states or the tribes.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
I am out of time here, but that is an important principle.
I will tell you, out in Montana, we do a pretty good job of
managing wildlife and it is time to transfer that
responsibility back to the State of Montana as it relates to
grizzly bears as we delist it.
Thank you.
Mr. Wallace. Thank you, Senator.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Wallace, thank you for your willingness to serve.
I want to ask you about a couple of large issues.
Obviously, the Land and Water Conservation Fund. I have heard
you talk about the backlog and maintenance already this
morning, but what about making sure that we get funding at the
levels that we need to have continued access to lands that are
important in carrying out the larger mission?
And on wildfires which are, you know, we have one raging in
the state right now in Grant County. These are big risks to our
wildlife as well. So could you address that and what you think
we should be doing to mitigate those impacts?
Mr. Wallace. Senator, I've been around the Land and Water
Conservation Fund pretty much my entire career. It's a
marvelous tool to help people enjoy their public lands,
recreate.
I've heard Secretary Bernhardt mention in testimony, and I
feel the same way, that with the fact that we're both at the
Department, hopefully in confirmed positions for me, we'll have
a better opportunity to, sort of, argue and fight for that
issue in the next budget cycle that I know it is important to--
I mean, almost every member that I talk to brings that up. And
I'm fully committed to working to see that funding at the level
you all will find satisfactory.
Wildfire policy, again, I haven't been to the Department
yet, but I know that just based on watching the terrible fires
that we've experienced in the West over the last few years that
there's a lot of deep thought that needs to go into that.
And I'm going to get smarter about the policies, again as I
said to Senator Daines, look under the hood and hopefully be
able to come back and have a more meaningful conversation with
you about ideas on how to do that.
Senator Cantwell. But you do believe that climate is
impacting our fire situation?
Mr. Wallace. I believe that climate is changing, that man
has a role in it and it's a big question with a lot of
variables. Regardless of the cause, the fact is that we have to
be involved in, sort of, healthy forests and healthy management
and I'm fully committed to the idea that climate is a man-
created issue and that smart science needs to be a very
important part of how we adapt or modify our performance.
Senator Cantwell. We are getting very, very, very technical
about this in the State of Washington, and one of the reasons
why we are is because we are putting incredible investment in
stream restoration. And then, basically we are spending
millions and millions of dollars to try to return salmon to a
particular area and then next thing you know, a devastating
fire season comes through there and basically erodes the
hundreds of millions of dollars that we have invested.
So we are trying to think strategically about how we
preserve those investments and continue to make progress
without having hundreds of thousands of acres burn up in one
afternoon and then eroding our streams and our stream progress.
Mr. Wallace. I was the head of Congressional Relations in
1988 when the Yellowstone fires occurred. And up until that
point, you know, a controversial fire was 10,000 acres, 15,000
acres, that made big national news.
That was a rounding error in 1988. It became so and I can
just, when I read about what has happened in your state, in
California and others, I look back to that experience and just
can't imagine when you've got actually homes and roads and
infrastructure involved in those fires too. So Senator, I'm
fully committed to understanding what you're telling me.
Senator Cantwell. Right. So just if you could take a look
at that and then maybe send us some thoughts about this or we
can pose a more specific question, but what we are really
interested in is how does, in this position or new role, would
you, you know, help to target protection of these most
vulnerable wildlife corridors, you know, from fire? How would
you engage in the debate to make sure that we, at Interior, are
doing this important work?
So we can, I can get that for the record, Madam Chair. I
can pose a question for a written answer.
But we do think that this is a very important role because,
again, we are spending lots of money to protect these areas,
but we are going to have to be more strategic about how we
achieve it.
Mr. Wallace. You know, Senator, one of the things I like
about, and again, I haven't had the benefit of a lot of very
smart people that I'll have the privilege of working with, if
confirmed in this position at Interior, but if you look at the
system that the Assistant Secretary has, it's about almost a
quarter of a billion acres in all 50 states, five territories,
a lot in Alaska.
And I would like to look at it about where the stress
points are in that entire system, you know, along the coast in
Louisiana, it may be adapting to climate change. And I saw
Governor Edwards actually thinking about moving people out of
Southern Louisiana. You talk about leadership in your State in
Oregon. It's ocean acidification. It may be in Wyoming,
invasive species or fire or migratory corridors or somebody
that cares about historical preservation. It may be just
finding the last piece of like Champion's Hill at Vicksburg to
add to the system.
So there's stress points all over, and I think if I do my
job correctly, I'm able to look at fire, invasive species,
migratory corridors, climate and make sure that the applied
science and the resource managers have the tools to address the
problems that you so eloquently raised a minute ago.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
I am just reminded that I was reading an article coming in
this morning about the road at Denali National Park where you
get into the heart of the park itself and what we are seeing.
We are seeing a series of landslides, which you and I are
working on legislation, but landslides and slippage that is due
to a thaw in the permafrost. It is going to be a considerable
undertaking for the Park Service. So when Senator Heinrich
mentioned the piece about parks' maintenance and the funding
and just the infrastructure side of the ledger, it is just a
reminder that what we see from climate exacerbates already
challenging issues when it comes to infrastructure for our
parks.
We will have an opportunity to discuss more of this when we
do our parks oversight.
Mr. Wallace, I just have a couple more quick things because
I think what members have done is, they have really highlighted
the priorities. I appreciate Senator Daines bringing up the
workforce and ethics issues. I think that is very key, and I
would join him in a sense of urgency in making sure that we
address these and we address them boldly and quickly. You have
heard from all of us about the park maintenance. We need a
partner to work with on that. Again, so many of the local
priorities that you get involved with that will be important
going forward.
I just wanted to ask for the record here. Again, this goes
back to more Alaska-specifics, but under the Tribal Self-
Governance Act, the Department of the Interior is authorized to
work with tribal governments to enter into compacts or annual
funding agreements, and these are government-to-government
agreements. They involve indirect costs. They are separate.
They are different from park concessions.
We have been working in Alaska to, kind of, pioneer in this
area. The Sitka Tribe has recently, actually it has been a
couple of years now, they have entered into a compacting
agreement with the Park Service at the Sitka National Historic
Park. I have been out there. We have, kind of, walked through
the bumps and the hurdles. But it is important to try to get
this right with the Sitka Tribes because other tribes and
native corporations are looking at this as possible models
going forward. I would just put this on your radar, and ask
that you get up to speed on this, commit to directing some of
your staff, again, not only on the training side but to see
what it is that we can do to make these compacts workable
arrangements, not only workable for parks but workable for the
tribes that engage in those.
Mr. Wallace. I'll certainly commit to getting up to speed,
Senator. Thank you for bringing that to my attention.
The Chairman. Lastly, a couple of years ago Congress passed
the National Park Service Centennial Act, and we expanded the
agency's authority to award and administer the various
commercial services, contracts for operation and expansion of
commercial visitor facility services. But it has been almost
three years now, and we haven't seen Interior implement any of
these regulations. So we are waiting. We are not quite sure why
it has taken three years on this. But again, when you think
about the necessity to provide for a level of services within
our parks, it is maintenance, it is upkeep that we need to
focus on. But if we haven't done a good job on the service
agreement side of it, that is also an area that needs some
attention. I just ask that you to look into why, some three
years after the fact, we have not seen any implementing regs
yet.
Mr. Wallace. I will, Senator, thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. I just have one comment.
I look forward to working with you. I look forward to
voting for you.
I think you have a great opportunity, Mr. Wallace, to
really make some changes, necessary changes, that we have and
also be able to have the support in a bipartisan way of the
resources that will be needed to do the park maintenance to
basically secure our parks, make them more, I think, more user
friendly, if you will, and hopefully navigate your way through
some of the difficulties that we don't intentionally try to put
before you but might come about because of a dysfunction that
sometimes interrupts our day-to-day operations here.
But I really do look forward to working with you and think
you are going to do a great job.
Mr. Wallace. Well, thank you, both.
I look forward to maybe even sitting here again sometime.
[Laughter.]
Senator Manchin. That is a guarantee.
Mr. Wallace. It would be twice now.
The Chairman. Well, Rob, thank you. Thank you for, again,
your willingness to serve.
I think it is clear from the questions that you will enjoy
strong support within this Committee. I don't want to predict
any outcomes, but my sense is that you hit it out of the park
today, and we will be very pleased to be able to send your name
forward to the Floor as soon as we are able to move you out of
Committee. And we look forward to doing that very, very soon.
We appreciate your willingness and that of your family to
provide that support. Fourteen-year-olds do come around. It
takes a little bit, so keep up your negotiation there.
With that, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:09 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHICS IS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]