- FITARA 9.0
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
FITARA 9.0
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
DECEMBER 11, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-77
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available on: http://www.govinfo.gov
http://www.oversight.house.gov or
http://www.docs.house.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-737 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Jim Jordan, Ohio, Ranking Minority
Columbia
Member
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Mark Meadows, North Carolina
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Harley Rouda, California
James Comer, Kentucky
Katie Hill, California
Michael Cloud, Texas
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida
Bob Gibbs, Ohio
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Peter Welch, Vermont
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Jackie Speier, California
Chip Roy, Texas
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Ro Khanna, California
Frank Keller, Pennsylvania
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
David Rapallo, Staff Director
Wendy Ginsberg, Subcommittee Staff Director
Joshua Zucker, Assistant Clerk
Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
Contact Number: 202-225-5051
------
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Mark Meadows, North Carolina,
Columbia,
Ranking Minority Member
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Jackie Speier, California
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
James Comer, Kentucky
Ro Khanna, California
Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachsetts
W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Jamie Raskin, Maryland
C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
----------
Page
Hearing held on December 11, 2019................................
1
Witnesses
Carol Harris, Director, IT Management Issues, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................
4
Renee Wynn, Chief Information Officer, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Oral Statement...................................................
5
Elizabeth Cappello, Acting Chief Information Officer, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...................................................
7
Written opening statement and statements for the witnesses are
available on the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository at: https://docs.house.gov.
Index of Documents
----------
Documents entered into the record during this hearing and
Questions for the Record (QFR's) are listed below/available at:
https://docs.house.gov.
* Questions for the Record: To Ms. Elizabeth Cappello, Acting
Chief Information Officer, Department of Homeland Security;
submitted by Chairman Connolly.
* Questions for the Record: To Ms. Renee P. Wynn, Chief
Information Officer, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration; submitted by Chairman Connolly.
FITARA 9.0
----------
Wednesday, December 11, 2019
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:52 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gerald Connolly
presiding.
Present: Representatives Connolly, Norton, Khanna, Meadows,
and Grothman.
Mr. Connolly. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Sorry for the delay but we had an extra unplanned vote that
took up some time, and my friend, the Ranking Member, Mr.
Meadows, and I were both delayed. I beat you, Mark, by one
minute.
Mr. Meadows. You are younger than me.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Connolly. I now recognize myself for my opening
statement.
Since the enactment of the FITARA Act, the Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act, in 2014, this
subcommittee has maintained steady and bipartisan oversight of
implementation of the law. The benefits of continued oversight,
which were lacking in the predecessor structural law, Clinger-
Cohen, are clear: across the government, agencies have improved
Federal information technology acquisition practices and
management practices.
In fact, the FITARA scorecard's success has led this
subcommittee to incorporate other aspects of Federal IT into
the grades over the years. Our framework is not rigid. The
subcommittee has augmented and changed the scorecard to take
cognizance of other important components of Federal IT, such as
cybersecurity, and incorporated other constructive feedback
from agencies.
Today, the scorecard incorporates grades adapted from three
additional pieces of legislation, including the MEGABYTE Act,
the Modernizing Government Technology Act, MGT, and the Federal
Information Security Management Act, FISMA. The bottom line is
that the FITARA scorecard works and continues to hold agencies
accountable for implementing the best IT practices. The
evidence is visible today in that chart.
In November 2015, the average FITARA grade was a ``D''
across all participating agencies. Over the past four years,
agencies have incorporated new, sometimes challenging metrics
and higher stakes, and yet, the average overall agency grade
today is trending up. It is now above a ``C'', a full grade
improvement, not trivial. The witnesses from the Department of
Homeland Security and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, who are going to testify today, model this
progress. In the eighth scorecard from June 2019, DHS and NASA
received the worst grades of all agencies, a ``D-''. While
there is still room for growth, the CIOs here today should be
recognized for the progress they have achieved. In the ninth
FITARA scorecard, today's, DHS is a ``B'' and NASA a ``C+,''
material progress.
Unfortunately for some agencies, and in some categories,
progress has slowed. Today, I hope to hear from our witnesses
and GAO about what it takes to move beyond these hurdles to
ensure efficient IT acquisition and management practices. We
must continue to see the dividends from putting resources
toward replacing legacy IT systems, migrating to the cloud, and
maintaining a strong cyber posture.
This subcommittee recognizes that each agency has its own
unique attributes. Agencies vary greatly in their personnel and
budget size, and in the number of missions, components, and
programs that fall within their purview. Large, federated
agencies such as DHS and NASA likely face additional challenges
when implementing the best IT practices across their enterprise
because of this complexity.
Despite these challenges, improvements are possible.
Progress in Federal IT takes political will and the recognition
that the CIO needs a seat at the leadership table directly and
a critical role in an agency's management decisions. Both DHS
and NASA scorecards reflect increased grades given their
agencies' commitments to give the CIO or a CIO direct reporting
access to the head of the agency. Ms. Wynn, I am pleased to see
that NASA recently reversed course on its reporting structure
after the Ranking Member and I both expressed our concerns in
writing, and we thank you for that.
With the ninth scorecard, this one, our subcommittee
acknowledges that some other agencies have taken steps toward
direct reporting structures. DHS, the AID, and the Department
of Treasury received partial credit this cycle for having a
direct report to the head of the agency and indirect reporting
to an Undersecretary or Assistant Administrator for Management.
For DHS, the authority to drive change in IT practices across
the entire department is of the utmost importance. The DHS IG
reported on numerous IT deficiencies in components like the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that hindered the agency's
recovery operations following catastrophic hurricanes and
wildfires. Lives depend on FEMA doing its job and doing it
well, and that is what the importance of this finding really
is.
Finally, I would like to take some time to reflect on the
actions of the Administration regarding data center
consolidation. At our last hearing, the Federal CIO, Suzette
Kent, testified that she would continue the push for aggressive
data center closures in the Office of Management and Budget's
revised Data Center Optimization Initiative policy. After all,
the law calls for that consolidation. It is explicit in the
law. And we, both Mr. Meadows and myself, and the subcommittee
were very gratified to hear Ms. Kent's rededication or
recommitment to the explicit commitment of data center
consolidation.
In June, OMB released new agency data center guidance,
however, that changed the entire baseline for how agencies
define and count data centers. Just one year ago, agencies
reported on more than 4,700 such centers that they planned to
continue to operate. In 2019 data center inventory, however,
the number dropped by nearly 50 percent to 2,400 data centers
because of a definitional change, not because of consolidation,
and I think that is of concern to us because it bypasses the
whole point. Whether it is deliberate or bureaucratic, one does
not know. But we do not want to miss the need to achieve that
goal.
When we passed the MGT Act that both Mr. Meadows and I also
sponsored, it was to be able to allow reinvestment in the
enterprise through the savings effectuated through
implementation of FITARA, primarily this, because data center
consolidation is what frees up capital. That is what gives you
the cost savings. If you play games with the definition of what
is a data center or what constitutes consolidation, you miss
the benefits. So we want to hear more about that, but we are
concerned about it, and we want to make sure no one is playing
games or doing an end-run; and even if it isn't deliberate,
that unwittingly we are actually evading the purpose of the
law. After all, the law is a good-government law. It is a
bipartisan bill to try to bring agencies into the 21st century.
So we are eager to hear the testimony today, and I want to
again thank my colleague, Mr. Meadows, who has always been
there on this issue, and then some, and I just thank him as
being an equal partner in this enterprise. Thank you.
Oh, Mr. Meadows. I recognize the Ranking Member.
Mr. Meadows. I will be very, very quick. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for your leadership on this issue, and the very fact
that we are having this hearing is the emphasis and the
priority not only of the Chairman but of members broadly. I
know it is not a topic that brings in the cameras and members
come rushing in.
I do want to let you know, though, for our two witnesses
that are here, to kind of give a synopsis of what you have done
-- Ms. Harris will certainly attest to this -- we pay very
close attention to this. It is actually now starting to become
indirectly part of the appropriations process. We are looking
at it. We want to make it a more formal part of that where
literally we reward you for doing a good job, and both of you
are here today to talk about your successes.
Certainly, efficiency in government as it relates to IT is
critical. I have shared this a number of times. We spend more
on IT than we should, and I say that because it is $100
billion, if you count all of the agencies that we name and
don't name. It is over $100 billion a year, and when you look
at that kind of number, I used to get more computing ability in
my private-sector real estate company than some agencies do
with the amount of money that we spend. So we have to do a
better job.
That being said, we know that there have not been rewards.
So I am committed both on the fiscal side of things, which is
hard for this conservative to say, but also on the reform side
of things, to work with not only the two of you but all the
agencies. Ms. Harris and your colleagues, I want to thank you
both for your continued work on this.
And without further ado, I think I will yield back to the
Chairman so we can hear from all of you.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Ranking Member. Thank you very
much.
I now want to welcome our witnesses.
Carol Harris, Director of IT Management Issues at the
Government Accountability Office. Welcome back.
Elizabeth Cappello, Acting Chief Information Officer, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security.
Renee Wynn, Chief Information Officer for NASA, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
And, I will point out, an all-woman panel.
Thank you for being here.
If you would please stand and raise your right hands, we
will swear you in, which is the habit of our committee.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Connolly. Let the record show all three of our
witnesses answered in the affirmative.
Thank you so much. You may be seated.
Without objection, your written statements will be entered
into the record in full. We would ask you within a five-minute
timeframe to summarize your testimony as best you can.
And we will start, Ms. Harris, with you. Welcome.
STATEMENT OF CAROL HARRIS, DIRECTOR, IT MANAGEMENT ISSUES,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Ms. Harris. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Connolly,
Ranking Member Meadows, and members of the subcommittee, I
would like to thank you and your very excellent staff for your
continued oversight on IT management and cybersecurity with
this ninth set of grades.
Overall, nine agencies' grades went up, four went down, and
11 remain the same. Also, for the first time ever, three
agencies received an ``A'' grade, including two ``A+'s,'' and I
would like to commend USAID, the Department of Education, and
GSA for earning these top grades.
I will now share some key highlights from this ninth
scorecard. First, I will start with the CIO reporting
structure.
The CIOs of USDA and NASA now report to the agency head or
deputy, which brings the total number of agencies with this
direct reporting structure to 16. In addition, DHS, Treasury,
and USAID have established acceptable CIO reporting
relationships that, while not perfect, have enabled them to
achieve partial credit in this category. This progress would
not have happened to this extent without your scorecard and
your oversight.
Turning to data centers, the grading was suspended in the
prior scorecard to provide the Federal CIO the opportunity to
share OMB's plans for revising its data center optimization
initiative at that hearing. At your direction we have
reintroduced these grades, and the change increased the overall
grade of DHS and decreased the overall grade of Interior,
Labor, and state.
OMB's guidance is now final, and unfortunately the concerns
I raised at the last hearing about the revisions remain
unchanged. Among other things, OMB's guidance revises the
classification of data centers and data center optimization
metrics. For example, OMB's new data center definition excludes
roughly 2,300 facilities that agencies previously reported on
in Fiscal Year 2018. Many of these excluded facilities
represent what OMB itself has identified as possible security
risks. Some are also large facilities that agencies will keep
operating but will no longer be reporting on. SSA has five
facilities over 8,000 square feet, and state has two over
10,000 square feet, as an example. In addition, there are 194
data centers over 1,000 square feet for which closure progress
will no longer be reported as a result of the redefinition.
Accordingly, the subcommittee and the committee will lose
the ability to track and measure progress in this area because
the baseline for comparison will have changed. Moreover, the
changes will likely slow down or even halt important progress
agencies should be making to consolidate, optimize, and secure
their data centers.
I will now turn my comments to DHS and NASA. These agencies
collectively plan to spend $8.6 billion on IT this year. For
each of them, roughly 80 percent of their IT spent is on
operational systems. DHS has an overall ``B'' grade, which is a
solid improvement from the past four scorecards in which it
hovered between a ``C'' and a ``D-''. NASA, too, has made
noteworthy progress from its ``F'' grade on the first two
scorecards back in 2015 to a ``C+'' today.
Some positive areas to highlight for both. They have
comprehensive software license inventories and use them to make
decisions and save money. These agencies also have highly
effective IT portfolio review processes which have led to a
collective $2.6 billion in savings and cost avoidances since
2012. For DHS, progress in the area of incremental software
development is still rather low. Only about 55 percent of its
IT projects are delivering functionality every six months, as
OMB has called for. For NASA, the lack of transparency in its
evaluation of major IT investments is troubling. NASA spent
$442 million on major IT in Fiscal Year 2019 and did not rate
any of those investments as yellow or red.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my comments on the overall
scorecard and the results for these two agencies. I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much. I just wanted to
mention, Ms. Harris, I will assure you we are not going to lose
our ability to evaluate by virtue of OMB obfuscating the
baseline. If necessary, we will work with you to create/
recreate the baseline we have been using, and that is how we
will continue to monitor and score agency performance. But we
are not going to allow either the evisceration or the dilution
of the baseline that has served us so well and agencies so
well. Thank you.
Ms. Wynn?
STATEMENT OF RENEE WYNN, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, NATIONAL
AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
Ms. Wynn. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member
Meadows, and the members of the Subcommittee on Government
Operations, for allowing me to appear before you today to
provide you an update on NASA's implementation of the Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act, or FITARA.
NASA's global information technology infrastructure plays a
critical role in every aspect of NASA's mission. Today is an
especially exciting time to work at NASA as we work toward
delivering the first American woman and the next American man
to the moon in 2024.
NASA's new Artemis program will use a long-term presence on
the moon to test, build, and validate new capabilities for
human missions to Mars. My team looks forward to playing our
part in this great endeavor.
Effective IT management is not an easy task. As the CIO, I
must balance innovation with mission needs, costs, and evolving
threats. NASA has come a long way from our initial FITARA
score, and more work remains. As an example, in 2010, NASA had
79 data centers. Today we have 19. This is a 75 percent
reduction, resulting in the repurposing of approximately 80,000
square feet of space and generating about $36.2 million in
savings since Fiscal Year 2012. When reducing our data center
footprint, we also increased our use of cloud computing. NASA
currently has more than 10 petabytes of data in the cloud and
uses more than 1.4 million commercial cloud computing hours per
month.
To its credit, over the last several years NASA has
transformed its IT governance structure to empower the CIO with
greater authority. For example, the CIO directly reports to the
Administrator, and I have access when needed. The NASA CIO and
most of the center CIOs sit on all key NASA decisionmaking
councils, and the CIO has direct authority and oversight over
the center CIOs, including their IT and acquisition decisions.
Within NASA, IT is now regarded as a strategic agency
resource, with the CIO having clear authority to approve the
agency's IT spend plan. In doing so, NASA is strengthening the
agency's ability to rely on IT resources with agency missions,
goals, and programmatic priorities. My office continues to work
closely with our customers to better understand and support
their mission and mission support needs. My office is even
integrating team members directly into the Artemis program,
ensuring cybersecurity risks are mitigated at the earliest
stage.
Additionally, my office continues to participate in NASA's
mission support future architecture program, or MAP. Through
MAP, NASA is implementing a phased approach to transform
mission support services into more efficient enterprise
operating models. This includes realigning budget authority and
lines of reporting, improving the sharing of capabilities
across our centers, and strategically assessing and aligning
the work force to support this transformation. My office is on
track to complete our MAP assessment and planning by December
2020.
When speaking about NASA, it is important to remember that
cooperation with our Nation, the public, and scientists across
the world is one of NASA's founding principles. Therefore, NASA
seeks the widest practical and appropriate distribution of
information from our missions, but in doing so we must also
safeguard our IT assets against well-resourced and highly
motivated threat actors.
The reported number of cyber incidents against NASA
continues to increase because we have greater visibility into
our network. I am confident that NASA continues to
appropriately address these threats. Some of the metrics that I
provided in my written testimony demonstrate that.
Additionally, I would like to publicly congratulate NASA's
Identity Credential and Access Management team for being named
a finalist for the prestigious 2019 National Security Agency's
Frank B. Rowlett Award, an award that recognizes outstanding
Federal Government excellence in the field of cybersecurity.
In conclusion, I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to assure you that effective IT management is
a top priority for NASA and its senior leaders. NASA looks
forward to continuing to work with Congress and our other
Federal cyber partners to ensure that NASA's IT global network
remains secure, effective, and resilient. I would be happy to
answer any questions you may have.
Mr. Connolly. Wow, right on the nose. Excellent job.
Ms. Cappello?
STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH CAPPELLO, ACTING CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Ms. Cappello. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Meadows,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
your continued commitment to achieving the goals of FITARA and
the opportunity to appear before you today to share the
Department of Homeland Security's progress in meeting these
goals.
Across DHS, our components serve disparate missions at
various operational tempos, requiring information technology at
locations across the globe. As a career Federal specialist from
within DHS, I know that providing capability for this complex
agency requires a strategy that advances the mission, optimizes
the organization, enhances service delivery, and strengthens
cybersecurity.
The DHS Chief Information Officer is accountable for the
efficient and effective use of IT resources across DHS. As part
of my statement, I would like to highlight a few areas of
success that relate to FITARA's scorecard metrics, the
Department's cybersecurity posture, cloud adoption, Agile
development, and data center consolidation.
Cybersecurity must be at the core of everything we do in
information technology. At DHS, my office operates the
enterprise-wide area network that connects the 240,000 DHS
Federal employees, more than 4,300 physical locations, and
dozens of mission-essential applications. An important layer of
protection for this ecosystem starts at the enterprise Security
Operations Center, or SOC, which is focused on the risk of
attack from hostile cyber actors.
The next levels of defense in-depth occur within the
components themselves. To ensure consistency in cybersecurity
across all levels of the Department, we implemented the
Cybersecurity Service Provider Program this year. The CSP
Program tailored the well-established Department of Defense SOC
accreditation program for use within the Department of Homeland
Security, and this past year the U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement SOC received accreditation, and DHS will continue
assessments of the remaining DHS SOCs throughout this fiscal
year.
Given all these efforts, I am proud to note that the
Department's improved cybersecurity posture is evident on our
Federal scorecards, including FISMA and FITARA. Our
cybersecurity strategy is not static, however. As DHS continues
to make great strides in cloud adoption, we must update our
enterprise security model, our policies, and our architecture.
We must eliminate the barriers to cloud migration while
supporting information assurance.
The perimeter defense approach is evolving into zero trust,
which very simply means that we eliminate the concept of trust
from our technology enterprise. This architecture will better
protect DHS IT assets from compromise through improved
monitoring and strict access control. At the same time, the
Department is implementing the new OMB TIC 3.0 and the
streamlined authority to operate process to facilitate the
cloud environment.
The Department is also committed to developing and
retaining a skilled cyber work force. We are partnering with
the Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer as they develop
the Cyber Talent Management System to manage the entry and
training of cyber talent within DHS. Additionally, DHS supports
a cyber internship program and numerous engagements with
educational institutions.
Cloud adoption also requires re-skilling the work force. By
integrating cybersecurity with incremental development, we
ensure that DHS operates a resilient and responsive technology
enterprise. DHS is focused on building Agile skills so that
security, development, and operations are an integrated
culture. We host an annual Agile Expo highlighting the best
practices from across the Department.
At DHS, we understand clearly that data center
consolidation is a top priority for the Chairman and the
Ranking Member of this subcommittee. FITARA focus has led DHS
to continue enterprise data center consolidation and cloud
adoption. For example, we have almost eliminated our on-premise
email system and will continue with migrating out of the DHS
Enterprise Data Center 2.
DHS requires secure, responsive, and resilient information
technology to execute its mission. I am proud of our efforts
thus far and excited about our continuous improvement. But as I
said in my written statement, there is certainly more room for
progress. As a leader with success in these areas at the
component level, I look forward to working with this
subcommittee and actively engaging across DHS to improve our
enterprise using FITARA as our yardstick.
Once again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much.
And thank you all for your thoughtful testimony.
The Chair calls on the distinguished Congresswoman from the
District of Columbia for five minutes of questioning.
Ms. Norton. I thank my good friend from Virginia, and I
appreciate this hearing. I do believe it is an important
hearing. We are obligated to have it for good reason.
It is interesting to note that the CIO is understood to
have such an important role that the subcommittee reduces an
agency's overall grade in its annual FITARA scorecard if that
person does not have that role reporting to the agency head.
So, Ms. Wynn, in the last FITARA scorecard that was in June
2019, NASA had demoted the position of the CIO; and, of course,
NASA reversed course after the Chairman and the Ranking Member,
Mr. Connolly and Mr. Meadows, wrote to the Administrator, and
the future of the CIO was changed. I don't know why it was
demoted. I don't know if you know.
But how has your role changed since the Chairman and
Ranking Member wrote and you were reporting directly to the
agency head?
Ms. Wynn. Thank you for the question. My role remains the
same with the short-term move to our mission support
directorate. That role never was changed. It was only my
reporting authority to the --
Ms. Norton. Well, that is what I am trying to find out.
What difference does the reporting authority--it was the
reporting authority that was at issue.
Ms. Wynn. That was at issue, and then that was returned.
The intent of the agency was to try to gain some --
Ms. Norton. And how has that mattered to you is my
question. If you report directly to the agency head, why does
that matter to you?
Ms. Wynn. It helps me when I am reporting in particular on
cybersecurity events, to be able to get easy access to the
Administrator, which I remain to have that access to him. I
think there are a couple of other issues in IT that get to be
significant, and we certainly have easy access to report any of
those issues to him.
Ms. Norton. So I think that justifies your action, Mr.
Chairman, very much so.
This committee is very concerned about the skills gap in
technology across the Federal Government. There are a lot of
places you can work and make a lot more money, and we certainly
appreciate your work.
IT management and acquisitions is listed in the GAO's
annual high-risk list. Let me ask Ms. Wynn and Ms. Cappello,
what steps are you taking, or should we perhaps take, to
strategically manage your human capital to ensure DHS and NASA
have the work force that you need?
Ms. Wynn. I will start, and you can take it from there.
One of the things is the continued support of this
committee, as well as Congress, in terms of taking a look at
the importance of hiring cyber-skilled personnel and letting
them know that working for the Federal Government, and the
missions in particular --
Ms. Norton. Well, you should be doing that as well.
Ms. Wynn. Yes, we are, and we need your support to do that.
At NASA, the one thing is we are not, except geographically,
struggling with hiring right now, but I know that we keep a
constant eye on making sure that we are looking at new ways to
recruit individuals. We certainly get out there and tell them
about our mission and how they can be a part of protecting our
mission.
Ms. Norton. Do you go into the colleges?
Ms. Wynn. Yes, we do go to the colleges, and we work in a
number of different ways. We get into the high schools and the
elementary school level as well.
Ms. Norton. Oh, I appreciate that, yes.
Ms. Wynn. Yes. So we --
Ms. Norton. Let them begin seeing the Federal Government as
a place you want to come to.
Ms. Wynn. Absolutely. And so with the continued support of
the Hill and a lot of recruiting practice, we continue to work
on this effort. But I do know that my colleagues in other
Federal agencies do have some significant challenges. There are
geographic areas that are challenging for everybody.
Ms. Norton. Yes, I understand that. So people need to be
doing it across the United s.
I do want to get this question in. I notice we have an all-
female group here testifying, and I am pleased with that
because that is not what we see across the profession. So let
me ask Ms. Wynn and Ms. Cappello, as female senior-level
technology officials in the Federal Government, help us to
learn what we should be doing to encourage more minority and
female entrants into the field of information technology.
Ms. Cappello. Ma'am, thank you for recognizing the rather
historic panel that we have today. I think you bring up an
incredibly important topic. Diversity in our work force at
every level serves our mission. Whether it is females,
minorities, cognitive diversity, it is incredibly important
that we attract the very best talent. I think one of the ways
that we begin to do that is by setting the example. We are
here, we are at the table, and we are given a voice. So when
someone, a young woman or someone from the minority community,
looks up and says is that a place where I want to work, do I
see people that look like me, well, you do; we are here.
We need to be out there mentoring. We need to be out there
talking about our agencies. We need to be talking about
technology. And I agree with Ms. Wynn, that starts at the
elementary school, the middle school, the high school level.
Certainly, we are recruiting at the college level. But if we
want to get folks excited about DHS, I think it is incredibly
important for those of us who are in senior leadership,
especially women and minorities, to be out talking to the
community and here is what we have to offer here in DHS or in
NASA or anywhere else in the Federal Government.
Mr. Connolly. And to your point, if I may, I think having
our agencies aggressively get into schools where they can show
role models for women and minorities and mentor them, and even
adopt programs, I have seen incredible work done by -- I will
pick an agency -- DARPA on robotics. The enthusiasm among young
people, and it doesn't matter whether they are boys or girls,
what backgrounds, is just contagious. So that interaction can
also -- you all can make a difference too, to Ms. Norton's
question.
I am afraid the gentlelady's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman,
for his five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. First question for Ms. Wynn. NASA has a
department-wide working capital fund, correct? I understand you
are evaluating the establishment of an IT-specific fund, right?
What is NASA's timeframe as far as coming up with a solution,
and what steps are you taking?
Ms. Wynn. We finished an initial analysis to look at our
current working capital fund and other working capital fund
authorities this past summer, and right now we are marching
toward making a decision within our IT council, as well as with
our other senior leaders, by the end of Fiscal Year 2020.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Do you have any specific plans to work
away from any of your legacy systems, your legacy systems all
around?
Ms. Wynn. So, at NASA we have two types of legacy systems,
and there is a set of legacy systems that we have to be very
careful with because those are our flying assets, our
satellites, and some of those were started back in the `60's.
So for those, we are not thinking about modernizing, but we are
taking the best precautions that we can in order to protect
those flying assets.
Then there is the legacy that definitely needs modernizing,
and we work across the agency to identify what those projects
are and then prioritize those projects for funding. In the last
year I had $10 million to provide specifically to modernization
activities in Fiscal Year 2019.
Mr. Grothman. When you talk about systems that are flying,
you mean things that are still around 50 years later?
Ms. Wynn. Yes, 10 years and much longer.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I suppose stuff can stay up there
forever and you keep using it, right?
Ms. Wynn. Yes. Because a new satellite program costs
millions of dollars, NASA takes great prudent measures to
evaluate each mission that is in flight each year to see if the
value of the data coming back versus the cost of a new mission,
as well as other protection needs, good-neighbor policies in
space, and then proceeds with either continuing the mission or
stopping it.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Ms. Harris, I was going to ask you the same question. What
progress have the agencies collectively made in transitioning
away from legacy systems?
Ms. Harris. Well, unfortunately, when you take a look at
the total IT spend per year, $90-plus billion, 80 percent of
that $90 billion-plus is still mired in the O&M, the operations
and maintenance category. So the Federal Government still has
quite a bit of work to do to reduce the amount of legacy IT.
Mr. Grothman. When you say legacy, I mean, things have
changed so much in IT, it kind of amazes me. When you say
legacy IT, when does that date from normally?
Ms. Harris. It could be anywhere from the 1970's or 1960's
to 1997, to even as far as three years ago. It depends. But
when we talk about legacy, we are talking about systems that
are in desperate need of either modernization or being turned
off because they present security vulnerabilities, among other
things.
Mr. Grothman. I am trying to think of industries that are
data heavy. I suppose financial services, insurance, that sort
of thing. Do you ever take a look and see how old systems are
around or how many legacy systems are around, say, in those
types of industries?
Ms. Harris. We haven't done work, sir, in examining what
you just described, the financial management services
community, in terms of how old the systems are. But what I can
tell you is that back in June we did a report on the top-10
legacy systems across the Federal Government, and what we found
is that for these 10, the majority of them lacked modernization
plans. So they didn't even have plans in place in terms of the
game plan moving forward, whether they were going to shut them
off or how they intended to modernize. So that is a problem,
and that is systemic across the Federal Government.
Mr. Grothman. I think the thing that frustrates me is we
should know what is going on in the private sector in data-
heavy operations, right? And my guess is if you went into -- it
probably doesn't matter what insurance it is, probably health
insurance is the most data heavy, but whichever field you go
into, my guess is you would find very little that has been
floating around for even more than 15 years. I would think that
if you collect that data or collect data from other places, you
would find how out of whack the government is. Is there any
reason why you don't? Because presumably all three of you want
to update things, and I would think you would have a lot more
ammunition if you could say we checked in with such and such
insurance company, they don't have things floating around here
for more than 12 years. Is there any reason why you don't do
that?
Ms. Harris. Sir, the work that we do is driven by the
requests that we receive from committees and members. We would
be happy to take on a request like that if that is something
that the subcommittee would be interested in sponsoring.
Mr. Connolly. We can work with the gentleman from Wisconsin
in formulating such a request, and I thank you for the idea.
The Chair now recognizes the distinguished Ranking Member
of the subcommittee.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Harris, what would be the top three things that you
would recommend this committee focus on? We are now at our
ninth report card. So we have seen some trends, we have seen
what works and what doesn't work, and you and your colleague
have been very helpful in helping us address certain areas to
modify. So what would be the top three things that you would
recommend we pay attention to over the coming year?
Ms. Harris. No. 1, continuing to be aggressive on data
center consolidation; No. 2, looking at the ----
Mr. Meadows. I am sure the Chairman liked to hear that. I
mean, that is his number-one priority. So the fact that it is
your No. 1, you get an ``A'' for the day, and maybe even an
``A+'' on the FITARA scorecard.
Mr. Connolly. That is a motion I second.
Mr. Meadows. Go ahead.
Ms. Harris. The second being continuing to be aggressive
with the agencies on the CIO reporting structure. We still have
five that are no, and we need to make sure that those five turn
into yeses. And then the third thing is looking at the working
capital funds, making sure that agencies have -- the CIOs have
-- the funds necessary to modernize those legacy systems that
are in their house.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Let me followup. On the legacy
systems, so much of the money is spent on O&M and not capital
purchases. Do you think we could substantially lower our
operating and maintenance costs if we invested significant
dollars -- and significant system-wide would be hundreds of
millions in terms of infrastructure. Do you think we could
systemically change the trend of our O&M expenses?
Ms. Harris. Yes, I do.
Mr. Meadows. All right. By a factor of -- I mean, could we
reduce O&M by more than 15 percent? Too healthy? Ten?
Ms. Harris. I think it is hard for me to say at this time,
but I think that if --
Mr. Meadows. Let me ask it a different way, then. How much
are we spending on programmers that know what I would call dead
programming languages?
Ms. Harris. We are spending, actually, a notable amount. I
don't have the figure on me, but it is a notable amount.
Mr. Meadows. Do we have young people that we are training
on COBOL and Fortran now because guys like me with gray hair
that learned it a long time ago are dying off?
Ms. Harris. The new folks that are coming into the work
force are not interested in learning those archaic languages.
And so I think that --
Mr. Meadows. So we are going to run into a problem, I
guess, with our cap on Federals, because at some point the
supply and the demand -- if I knew that you needed a Fortran
programmer, I might refresh my abilities. But if I can only get
paid similar to what I am getting paid in other areas, I guess
that is going to be a problem, isn't it?
Ms. Harris. Yes, it is going to be a big problem.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Ms. Wynn, let me thank you on behalf of the Chairman and
myself for actually listening to the reporting structure. It
was actually something that Ms. Harris and her colleague let us
know when we were doing a review. We sent a letter, and I just
want to say that it changed my attitude. I have a reputation
for asking real tough questions. You are not supposed to agree
with that. But it changes my attitude, and I think the Chairman
would agree that even though you are not at an ``A'' or an
``A+'', it changes my attitude on the fact that you are willing
to look at that. So if you would take that back to the
Administrator and just let him know that, and thank you for
your work. I would love to see, not in your verbal answers, but
if you could come up with three things that you are going to
prioritize for our next scorecard, we can kind of be familiar
with that and that would be great. Obviously, data center
consolidation needs to be one of the three. All right?
Obviously, I was checking your scorecard and where you have
been and where you are at DHS. Again, I want to thank you.
These hearings can be very difficult, and we will have other
FITARA hearings that don't go quite as smoothly, but I want to
thank you.
Here is the one concern that I do have. DHS is so big, and
when you look at -- sometimes because you are so big, you can
actually overlook a lot of things when you are getting a good
grade, because part of the grading is relative to where you
have been. So it gets tougher. The more scorecards we have, the
more finite we become with what we are looking at. So if you
would try to look beyond just the next scorecard and where you
are with your agency. Obviously, you have had a lot of
turnover. So what we would love to do is make sure that we get
those same three things from you.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I know we will have a full
FITARA hearing later on. I just want to say thank you. Thank
you, GAO, once again. You have delivered, and we appreciate
that, and I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the gentleman and thank him again for
his leadership and partnership in this enterprise. We couldn't
have done it without him.
And as the gentleman indicated, the next FITARA hearing
will be the 10th. I think it will be an expanded hearing where
we will take an expanded look at implementation and compliance,
so we look forward to that.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Khanna, for his five minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Would the gentleman yield for just a second?
Mr. Khanna. Absolutely.
Mr. Meadows. I just want to wish your daughter a belated
happy birthday.
Mr. Khanna. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Meadows. I remember her birthday, and so
congratulations.
Mr. Khanna. That is very kind of you, Representative
Meadows, and I appreciate our friendship.
And thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Connolly. I am sorry I wasn't there. I was getting
ready for the FITARA hearing.
Mr. Khanna. Well, that is more important.
Mr. Connolly. Believe me, that was a tough choice. The
birthday party sounded pretty enticing.
Mr. Khanna. We still have cake if you need some.
Mr. Connolly. Good. Thank you, Mr. Khanna.
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate that. I appreciate the Chair's and
Representative Meadows' work on FITARA and in a bipartisan way
making government more technologically proficient.
As you know, the 21st Century ID Act passed last Congress,
and the implementation is ongoing. Ms. Wynn and Ms. Cappello,
what steps have you taken to implement the law?
Ms. Wynn. Well, I think the first step was education, to
share with people what the law was about, and then identify a
plan that would be appropriate for NASA to do the
implementation steps. Many steps of the law are fairly broad
and big, and so we just broke it down to bite-sized pieces at
NASA.
I think the big thing to the success is really
understanding what you wanted out of the law, what is expected,
and then outlining for my leadership team what we needed to do
to deliver here at NASA in a way that was supportive of the
law, as well as our mission.
Ms. Cappello. Thank you for the question. My office at DHS
is responsible for accessibility and 508 compliance, and so we
are a little bit excited about the opportunity to leverage user
interface and user experience as we redesign the website.
I think basically what we are doing right now at DHS is
following the GSA three-phase maturity model. So we are using
the principles, we are looking at user experience guidance, and
then following the web design code. I know the team at DHS that
is working on this project has got a plan that they are putting
together, and it is going through the process right now for
review, and I would expect it to be submitted rather soon.
Ms. Wynn. And if I might add, in advance of that Act we had
already started to take a look at our external footprint and
started to shrink that down so the work that we have left is
now very much aligned with the Act itself, and we appreciate
the focus on it. But as you know, our website, our web presence
for any Federal agency is also an attack surface.
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate that.
The subcommittee has seen steady improvement across the
government over the course of nine FITARA scorecards. It
appears that large decentralized agencies have had a more
difficult time implementing FITARA than small or medium
agencies that have one clear mission.
Ms. Harris, what challenges do large and decentralized
agencies have in implementing IT initiatives, and what steps do
you recommend that they can take?
Ms. Harris. Well, it is not surprising that these large
federated, decentralized agencies have a tougher time than the
smaller ones with a single focus. A large part of the success
that we have seen at these large federated agencies in areas of
the FITARA scorecard such as software licensing is centralizing
the collection of information so you have a centralized
inventory, for example, in this case software licenses, that
you are able to then make decisions about economies of scale
across the enterprise as one example.
So I would start with centralizing the collection of
information, whether it is licenses or anything else, mobile
phones, other inventory that you might have.
And then also it is really about establishing relationships
with the CIOs at the component level. I think Ms. Cappello
actually could speak quite eloquently about the successes they
are seeing at DHS in terms of the synergies that they are
experiencing between the component CIOs and herself in order to
be able to more effectively manage at that department-wide
level. But that is a major step as well, establishing that
communication and instituting institutional processes across
the department so that these component agencies will fall in
line and be able to provide the information that is needed at
that department level so that sophisticated management
decisions can be made.
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate that.
Ms. Wynn, can you describe your relationship with NASA
centers and facilities and what authorities you have over
NASA's IT and challenges that you have seen?
Ms. Wynn. Yes. So, I am happy to report that all the center
CIOs actually report to me.
Mr. Khanna. That is good.
Ms. Wynn. Yes, this is a great place to start. And then
also each of the centers themselves, as well as myself, sit on
key decision boards at the agency, whether it be at the center
or at the agency level, and this allows us to learn about the
mission as well as influence the decisions that would come down
and affect our infrastructure, or make suggestions on better
ways to implement cybersecurity principles.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. Thank you all for your leadership
and expertise.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Khanna. Thank you so much for
being here today and your interest in the subject.
To Mr. Khanna's last point, Ms. Wynn, I like hearing that
the other CIOs report to you. One of the things we wanted to
do, and we hoped to do it in an evolutionary rather than a
mandated way, was to have what we call in Latin ``primus inter
pares,'' first among equals.
Mr. Meadows. Show off.
Mr. Connolly. I know; I can't help it. In six years, I have
to use it sometime.
We could have mandated, but we chose to respect the Federal
culture and let it evolve. But when we started -- and I see
Rich Buetel, who helped write this bill when he was on the
committee staff -- we had 250 people in 24 agencies called CIO.
You would never see that in the private sector, ever. I don't
care how big or small, they would be one. So you are the model.
That is exactly what we want to happen. There has got to be
somebody who reports directly to the boss who has the
authority, responsibility, and accountability for IT
management, procurement, and reduction of legacy systems. So,
congratulations again; that is great.
Your agency is a lot more difficult because it is this
compressed hodge-podge, but are you making progress in that
respect, Ms. Cappello?
Ms. Cappello. Chairman, thank you for the question. I think
it is very interesting when you look at DHS. We were created 16
years ago, and I think it is safe to say that of all the large
Federal agencies, we have the most disparate mission sets. So
while I certainly appreciate and understand the intent behind
the reporting structure as described, my concern would be
responsiveness to the operational tempos and to the individual
mission sets. I think what we are doing in DHS right now that
is really exciting and really useful is we have strong working
relationships amongst the CIO community. We probably have a
little bit of competitiveness as well, especially in regards to
cloud adoption and Agile development and modernizing our
applications. I think what the disparate mission sets allows us
to do and the responsiveness in the CIO community is, for
example, CBP is a very large component agency, more than 70,000
employees. In their mission set, they had to develop an
analytics capability very early on. So they are able to bring
best practices/experiences to the conversation as the next part
of DHS looks to adopt analytics, and we have examples of that
across DHS. I would say our HSI under Immigration and Customs
Enforcement has done such tremendous work in computer forensics
in its child exploitation space.
So while I fully understand the concerns around the
reporting structure, I would offer that in DHS there is an
awful lot of value in the technologists being able to respond
directly to the operational requirements.
Mr. Connolly. It is a good point you make, and I think that
is why we respected the culture. That is why we didn't, by
fiat, say there will only be one. We didn't do that because we
understood that this is a disparate Federal Government, lots of
different agencies, lots of different missions. Some are more
narrowly focused and it is easier to do. Some are much more
complicated, with multiple missions.
But what we want to avoid, though, is this: It is not me;
it is her; it is somebody else other than me, and no one is
responsible, and no one is accountable. That is how you waste
gazillions of dollars, and that is how projects go awry.
Someone has to be vested with the primary responsibility and
the primary accountability, that you are empowered, you are
imbued with decisionmaking, and that is the model we want to
move toward. We will respect the evolution, but not forever.
That doesn't mean there can't be individual pieces, but you get
what I mean, because the private sector somehow is able to do
it.
I worked for a company before I came here of 42,000 people.
We were into everything. I mean, we did engineering, we did
science, we did pharmaceuticals, we did government contracting,
we did cybersecurity, all kinds of things. We had one CIO, and
that company to this day has one CIO. So it can be done, and it
is probably the preferred model over time.
Ms. Harris, final question. We started out by talking about
data center consolidation, and I, like Mr. Meadows, was very
pleased that that was the first of your top three in answer to
him, and I am glad to hear it. I just want to cite that GAO
found, as of August of last year, agencies had closed 6,250
data centers and had plans to close an additional 1,200,
leaving the Federal Government with 4,716 data centers left. As
a result of the closures, agencies had achieved $1.94 billion
in cost savings for Fiscal Years 2016 through 2018, so there is
more in this last year, and identified an additional $42
million in cost savings. That amount is still $38 million short
of OMB's goal under the previous guidance of $2.7 billion. But
the point is that is where the savings are. That is where the
savings are if we are going to retire these legacy systems, if
we are going to reinvest in the enterprise.
So that is why we are concerned about OMB guidance on what
will be acceptable. We want explicit language that says close
them, consolidate them, and we were worried, and we thought we
had gotten the reassurance that this new guidance that included
the vague term ``optimization'' allowed people to avoid
consolidating and achieving these savings. Your comment? And
feel free to expand on what you said in your testimony so it is
clear for the record why are we concerned about what OMB is
doing.
Ms. Harris. Absolutely. We are taking significant steps
backward from where we were even just four years ago. The focus
and the priority needs to be on consolidation because that
gives you the large amounts of money that you need in order to
reinvest back into modernizing agency infrastructure. So that
is why the number-one priority, when you asked me the top
three, has to be consolidation of these data centers.
And with this redefinition of data centers, we are losing
visibility into 2,300 facilities, and that is a problem because
agencies are going to lose focus on consolidation as being a
top priority. In addition to that, there are security risks
with not monitoring these facilities, even if you are not going
to consolidate them.
So we do anticipate -- we have ongoing work right now
evaluating the OMB guidance. We do expect to issue that report
sometime soon, and we will make recommendations to OMB which
will include taking another look at the policy and the
classification of the data centers. Even if they maintain that
current definition which excludes 2,300 centers, at this point
the agency should be keeping a pulse on those that are now lost
because of the things that I described in my oral statement.
But again, this is a major issue, and I do look forward to
working with your staff in order to ensure that we maintain
this baseline, whether it is through OMB guidance or through
work that we will do with you.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I am going to operate on the assumption
that everybody is highly motivated and of good intention. And
with that assumption, I am also going to operate on the view
that this change has unintended but negative consequences.
Ms. Harris. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. And with that operative principle, I am going
to consult with the Ranking Member, and maybe we can work our
magic like we did at NASA at OMB. But, I mean, this would have
real consequences. This is where the savings are. If you want
to effectuate a whole host of things, modernization of the
enterprise, retirement of legacy systems, upgrading of cyber,
streamlining management to make it more efficient and
hierarchical, all of it flows from the ability to effectuate
these savings, and it is in the billions of dollars. It is not
trivial.
So we have to get this right, and we will gladly work with
you, and I know my friend will also be part of this enterprise
to try to make sure OMB understands our concerns, and maybe we
can get this right before the next FITARA hearing.
Mr. Meadows, anything else for the record?
If not, I want to thank our witnesses for being here today.
I thank everybody for coming. You can see the press table is
loaded. I don't know what else anyone is interested in today,
but Mr. Meadows and I, let the record show, are still doing our
jobs. And I thank our staff for putting through another great
hearing.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:54 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]