- NOW HIRING: HOW THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC AFFECTS SMALL BUSINESSES
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
NOW HIRING: HOW THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC AFFECTS SMALL BUSINESSES
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
SEPTEMBER 13, 2018
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Small Business Committee Document Number 115-089
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-444
WASHINGTON : 2019
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).E-mail,
[email protected]
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ROD BLUM, Iowa
JAMES COMER, Kentucky
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto Rico
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
STEPHANIE MURPHY, Florida
AL LAWSON, JR., Florida
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
VACANT
Kevin Fitzpatrick, Majority Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Majority Deputy Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Adam Minehardt, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................
1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................
2
WITNESSES
Mr. Ben Gitis, Director of Labor Market Policy, American Action
Forum, Washington, DC..........................................
4
Ms. Katie Van Dyke, Director, Ohio Small Business Development
Center, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH, testifying
on behalf of America's SBDC....................................
5
Ms. Lisa Allen, President & CEO, Ziegenfelder Company, Wheeling,
WV.............................................................
6
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Mr. Ben Gitis, Director of Labor Market Policy, American
Action Forum, Washington, DC...............................
17
Ms. Katie Van Dyke, Director, Ohio Small Business Development
Center, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH,
testifying on behalf of America's SBDC.....................
31
Ms. Lisa Allen, President & CEO, Ziegenfelder Company,
Wheeling, WV...............................................
35
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.
NOW HIRING: HOW THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC AFFECTS SMALL BUSINESSES
----------
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 13, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Knight, Blum, Fitzpatrick,
Marshall, Balderson, Velazquez, Evans, and Lawson.
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order. I want
to thank everyone for being here today.
The American economy is soaring. Significant growth is
occurring as we speak and Americans, especially entrepreneurs,
are once again optimistic about the future of their businesses.
Just two days ago the National Federation of Independent
Business Small Business Optimism Index soared to a new record
high in the survey's 45-year history, showing that small
businesses are finally feeling confident and are ready and
willing to execute plans to grow their businesses. However,
many small businesses are now facing a new challenge in
finding, hiring, and retaining qualified workers. The NFIB also
noted that 62 percent of small businesses reported trying to
hire new employees with 89 percent of those businesses
reporting finding few or no qualified applicants. A record 25
percent of small businesses cited the difficulty of finding
qualified workers as their single biggest problem, up 2 points
from just last month.
Today, we are here to examine why that might be. In recent
Small Business Committee hearings, we have heard reports about
how the opioid epidemic is impacting small businesses across
this nation. Driven by the rise in opioid prescriptions and the
influx of illegal opioid drugs into communities, drug addiction
has grown in the United States in recent years. The opioid
epidemic touches families and communities all across this
country, so much so, in fact, that President Trump declared the
epidemic a public health emergency almost one year ago today.
We have seen that the opioid crisis has the ability to impact
businesses, too. Many young working age Americans are not
working or actively seeking work as a result of opioid
addiction, impeding the ability of businesses to fill important
job openings. In 2015, an estimated two million workers were
not in the labor force due to the opioid epidemic. According to
a recent report by the National Safety Council, more than 70
percent of United States employers have been affected by
employees' prescription drug use.
We want to hear from our witnesses today and we appreciate
that they have taken time away from I am sure important
obligations that they have and their busy schedules to share
their expertise with us on this very important topic, and we
look forward to having a very productive discussion here this
morning. So we want to thank you for being here.
And I would now want to recognize the Ranking Member, Ms.
Velazquez, for her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. America's economy
has improved since the Great Recession and unemployment is at
an 18 year low. But while most signs of economic gains are
promising, the labor participation rate has been on a decade's
long decline.
As in previous hearings, we have heard what a challenge the
workforce decline has had on small firms all over the country.
With low unemployment rates, small employers are reporting
difficulty finding qualified and skilled workers. Analyzing the
United States workforce reveals two areas of concern, an
existing skills gap among workers and a shrinking workforce.
These problems are magnified by the opioid crisis. More than
two million people struggle with opioid addiction, which is now
one of the deadliest public health crises in modern history.
This epidemic is not only wreaking havoc on our communities but
also ravaging our workforce. In the last 15 years over 20
percent of the decrease in labor participation can be
attributed to the increase in opioid prescriptions. For
businesses, this reality has real consequences. If we are
unable to meet the demand for trained workers it will weaken
our ability to compete globally.
For individuals this reality has even more devastating
consequences. In 2016 opioid overdoses killed more than 42,000
Americans, more than car crashes and guns combined. And those
addicted to opioids are three times less likely to have
completed post secondary education, adding an additional
barrier to reentering the workforce. This epidemic begs the
question of how we address the skills gap to get qualified
people back into the workforce to fill these jobs.
It is critical to reengage adults who have left the labor
force due to opioid addiction. Access to treatment must be
widely available from drug rehab and medical interventions to
non addictive alternatives to pain management. According to
NIH, the most successful addiction treatment programs teach
coping skills, mobilize community forces, and instill values
toward pro social behaviors, such as meaningful jobs. Such
efforts are a critical part of today's discussion for both
economic and addiction recovery.
Too many American workers have been left behind because of
addiction, to the detriment of small firms and entire families.
To assemble the workforce that American businesses need to
thrive, policy makers, educators, and businesses need to
collaborate to find a solution to the opioid epidemic.
I look forward to today's hearing and I thank the witnesses
for being here today. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentle lady
yields back.
And before I introduce our witnesses and go into our timing
rules, I would like to recognize we have a new member of our
Committee, Troy Balderson, who is from the great State of Ohio,
which happens to be my State. He came to Congress replacing Pat
Tiberi and prior to that, that District had been held by John
Kasich, who is the current Governor of Ohio. And Troy was sworn
in just last week. We are delighted that he was selected for
the Small Business Committee, a most important Committee in the
House. And his experience as a State Senator and being involved
in two family-owned businesses will be a great asset to this
Committee. So we welcome him here.
And if Committee members have an opening statement
prepared, I ask that they be submitted for the record. Without
objection, so ordered.
And I will take just a moment to explain our timing rules.
They are pretty simple. You get 5 minutes. And there is a
lighting system to assist you. The green light will be on for 4
minutes, the yellow light will come to let you know you have
got a minute to wrap up, and then the red light will come on
and we would ask that you try to end your statement. At that
time, if you need a little time to wrap up, that is okay.
And I would now like to introduce the witnesses. And we
will begin with our first witness, Mr. Ben Gitis, who is the
Director of Labor Market Policy at the American Action Forum.
He has written extensively about the opioid crisis and his work
has been referenced by news publications such as the Wall-
Street Journal, the Washington Post, and many others. We thank
you for being here today.
Our second witness will be Ms. Katie Van Dyke, who is the
Director of the Ohio Small Business Development Center, or
SBDC, at Cleveland State University in Cleveland, Ohio. In this
role, Ms. Van Dyke works to provide free training and advice to
startups and entrepreneurs and existing businesses seeking to
scale and grow. And we thank you for being here.
And I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member for
introducing our third and final witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure
to introduce Ms. Lisa Allen, President and CEO of Ziegenfelder
Company, a privately held family owned business in Wheeling,
West Virginia. Her company manufactures and sells Budget Saver
popsicles. In the past 10 years the company has grown from 75
employees to over 300 across 3 locations. Ms. Allen has been
widely recognized for her compassionate hiring practices and
dedication to her local communities. Welcome, Ms. Allen. Thank
you for being here.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And we welcome you.
And, Mr. Gitis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENTS OF BEN GITIS, DIRECTOR OF LABOR MARKET POLICY
AMERICAN ACTION FORUM; KATIE VAN DYKE, DIRECTOR, OHIO SMALL
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT CENTER LAKELAND COMMUNITY COLLEGE; LISA
ALLEN, PRESIDENT & CEO, ZIEGENFELDER COMPANY
STATEMENT OF BEN GITIS
Mr. GITIS. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, I am
pleased to be here.
A few months ago I was in Boston for an opioid event and
there was a construction business owner who told us the story
where he was at a job fair and he told a room full of people if
you can pass a drug test you have a job. Half the room left. We
have heard stories like these from small business owners
countless times. And it has made me interested in gauging just
how many workers could be out of the labor force due to opioid
dependence.
And so my work at the American Action Forum has focused on
three main areas. First, I just wanted to identify what is the
source of this crisis and why are overdose fatalities rising.
And I found from 1999 to 2010 prescription opioids were really
the source of rising dependence and rising overdose fatalities.
The supply of prescription opioids grew, and along with it was
a growth in prescription opioid involved overdoses. But in 2010
there as a pretty major shift in response to several policy and
private sector initiatives. The supply of prescription opioids
peaked and then began to decline. Along with it, overdose
fatalities caused by those drugs flat lined, but overdose
fatalities caused by illegal drugs like heroin and illegal
synthetic opioids both spike. And that is why today we are
seeing an acceleration in the total number of opioid overdose
fatalities.
Second, my research has quantified the number of workers
nationwide who are out of the labor force and what that means
for the U.S. economy. I estimate that between 1999 and 2015 the
prime age labor force participation rate--that is people 25-
54--that rate declined by 1.6 percentage points. That means
that in 2015 two million workers were absent from the labor
force due to opioids. It also means that it was a major drag on
U.S. economic growth. The figure suggests that during that time
period the U.S. economy lost out on $1.6 trillion in real
economic output. In other words, had these workers been in the
labor force, the economy would have grown about 30 percent
faster.
The research also indicates that female workers left the
labor force slightly more frequently than male workers due to
opioids. And it also suggests that small businesses were
particularly heavily impacted by this crisis.
The third point that my research has focused on is
estimating just how many workers are out of the labor force and
what is the impact on the economy in every state due to the
opioid crisis. And I found that the impact varies considerably
by state. The two states that are by far the most severely
impacted by this crisis are West Virginia and Arkansas. Their
prime age labor force participation rates fell by 3.8
percentage points due to opioids. To put that in perspective,
remember that the nationwide decline was 1.6 percentage points.
So it is pretty clear that these states are being ravaged by
the crisis.
Other states that are being negatively affected are
Missouri, Kentucky--and then if you look at the states across
the country, the states that tend to be more negatively
affected are located in the southeast and the Midwest. So you
have states like Ohio, where the participation rate declined by
2 percentage points, and also Louisiana, Tennessee are seeing a
pretty negative effect. And I should also mention that New York
also experienced a pretty significant decline in labor force
participation, about 3 percentage points, due to opioids.
Now, I have a lot of data on a lot of states, but I will
leave it there. And I am happy answer any questions you have.
Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Ms. Van Dyke, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF KATIE VAN DYKE
Ms. VAN DYKE. Thank you Mr. Chairman , Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. It is an honor to be
here to speak with you today about how the opioid epidemic
affects small businesses.
I am Katie Van Dyke, Director of the Ohio Small Business
Development Center at Cleveland State University. I am proud of
the work that we at the Small Business Development Centers do
to support our local small businesses, who are the critical
components and major contributors to the strength of our local
economies.
The Small Business Development Center program provides
assistance to small businesses and aspiring entrepreneurs
through no cost business advising around business plan
development, financial packaging, lending assistance,
exporting, and market research. The SBDC Program is made
possible through a collaborative partnership between our
Congressional champions, the Small Business Administration, and
state hosts. Last year alone the Ohio SBDC Program helped 722
entrepreneurs start their business. We worked with existing
business owners to access $230 million in capital. Our clients
created or retained nearly 14,000 jobs, and we worked with more
than 500 companies to increase export sales by $99 million. But
a significant challenge to Ohio's current business operations,
in both the urban or rural communities, is Ohio's opioid
crisis.
Here are the statistics, which is a snapshot of Ohio. In
Ohio, from 2016-2017 overdose deaths due to opioids increased
39 percent and Ohio was the third largest increase among the
states. Fourteen people die a day from opioid addiction. These
deaths aren't the stereotypical ``junkie'' on the street, they
are people involved in the community, your average American,
workforce age. Sixty-eight percent of Ohio's injured workers
were prescribed narcotics in 2016. Unintentional drug overdoses
that may have started as a prescription for a surgery or
injury, cost an average of $5.4 million each day in medical and
work loss costs in Ohio. Over 2,500 people of employment age,
between ages 25 and 64, in Ohio died of an opioid overdose in
2017 alone. Half of Ohio businesses reported suffering
consequences due to substance abuse, including absenteeism and
decreased productivity of their employees, and a shortage of
workers who can pass drug tests.
There are many more examples of clients who are wondering
just how to deal with the opioid crisis. It goes beyond the
addicted employee or the shortage of applicants that can pass a
drug test. Opioid addition is affecting employees and their
families. This is happening everywhere. This is a problem all
businesses are facing, or will face, in the near future at the
rate we are going in Ohio.
Thankfully, there are many great resources that are on the
ground working to educate employers and employees alike. But,
there is a lot of work to do. Getting the information out
quickly and reaching the small business owner is a challenge we
face. The Ohio SBDC at Lakeland Community College created a
workshop called ``The Opioid Crisis in the Workplace: The
Proactive Role Employers Can Take''. This workshop was built to
be easily replicable for each SBDC in the different counties to
offer and customize with local subject matter experts.
We are also partnering with our local Chamber to hold this
workshop in Cuyahoga County in October, and we can even offer
continuing education credit to the HR professionals that
attend. We are also working to share the resources from
partners that are available to small businesses when we advise
them. There is a drug free workplace training program offered
by The Ohio Bureau of Worker's Compensation. And the Ohio
Chamber of Commerce collaborated with WorkingPartners in Anthem
to develop a free opioid toolkit containing webinars for
customizable printable resources for use in the workplace.
The most important thing we as a community can do is to get
everyone to talk about the facts, the staggering statistics,
and breakdown the stigma that this is someone else's problem.
It affects us all, whether directly or indirectly. As business
advisors, if we can face this problem with as much knowledge as
possible, we will be better armed for changing the statistics
and creating a healthier workforce.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Ms. Allen, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF LISA ALLEN
Ms. ALLEN. Good morning, Chairman Chabot and members of The
Small Business Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you to discuss the opioid epidemic and to share
our culture and our solutions for change in our business and in
our communities. I hope that by sharing our story we can make a
dent in this terrible drug epidemic.
My name is Lisa Allen; I am the President and CEO of The
Ziegenfelder Company, a privately held, family owned business
located in Wheeling, West Virginia. We ``make people smile with
really cool treats'' manufacturing Budget Saver twin pops and
other frozen items.
Since 2003, Ziegenfelder has averaged 12 percent year-over-
year growth in a grocery category that has been flat to
declining, making Budget Saver products the market disrupter.
With three manufacturing facilities in West Virginia,
California, and Colorado, operating continuously, our Budget
Saver products can be found in grocery stores in nearly every
community across the country. Last year we proudly sold over 40
million bags of pops into homes in America.
While we are proud of this growth, the source of my pride
comes from our team we call a Tribe. We are individuals,
families, and a community linked by our culture, our practices,
and our vivid vision. All members of our Zieggy Tribe benefit
from our committed, compassionate hiring practices. Our doors
are open to nearly anyone who is willing to work hard, grow and
develop, and can commit to our Zieggy Essentials.
Perhaps our hiring practices emerged from our culture and
our commitment to our Tribe. Yet, we intentionally refocused
our hiring practices from the harsh reality of our shrinking
workforce caused by the devastating effects of drug addiction,
which knows no bounds. Addicts are our sons, our daughters, our
mothers, our fathers, and our friends. Diversity of potential
talent and intellect are interrupted and hijacked by drug
addiction. Yet with hope, recovery, and connections, a person's
resilient spirit can rise again.
At Ziegenfelder we offer a safe environment where Tribe
members have a place to recover and prosper. We feel validated
when our employees are in trouble, they look inward to each
other and our leaders and ask for help. When our Tribe is
hurting, we are hurting too. We take an active role in
developing connections with people in our Tribe, demonstrating
our care for each person. Intentionally connecting, asking
about their lives, and building relationship with people who
feel isolation or have lost connections can make the difference
in addiction relapse and re-incarceration.
Just this last Saturday, I subtly honored one person
celebrating three years clean and another who had their ankle
bracelet removed, with a hug and a high five. Hugely meaningful
milestones in recovering and in their changing lives.
In our Zieggy Tribe, loosely structured peer groups have
emerged, addressing issues they surface and work together to
solve. We work with social service agencies, our medical
community, law enforcement, parole and probation officers on a
case by case basis, working to employ and assist recovery and
reentry. We have visited state and federal prisons, we have
participated in job fairs inside jails, in re-entry
simulations. And in partnership with the West Virginia Division
of Corrections and Rehabilitation, members of our Tribe have
become certified Addict Recovery Coaches. We work closely with
the halfway houses in Denver, Colorado. We are working with the
West Virginia Department of Corrections on a pilot work release
project with our Northern Regional Jail. Currently incarcerated
men with excellent conduct records at the tail end of their
sentences, walk three blocks to our facility, work an eight
hour shift and walk back to the jail. A win-win.
While we are compassionate and have open hearts, we are not
foolish. We have customers and a business to run. We are
grateful that most of our Tribe is also committed to protecting
our business and each other. We are a close-knit, trusting
community and people look out for each other. Inclusion is our
strength and our competitive advantage.
Standing idle, often in judgment of others, doing little
but measuring and analyzing statistics does not erase mistakes
nor change the spiraling impact of addiction. Even worse, it
may perpetuate crime and other debilitating problems. We
believe a job and connections are the best antidote. And this
belief has been affirmed over and again by our Tribe members.
The drug epidemic is devastating, yet we believe in the
resiliency of the human spirit. It takes courage to stand up
and make change, it takes courage to believe, and it requires
courage to take the first step. We will continue to embrace the
opportunity to demonstrate and reward this courage.
Our results are not without failures. This is messy, and
unfortunately we have many failures. However, we learn from
those disappointing circumstances and we know the next person
deserves our open hearts just as much as the last. I am proud
of our Tribe. Drug addiction and associated social problems
know no bounds. We are working to combat this enemy one person,
one family at a time. We know to each person that we touch and
we can help, we make a difference.
Thank you for this opportunity to share our story and I
look forward to your questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And I will recognize
myself to begin the questioning for 5 minutes
And, Mr. Gitis, I will begin with you. You had mentioned in
you testimony that you felt that small businesses were
particularly affected as opposed to larger companies by this
opioid addiction. Why is that and how is that affecting small
business across this country?
Mr. GITIS. So small businesses, by the sheer quantity of
them, a lot of workers are employed by small businesses. So
just on that basis alone, they will be negatively affected by
this crisis. A rough estimate suggests that about 45 percent of
these absent workers, or about 900,000 of them would have been
employed by a business with under 50 workers.
And it is also important to keep in mind that small
businesses have fewer resources in terms of attracting
employees, so they have to rely on things like job fairs and
all that. And so that would also be difficult for them.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. Ms. Van Dyke, I will go to you
next. If a client comes to the Ohio SBDC and has a problem with
opioids in the workplace, could you walk us through the steps
that you would take in trying to help them?
Ms. VAN DYKE. Sure. My biggest role in that situation would
be to connect them with the resources available. Unfortunately,
small businesses do not have a lot of resources for maybe an in
hours HR, but there are quite a few resources in Ohio. For
example, Working Parners is a consulting firm that would help
them. And the Ohio Bureau of Worker's Compensation could help
them to implement a drug free workplace. Maybe not at that
point, but we could also educate them and educate the other
employees. We would also need to walk them through
understanding, possibly helping that employee to get into rehab
and offering them a second chance based on getting clearance
from a counselor and going through some rehab and recovery.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you very much. Ms. Allen, I
will go to you next. Your story and your commitment to your
community is very inspiring. What are the most rewarding and
most challenging parts of hiring recovering addicts and others
reentering our community?
Ms. ALLEN. Well, thank you for your question. Rewarding is
seeing success, it is watching people who feel like they have
no hope, came from a bad situation, are reentering and have no
home to go to, finding a home with us, finding a work home with
us, the opportunity to earn an income and to make connections.
Fortunately, just by chance just outside of my office is the
time clock for our business, and so I get to see our folks
every single day and I can have conversations and build
relationships. That is incredibly rewarding. And I think it
gives people the connection that they need that they don't
have.
The most difficult is knowing that somebody didn't come
back to work, didn't show back up to work, to know that we have
lost the life of past co-workers due to this addiction. That is
the hardest part, but we plug through.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Ms. ALLEN. You are welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Would anybody like to cover any concerns
that companies might have, liability issues if they are hiring
folks who may have struggled in the past and have been facing
challenges of addiction?
Ms. Van Dyke, would you like to talk about that?
Ms. VAN DYKE. Sure. As a small business owner, like I said
before, you have limited funds to spend on an HR or HR
policies, but there are, like I said, free resources out there
so that you can develop programs so that when you are bringing
someone on board that maybe has some previous history with drug
abuse or drug addiction, that you can put them into a program
and know that all of your employees are educated. And they are
also affecting their families by bringing the education home
and talking to their kids and learning more about the addiction
and possible--who of your employees could be more addicted than
others.
It is also about not only educating your employees, but
having, like I said, the policies in place, things that are
going to protect you as a business so that there are no
liability issues. If an employee does injure someone because of
the addictions, the come to work addicted, maybe they are high
or something and they have an accident at work, knowing how to
deal with that in a legal--and having your HR policies is
really important.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. My time is about to
expire, so I will turn to the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Lawson, who is the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Health
and Technology for five minutes.
Mr. LAWSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And this question will
be to everyone on the Committee. How can the federal government
provide support to small businesses who hire those recovering
from addiction? And what other resources exist for those
companies outside of the government? And I would like to have
all of you all to respond for that, respond to it.
Mr. GITIS. I am not sure what is available for small
businesses in order to help their employees treat addiction. I
am not an expert on health issues. I am more focused on the
workers themselves. But that is something I can look into.
Mr. LAWSON. Well, from the standpoint of federal
government, you have no recommendations?
Mr. GITIS. Well, just in general overall, there needs to be
a more comprehensive approach than what has been employed so
far. Around 2010 there was just a focus on prescription opioids
and now we have accelerating overdose tests with other types of
drugs. And so there needs to be more focus on treating actual
addiction and also addressing the unlawful drugs, like illegal
synthetic opioids and heroine.
Mr. LAWSON. I will go to Ms. Van Dyke.
Ms. VAN DYKE. There are many things the government can do,
especially focusing on spreading the word. Small businesses
sometimes have a hard time approaching or asking for help, so
just supporting the education and getting the word out there
and talking about the issues is very helpful. Having easy
access to resources is very helpful for small businesses so
that they can begin to understand the addiction and education
around it and get it out there to their employees.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. Ms. Allen?
Ms. ALLEN. So my answer might be a little bit different. I
think as a small business owner, I think small businesses--for
us speaking specifically--I would much rather the federal
government rather than support us, I think the problem is so
pervasive that I would rather whatever money you would be
interested in giving us, put into education, into the education
system, and into mental health issues because addiction is an
outcome to me in a lot of cases. Addiction is the result of
isolation, of mental health issues, of lack of education, a
lack of connections, a lack of the humanness that need to exist
in our world. So I think our education is a great place to
start and then more emphasis on another great place, in the
corrections system. Preparing people who are leaving the
Department of Corrections so that they know how to get out and
when they get out what to do, where to do, how to get a job,
how to hold a job, all those kinds of things.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. And it is obvious from what you have
stated that--do you find any help that comes from SBA?
Ms. ALLEN. We don't specifically, no.
Mr. LAWSON. You don't specifically know? Do any of you all
know whether SBA provides any educational opportunities for
small businesses besides just applying for a loan or something
of this nature?
Ms. VAN DYKE. I can answer that. We are powered by the SBA.
Basically our funding provides us to provide free technical
support. So we feel like we are the soldiers on the ground
because of our SBA grant. So we are out here as small business
advisors working with small businesses and finding those
resources for them to make their lives a little easier. Because
there are quite a few resources for small businesses. It is
just that we have a hard time marketing, obviously, from our
funding. We are focused on working.
Mr. LAWSON. So with the few seconds I have left, do you
think there will need to be more emphasis from SBA to small
businesses educational, the emphasis on how to help small
businesses with this crisis?
Ms. VAN DYKE. It should be an initiative for sure.
Mr. LAWSON. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman yields back. Thank you very
much. The gentleman from California, Mr. Knight who is the
Chairman of Subcommittee on Contracting and the Workforce,
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a good
hearing. I wish we didn't have to have this hearing, but it is
a good hearing to see what is happening in America.
You know, in my district we have a lot of aerospace and the
number one thing is when you get your DoD clearance, obviously
you cannot have any drug addictions, use, or anything. Living
in California we have new laws and new things that are going on
out there that are different--and I can probably always say
that--but they are making it so that some of our young folks
think that it is okay to do a certain drug and then they can
get their clearance. Obviously that cannot happen. So we are
trying to educate young folks.
We are also having a problem, especially in my district and
others in southern California, to find people that can pass a
drug test to just show up for work. And that is one of the
biggest issues when we go out on a job fair or something like
that is the first thing is we want you to pass a drug test for
certain jobs.
So my questions are more on line with that. And, Ms. Allen,
I liked your testimony and I liked the way that you framed it.
We want to help people and we want to give them a chance and if
they take that chance, then great. If they don't, we also know
we have got to run a business, we have got to make sure the
business makes money for all the people that are employed here.
And it continues on. So if you take advantage of that chance,
then great.
So I would like to hear some of the kind of the stories--
not the stories, but tell me what you have done when you have
found somebody who has come into work and now you have found
that they haven't exactly followed the rules. What is the
process there?
Ms. ALLEN. Well, thank you, Mr. Knight, for your question.
The process is typically those things surface for us--as I
stated the kind of ad hoc peer groups that have developed, the
people helping people--the information surfaces, it works its
way through our organization, typically gets quickly to our
plant management and our HR department and if the person is
willing and interested in assistance we work with our social
service agencies, we work with counselors. Sometimes once it
comes up they just disappear, they don't come back. That
happens a lot, unfortunately. But there are connections. We are
in a small community. We are in little Wheeling, West Virginia.
We have a population that is, you know, 25-35,000 people and so
a lot of people know each other. And so the connections are
there. Typically----
Mr. KNIGHT. And you might be the biggest employer.
Ms. ALLEN. Pardon me?
Mr. KNIGHT. You might be the biggest employer. Is that
close?
Ms. ALLEN. Well, we are not because we have two other
facilities. But we are a large employer in the community, about
150 people locally. And people connect. So we rehire as well.
So if somebody leaves, disappears, you know, we don't know
where they are for a few weeks and then they come back and they
share their story and we talk. And we don't drug test on the
front end anymore. What we do though is we have done a lot of
training on reasonable suspicion. So we know what to look for,
we know signs to look for and we pay attention. And there is
word, you know, amongst our Tribe. So we kind of self-regulate.
Mr. KNIGHT. So it is interesting to hear business owners
talk about trying to help people with a drug addiction, and
what you do and what you can't do. Obviously if somebody came
in and they were working for me and I caught them stealing
something I would fire them right there. With a drug addiction
you can hear--and I hear this from businesses all the time--we
are trying to help you, you have got to help yourself. So if
you, you know, leave for those two weeks you come back and you
explain what went on and we are still going to have some
compassion for you, but understand that we want you to get
moving. And so there is some tough love there to.
Ms. ALLEN. There has to be.
Mr. KNIGHT. In my previous life I was a Los Angeles police
officer and we had the DARE program. And when I started in 1990
the DARE program had been going for five, or six, or seven
years, or something like that. It was very heavy into the
school districts and making sure the kids knew if you do this
you have already put yourself in a difficult situation. So
don't start, don't think that you can just do it and then
everything will be okay, you will just not do it again.
I think that we should go back to a lot of these types of
programs in America, whether they are local or some big just
say no DARE program that gets kind of a universal American look
at drug use. Drug use in America has been one of our greatest
black eyes, as it is, and we have got to figure out new and
innovative ways. And I think some of these programs that
infiltrate locals and go around the whole country is the way to
do it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired. The gentleman from Pennsylvania, who is the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Growth, Tax, and Capital Access.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I would
like to thank you and the Ranking Member for just organizing
this panel. It could not be more appropriate at this time.
Ms. Allen, what supports have you found to be the most
useful in decreasing the likelihood of relapse?
Ms. ALLEN. Connections. Making, building relationships. In
my experience, what we have seen and what I have heard, drug
addiction creates isolation. A lot of what Mr. Knight was
talking about, about stealing, the two kind of go together a
lot of times. So people find themselves very isolated. They
don't feel connected to anybody. So by building connections it
makes people feel important, they feel loved, they feel
included. And with that, they ask themselves--I just had this
conversation the other day--they ask themselves, do I want this
life or do I want this life. These people are nice to me and
they take care of me and they care about me. I think I will go
another clean day, I will go another clean day.
And it is a flywheel, it is truly a flywheel. We find
support with our counseling services in our community, we find
support with the social service agencies. But I think it is
really just helping people with connections and letting them
know that people care about them. One of the things that I feel
very strongly, and we feel very strongly in our business, is
those words that haven't always been hard business terms, like
care and commit and compassion, those are true leadership
skills and those are true business terms. And we use them often
and frequently and I think it helps with the connections and it
helps people overcome
Mr. EVANS. As sort of a follow up, obviously you cannot
legislate connections. That is the rumor I hear. I don't know,
maybe somebody who has been around here longer than I can
figure that one out. Then what are the conditions that sets it
up to just understand what you just expressed, which I assume
you learned from experiences?
Ms. ALLEN. Gosh, I wish I had a good answer for that. I
think it is conversations like this, to be honest. I think it
is conversations that recognize that this is a human issue and
people are resilient. And addicts don't want to be addicts. I
mean I have never experienced it myself, thank goodness, but I
don't believe that somebody in such a miserable state is there
by choice. So I think it is incumbent upon all of us to
recognize the humanness of it and to help people through
funding sources, through, as I said before, helping people who
are leaving incarceration after whatever their length of term
was. Most of them, a lot of them, the ones I have experienced,
really do want to change, really do want to change. I spoke
about the work release program we have with our local jail. We
have one gentleman, I just learned yesterday or the day before,
I approached him and he told me that he has two bachelor's
degrees and a master's degree in chemical engineering. And he
is a pretty good mechanic too. And he gets out soon, and he
likes his job.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you.
Ms. ALLEN. So they are no different than you and I, other
than that they made a bad choice, a lot of bad choices. But
they are human and they are intelligent and they have value and
they are labeled for life. And I don't know that that is
necessarily fair.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if with Ms.
Van Dyke I can get a question in or?
Chairman CHABOT. Sure.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah, you have got time.
Mr. EVANS. You discuss efforts that the SBDC is taking to
assist employers who are struggling with employees impacted by
the opioid crisis. What, if any, supports are you providing to
assist in filling the skills gap problem that small business
have because of the opioid epidemic.
Ms. VAN DYKE. Thank you for your question, Mr. Evans. That
is a tough one. We rely heavily on Ohio Means Jobs. They have a
wonderful massive data base full of employees seeking jobs. So
when our small businesses are looking for employees we work
with Ohio Means Jobs to help them kind of sift through the data
base of people looking. But, again, I just think it goes back
to education around our small businesses and what they are
looking for in skills versus what is available.
Mr. EVANS. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you, thank you. The gentleman's time
now has expired. The gentleman from Kansas, Dr. Marshall, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Maybe I want
to focus on prevention for a second, see if you all have any
suggestions. You know, I am a physician myself. It is said that
80 percent of people on opioid addiction problems started off
with a legal physician prescription. I think that number is
pretty high, but I am going to assume it is right. So across my
district I am seeing clinics, physicians develop protocols how
to handle chronic pain. That kind of keeps some of the patients
from doctor shopping, bouncing around. And the next sort of
protocol is how to handle acute pain, post-operative pain,
those types of things.
Are you all seeing that happening in any of your home
states, doctors are taking responsibility to do this? Ms. Van
Dyke, are you seeing some of that?
Ms. VAN DYKE. Yes. And I am not a medical official at all,
but in Ohio I know we use the AORRS system, which a doctor can
get information on previous prescriptions and other things for
each client that they have so that they are better
understanding what they have been taking and who they have been
seeing. I think that is very helpful. And I think that the
changes in the medical community and the knowledge that they
have of the addictions that are happening because of the
prescriptions is definitely really impacting and lessening the
opioid prescriptions that are just going out to everybody. It
has definitely made a difference in Ohio.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay. Mr. Gitis, are you seeing anything
happening and improving in that area?
Mr. GITIS. Yes, you can see it in the data, changing
behaviors, and also in response to changing attitudes and
policies. The supply of prescription opioids in the United
States has been declining each year since 2010 by about a 5
percent rate. So that is good news. And I think it would help
limit the number of folks who are exposed to opioids in the
first place. The tricky part is addressing those who are
already addicted and those who are using the illegal
substances.
Mr. MARSHALL. Okay. Is there anything else that you all can
think, whether it would require--I don't care where the--I
actually would prefer staying away from the federal government
dictating new rules. What else can the medical folks do that
they are not doing now to decrease the number of people
becoming addicted to narcotics? Are you seeing any better
practices out there? Anything else that you are seeing?
Go ahead, Ms. Allen.
Ms. ALLEN. I can only speak from personal family
experience, that it appears that it is well regulated and well
controlled. So that possibly, you know, obviously it doesn't
create addiction or cause addiction. I think in our family
case, you can see the process working. I think what is
happening though is it is to Mr. Gitis' point, it is not the
prescription opioids anymore, it is the synthetics that are on
the street. It is the synthetics that are on the street that
are causing the greatest devastation at this point. I can't
speak to that statistically, but that is what I feel.
Mr. MARSHALL. Yeah, I think that is absolutely right. You
know, fentanyl is the big synthetic drug that China is making
and shipping over by our U.S. Postal Service and for some
reason our U.S. Postal Service doesn't know where the package
is coming from. And one of the things we have recently done is
passed legislation to hold them accountable as well. And people
just don't realize how powerful fentanyl is, 50-100 times
stronger. And that is why most of the people are dying, they
are used to taking 5 or 10 percocets to get high, and you take
5 fentanyls and you are done. It is so strong that drug dog
walking by and sniffing it can kill the dog itself. So I think
we are all becoming more and more aware of that as well.
I guess we will spend the last minute on treatment plans.
What is the most effective thing that you are seeing? Ms. Allen
already mentioned relationships, having relationships. You
know, we are funding telemedicine more, we certainly do think
mental health is a big culprit here. I think we are doing more
in this Congress to reorganize mental health than since John F.
Kennedy. So I am proud of that. Do you guys see any other thing
succeed, what is working? Ms. Van Dyke, what do you think is
working?
Ms. VAN DYKE. Sure. I think on the small business side of
things getting small businesses to understand that you don't
have to fire that person that has the addiction problem. If
they go through proper rehab through an accredited source and
they work with a counselor they are less likely to use again.
And you don't have to retrain them, you can bring them back
once they have, you know, been cleared through a counselor. And
they are ready to go again. And giving second chances and
helping small businesses to understand that giving second
chances to people is the way to go, for the most part.
Mr. MARSHALL. All right. I think my time is expired. I
yield back. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
has expired. The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Balderson. It gives
me great pleasure to yield 5 minutes to you if you would like
to ask questions. Don't screw it up.
Mr. BALDERSON. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I really
don't have any questions. I will comment on what Ms. Van Dyke
says and some of the things that we have done in the State of
Ohio. And Ms. Allen is only approximately about 45 minutes away
from my home county, also, so down in Wheeling, West Virginia.
But, you know, just mostly what Ms. Van Dyke said about what we
have done in the state legislature since 2009 with the OARRS
system and many things. And I think we need to continue doing
that.
As far as relationships that Ms. Allen said, it is
something that we don't talk about in communicating with our
employees, and the importance of that and to help them. I mean
employers want their employees to be successful, because if
they are successful the business is successful also. So those
relationships and to communicate with those employees and
getting them the help that they need I think is vital. And that
is what makes it all work.
So I look forward and I am glad to be honored to sit on
this panel and hear this. I think it was very interesting this
morning. So thank you all very much for being here.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back. And, again, we welcome him to the Committee. And I want
to thank our panel here this morning for your testimony. I
think it has been very helpful to all the members that were
here in sharing your valuable insights. The opioid crisis is
affecting communities really in every corner of our nation. It
is clear that this epidemic is a monumental problem, but our
witnesses today have demonstrated how small businesses can work
with our communities to be a part of the solution. So we thank
you for helping us to deal with this. The Committee will use
today's conversation as a way that we can continue to examine
potential ways to help small businesses find the qualified
workers that they need to grow their businesses.
So, again, thank you.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have five
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned.
Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:54 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]