- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 10, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:00 a.m., in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Jerry Moran (Chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Moran, Murkowski, Collins, Graham,
Boozman, Capito, Kennedy, Shaheen, Leahy, Feinstein, Reed,
Coons, Schatz, Manchin, and Van Hollen.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JERRY MORAN
Senator Moran. Good morning. I call this hearing to order.
And, Attorney General Barr, welcome to the Commerce,
Justice, Science, and Related Appropriations Subcommittee
hearing to examine your Department, the Department of Justice's
fiscal year 2020 budget request.
I am pleased to welcome Mr. Lee Lofthus, the Chief
Financial Officer of the Department.
I would like to begin my remarks by thanking the 112,000
men and women that work at the Department of Justice. The work
they do is vital to protecting American lives and upholding our
rule of law.
I especially want to use this moment to thank the men and
women of the Department of Justice for persevering during our
unfortunate recent Government shutdown. I am sorry for the
stress that was created, and I hope that we are able to avoid
future shutdowns by enacting timely appropriation bills,
including Commerce, Justice, Science.
In order to accomplish this and write the fiscal year 2020
CJS appropriations bill, this subcommittee needs to understand
the Department's resource needs.
The President's fiscal year 2020 budget request proposes
over $30 billion for the Department of Justice. Because you
indicated yesterday, you will report to Congress on the Mueller
investigation next week, it is my hope that the budget request
will remain the major focus of today's hearing. I am not naive,
but I hope that is the case.
I would like to begin, though, by asking you a question
about your testimony yesterday. I would like for you to respond
during your time in regard to clarifying an issue related to
the Mueller Report.
When we met before your confirmation--you and I met-- I
told you I would like to see the Mueller Report released to the
public as expeditiously as possible and to the fullest extent
possible as allowed by law. Will you, as I hope, release the
redacted version of the actual report Special Counsel Mueller
submitted to you, or did you intend to indicate in your
testimony comments yesterday that you will only provide a
report of your own findings that are derived from the Mueller
Report?
Now, the focus of this hearing, President's fiscal year
2020 budget request. The Department's fiscal year 2020 request
is not based off of the Department's fiscal year 2019
appropriation and therefore does not contemplate the increases
provided or the government-wide 1.9 percent increase included
for Federal employees.
Because the baseline of the fiscal year 2020 request is
below the Department's current appropriation, I encourage you
to take time today to discuss any needs that may not be
adequately represented in the President's budget proposal that
is before us.
In particular, I hope you will discuss the Department's
resource needs as they relate to the FIRST STEP Act. I am an
original cosponsor of that legislation, and I am concerned to
learn that the fiscal year 2020 request only includes $14
million in additional funds for the implementation of this
legislation. That figure is far short of the $75 million that
was authorized by Congress.
I do note several program increases for the Department of
Justice included in the administration's request this year.
These increases reflect the administration's priorities, which
include strengthening our national security, combating violent
crime, cybercrime, drug trafficking, and opioid epidemic.
The request also includes enhancement for immigration
enforcement, another administration priority, under the
Executive Office of Immigration Review, EOIR, and the
Environment and Natural Resources Division. Fiscal year 2020
request seeks $670 million for immigration-related enforcement
activities and border security efforts, including 100
additional immigration judge teams and 10 new positions at the
Environment and Natural Resources Division's Land Acquisition
Section.
While I understand the importance of those increases, I am
discouraged and concerned to learn that the request does not
include technology enhancements or improvements for EOIR.
Our fiscal year 2019 provisions allowed for $25 million for
technology improvements to transform EOIR's paper system to an
electronic case management system. That electronic management
system, though incredibly important, was only forward-looking.
So the $25 million that we put in place for the Department of
Justice did not include the paper files associated with the
861,513 cases that are backlogged at EOIR Courts & Appeals
System (ECAS).
To encourage this practice, our fiscal year 2019 report
language directed the Department to develop a plan for folding
existing cases into the electronic case management system.
I hope to learn more about both the status of implementing
that plan as well as the Department's intentions to incorporate
the backlog into this system, and if there are additional needs
associated with full implementation of electronic records, let
us discuss those today, Mr. Attorney General.
The Department's fiscal year 2020 request reflects its
broad and multifaceted mission of protecting and defending the
laws of the United States. Members of the DOJ law enforcement
community include the FBI, the DEA, the ATF, U.S. Marshals, and
the Bureau of Prisons, and the people who work there put their
lives on the line every day to keep our Country and communities
safe.
The Department's mission, and especially its law
enforcement focus, is central to American safety and stability.
It imperative that Congress ensures the Department is
adequately equipped to effect its mission, and I look forward
to working with you in that endeavor.
I also look forward to learning more of the Department's
request for resources dedicated to the Law Enforcement Mental
Wellness Initiative, which includes peer mentoring, mental
health checks, and suicide prevention.
Unfortunately, a number of indicators now show that for the
third straight year, police suicide outnumbered lives lost in
the line of duty.
Much like our veterans and active-duty servicemembers, law
enforcement officers need access to comprehensive programs that
address mental wellness, something many jurisdictions struggle
to provide the necessary resources.
I will soon turn to Senator Shaheen, but I want to thank
you, Attorney General Barr, for your attention and
acknowledgement of the subcommittee's questions for the record
from our fiscal year 2019 budget hearing a year ago. As you
know, the Department's responses to these questions were 8
months late, making it impossible for our subcommittee to
consider the Department's responses as we crafted our fiscal
year 2019 bill.
I want to note that after I brought this to your attention,
we received DOJ's responses in short order, so I thank you for
that. It is my hope that under your leadership, the Department
will continue to respond expeditiously to this year's questions
for the record, and one of the things I remember from the
conversation we had before your confirmation was your
commitment to work closely with Congress and this subcommittee
in particular to have an open dialogue and a transparent
conversation. And your answer to those questions on the record
will be, and continue to be, appreciated.
I would add an additional thank-you, which is thank you for
your presence here today. This testimony is important.
And I now recognize the Ranking Member, Senator Shaheen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JEANNE SHAHEEN
Senator Shaheen. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Attorney General Barr. Thank you for
appearing before this subcommittee.
I share the Chairman's view that we want to try and focus
mostly on your budget, but I have to begin with two concerns
that I have about actions that you and the Justice Department
have taken.
First, I saw your testimony yesterday, and I still do have
questions on the Special Counsel's report, as I believe this
report has serious national security implications.
We know that Russia interfered in our election. We know
that the Special Counsel has brought nearly 200 charges against
34 individuals and three companies, including six former Trump
officials and 26 Russian nationals.
I am concerned by recent media reports that those working
on the Special Counsel's team believe your summary to Congress
glossed over the severity of the damaging actions of those in
the White House, including the President. The American people
should be allowed to see the report in its entirety so they can
make their own judgments about its content.
I am also troubled by the Department's recent decision to
support a district court decision that would completely
invalidate the Affordable Care Act. I have questions for you as
to why this decision was made. This recent action by the
Department will put millions of Americans, including 118,000
Granite Staters, at risk of being unable to afford or simply
not have access to their current healthcare coverage. The loss
of protections for preexisting conditions and soaring
prescription drug costs for seniors will affect thousands.
And this includes vulnerable Americans like a young boy
named Seth from Northfield, New Hampshire. He lives with
hemophilia. It is a disease that requires hundreds of thousands
of dollars of medication and treatment costs every month.
Before the Affordable Care Act, Seth's father would have to
change jobs because Seth's medical costs were constantly
running up against the family's annual limits on the dollar
value of insurance coverage.
Children like Seth, those living with preexisting
conditions, stand to lose the most if the Affordable Care Act
is wiped out. They could be denied insurance coverage because
of their medical condition, and insurers would be able to jack
up costs and cut off coverage after medical bills reach an
arbitrary threshold.
I believe we need to work together, the Republicans and
Democrats, to improve the healthcare law, not unravel it, and I
hope that we will be able to do that in the coming months and
years.
I do acknowledge, as I said, that you are here today in
your role as Attorney General to explain the Department's
fiscal year 2020 budget request. The complex and often
difficult work of the Department is vast, ranging from national
security investigations to operating a national prison system,
to management of billions in grants to State and local
entities.
Yet in fiscal year 2020, the Department has requested
nearly 2 percent less funding for its missions than the level
provided in the omnibus we passed last month.
The Bureau of Prisons is a large part of this reduction, a
cut of $188 million below what we just enacted in fiscal year
2019.
It is disconcerting that the Department would slash the
budget for BOP in light of our direction in Congress to
continue hiring, particularly so as not to rely on
augmentation, which is the dangerous practice of using
administrative staff, like teachers and counselors, as
correctional officers, and cutting programming for inmates at
facilities across the Country, including Federal Correctional
Institution, Berlin (FCI Berlin) in my home State of New
Hampshire.
It is also troubling that the Department seems to have
forgotten about meeting the requirements for prisoner reentry
as part of the recently passed FIRST STEP Act. There is only
$14 million requested, with little detail as to how you plan to
use that money, when $75 million has been authorized for this
effort.
I was also surprised about drastic reductions and
eliminations proposed for Justice Department grant programs,
including those to help our communities fight opioids. I am
deeply concerned that this budget request cuts nearly $100
million in funding that we just provided for Justice grant
programs to help communities respond to the opioid crisis, with
a balance of enforcement, treatment, and prevention programs.
I am interested to hear your reasons why your fiscal year
2020 budget dramatically reduces this critical funding and even
eliminates key programs like COPS anti-heroin task forces,
which we provided $32 million to cover, and mentoring programs
for youth who are directly affected by the toll opioids have
had on their families and communities. We funded that at $15
million. We see this very dramatically in New Hampshire where,
as I think we discussed previously, we have the third highest
overdose death rate in the Country.
I understand that there is more demand on these programs
than we even in Congress have appropriated. So what I do not
understand is why we are talking about eliminating them.
In closing, I want to echo the appreciation that was
expressed by Chairman Moran for the 112,000 career employees at
the Department of Justice. They worked very hard to keep
Americans safe from crime and terrorism, and especially during
the Government shutdown, they worked without any guarantee that
they would be paid. So I know that I speak for everybody on
this subcommittee in thanking them for their service.
I look forward to your testimony today, Mr. Attorney
General.
Senator Moran. Before we turn to the Attorney General for
his remarks, I would recognize the Vice Chairman of the full
committee, Senator Leahy, for any comments or opening statement
he would like to make.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY
Senator Leahy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with both you and Senator Shaheen and the 112,000
who kept on working during the shutdown that went on for 35
days. I remember very well the day it ended when four of us met
in my office--Senator Shelby, myself, Congresswoman Lowey, and
Congresswoman Granger--and we made an agreement on the
appropriations, and fortunately, the Republicans and Democrats
joined with us on it and passed. The President vetoed the first
one because it gave him only $1.6 billion for the wall. The
agreement that we agreed to give $1.3 billion. But he accepted
that, and I thought it was about time we got back to work.
Now, there are a lot of pressing issues facing the Justice
Department--immigration enforcement, combatting opioids,
violent crime, protecting voting rights--and a lot of these are
going to be discussed this morning. There will be another
oversight hearing.
I first want to express my appreciation to Robert Mueller
and his team for their service to our Country, determining
exactly what happened during an unprecedented attack on our
democracy. We already know from their investigation, 37
indictments. They uncovered serious misconduct, reaching some
of the highest levels, even if the President's involvement did
not amount to a provable crime, and thankfully so.
The American people and their Representatives in Congress
now expect to see the Special Counsel's work, and it is my hope
that you are still committed to the greatest possible degree of
transparency.
As you know, classified material can be shared with
Congress, and it is on a constant basis.
But there is also precedence for sharing grand jury
information as well, especially in high-profile investigations
of keen public interest, and ongoing investigations, another
reason to redact certain information, like all things in life,
eventually end. One way or another, the vast majority of the
Special Counsel's report will ultimately become public, and I
think attempts to hide swaths of the report from public
scrutiny along the way will only fuel suspicions that have been
raised by many that the Justice Department, which represents
the United States, is playing the role of President Trump's
defense team.
For the integrity of the Department, I know you well enough
to know that you agree this is a result that must be avoided.
Your imprint on the course of justice and the rule of law in
these moments are going to be scrutinized long after both you
and I are gone from public service. The only way out, in my
view, is transparency.
You do have the discretion to release the full report to
Congress. Nothing in the letter of the law stands in your way.
So I hope in the coming weeks, you will work in good faith with
the Congress to accomplish that.
Mr. Chairman, I will have a number of questions on the
budget, and I appreciate the courtesy of being recognized.
Senator Moran. You are welcome, Mr. Vice Chairman.
Attorney General Barr, we are ready for your testimony.
Thank you for joining us and anxious to hear what you have to
say.
STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM BARR, ATTORNEY GENERAL, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
ACCOMPANIED BY LEE LOFTHUS, ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR
ADMINISTRATION
Attorney General Barr. Thank you, Chairman Moran. Thank
you, Chairman Moran and Ranking Member Shaheen and Vice Chair
Leahy and Members of the subcommittee.
I am pleased to be here today to present the President's
fiscal year 2020 budget for the Department of Justice. I am
joined here today by the Department's Chief Financial Officer,
Assistant Attorney General for Administration Lee Lofthus. We
are looking forward to discussing how our requested
appropriations will help protect the safety and the rights of
your constituents.
Rather than read a statement to you, let me just say that I
am here to talk about the Department's $29.2 billion fiscal
year 2020 budget request. I believe the budget request supports
our priorities. We are seeking $128 million of increases for
our violent crime prevention work. We are seeking $291 million
enhancements for our drug abuse and opioid efforts. We have
$131 million for our national security and cybercrime efforts,
and I am seeking an additional $72 million for our immigration
work.
I am proud of the Department's accomplishments and our
workforce of more than 112,000 men and women, and I am looking
forward to your support for the resources we need for their
important work.
With that, I am happy to answer any questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. William P. Barr
Good morning, Chairman Moran, Ranking Member Shaheen, and other
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am honored to appear
before you today to present the President's fiscal year 2020 budget for
the Department of Justice. I am joined here by the Department's Chief
Financial Officer: Assistant Attorney General for Administration Lee
Lofthus. Let me start by thanking you for your strong support of the
Department in the recently enacted Fiscal Year 2019 Omnibus
Appropriations Act.
President Trump's fiscal year 2020 budget proposal totals $29.2
billion for the Department of Justice to support Federal law
enforcement and the public safety priorities of our State, local, and
Tribal law enforcement partners. The request reflects a commitment to
the Department's priorities of reducing violent crime, enforcing the
Nation's immigration laws, combating the opioid epidemic, and
addressing national security threats to this great Nation.
First, the Department of Justice is working hard every day to
combat violent crime. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) statistics
show that, in 2015 and 2016, the United States experienced the largest
increases in violent crime in a quarter-century.\1\ The administration
has prioritized reversing that trend. In 2017 and 2018, the Department
revitalized Federal efforts to fight violent crime, including the
launch of the enhanced Project Safe Neighborhoods (PSN) initiative,
which brings together all levels of law enforcement and the communities
they serve to develop effective, locally based strategies to reduce
violent crime. In fiscal year 2018, the Department prosecuted the
greatest number of violent criminals in at least 25 years, thanks to
the necessary resources provided by this Committee and Congress. Since
2016, violent crime has decreased.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Dep't of Justice, Fed. Bureau of Investigations, Crime in
the United States, 2016: Table 1 & n.6, https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-
the-u.s/2016/crime-in-the-u.s.-2016/tables/table-1; for data years
prior to 1995, see U.S. Dep't of Justice, Fed. Bureau of Investigation,
UCR Data Tool, https://www.ucrdatatool.gov/index.cfm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Of course, the Department's work is not done--crime is still far
too high, especially in the most vulnerable neighborhoods. We need to
build on our efforts in 2019 and beyond. To that end, the fiscal year
2020 budget allocates an additional $137.9 million to reduce violent
crime and combat transnational criminal organizations (TCOs). These
resources will enable the Department to dismantle the worst criminal
organizations and target the most violent offenders.
Second, the Department remains committed to enforcing and improving
our immigration laws. As I've stated before, in order to ensure that
our immigration system works properly, we must secure our Nation's
borders, and we must ensure that our laws allow us to process, hold,
and remove those who violate our immigration laws. Through the fiscal
year 2020 President's budget, the Department will continue improving
its ability to enforce our immigration laws and combat illegal
immigration by expanding court capacity for immigration hearings,
improving efficiency in the immigration process, and removing
impediments to the timely administration of justice.
Specifically, the budget requests an additional $72.1 million to
enhance border security and immigration enforcement. To maintain the
efficacy and efficiency of immigration enforcement and adjudication
programs, the Department requests $71.1 million for 100 new immigration
judges and support staff for the Executive Office for Immigration
Review (EOIR). This budget request supports the Department, along with
our partners at the Department of Homeland Security, in our efforts to
fix our immigration system.
Third, the Department is fighting hard against the scourge of
illegal drugs, and in particular the opioid crisis. The United States
is in the midst of the deadliest drug epidemic in American history.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more
than 70,200 Americans died from drug overdoses in 2017, a 10 percent
increase from the previous year.\2\ The President declared a National
Public Health Emergency in October 2017, and the Department remains
committed to doing its part to protect the American people from the
impact of drugs and drug-related crimes nationwide. In 2018, the
Department charged 7,000 defendants with offenses involving fentanyl,
heroin, or opioids; that is a Department record, and we are on track to
break it this year. But despite these record efforts, overdose deaths
remain far too high.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Hedegaard H. Drug Overdose Deaths in the United States, 1999-
2017. NCHS Data Brief, no 329. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for
Health Statistics. 2019. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
databriefs/db329_tables-508.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Department must redouble its efforts to combat this crisis. The
budget includes $295 million to enable the Department to target the
organizations responsible for the opioid epidemic and drug-related
violence in our communities. It also bolsters the capacity of
Department agents to deny revenues to drug traffickers using the best
cyber capabilities and technologies, enabling the Department to keep
pace with these nefarious actors.
Fourth, the Department is pursuing several programs--both old and
new--to protect national security. These include protecting American
elections from foreign interference, combating and preventing cyber
attacks, and fighting terrorism both at home and abroad. The budget
dedicates $132 million in program enhancements to address constantly
evolving national security threats, including the areas of cyber,
counterterrorism, and counterintelligence.
Our DOJ team, along with our Federal, State, local, and Tribal
partners, has been working diligently to address these issues each and
every day. The budget request supports many other key programs, for
example, by prioritizing public safety at the State, local, and Tribal
levels through approximately $4.3 billion in discretionary and
mandatory funding and by securing funds to help the victims of crime.
In line with the President's priorities and Congress's shared
commitment to protecting the public fisc, our proposal also includes
restructuring initiatives that are designed to reduce both bureaucracy
and costs to the American taxpayer.
Let me say clearly, Mr. Chairman, you and this Committee have been
strongly supportive. We are determined to use every dollar you have
provided to us to achieve the maximum benefit in our efforts to fight
crime and protect the American people. I would now to like to tell you
more about how our budget proposal furthers the priorities that I have
just outlined.
combating violent crime
Protecting the American people from violent crime is a top priority
for the Department of Justice. In 2015 and 2016, violent crime
increased by nearly 7 percent. Robberies, assaults, and rapes all
increased, and murder increased by a shocking 20 percent.
As a result of the Department's efforts, violent crime has
decreased nationwide since 2016.\3\ A key part of this success has been
the revitalization of Project Safe Neighborhoods that I mentioned
above. We are requesting a total of $100 million for this important
program. Under this program, grants are awarded to local law
enforcement agencies, outreach and prevention service providers, and
researchers to support activities implementing local PSN anti-violence
strategies across the country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Dep't of Justice, Fed. Bureau of Investigation, Crime in
the United States, 2016: Table 1 & n.6, https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-
the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-2017/topic-pages/violent-crime
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fiscal year 2020 budget requests a total of $137.9 million in
program enhancements to reduce violent crime and combat TCOs. This
includes funding for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives (ATF) National Integrated Ballistic Information Network
(NIBIN). The funds will allow ATF to expand the National Correlation
and Tracing Center (NNCTC) services to an additional five sites in
fiscal year 2020, support additional training, increase the capacity of
ballistic imaging and correlation hardware and software, and provide
necessary infrastructure for further expansion of services to NIBIN
sites. This will bring NIBIN to approximately 200 sites by the end of
fiscal year 2020. The Department is also requesting $4.2 million to
enable the FBI to increase their capacity to perform Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) background checks for firearms
purchases.
To ensure this continued decrease in crime, the Department is
requesting $5.8 million to enhance violent crime and firearms
prosecutions by United States Attorneys' Offices. This request will
give our United States Attorneys the support they need to prosecute
complex criminal cases.
The request also provides $18.2 million for the FBI to counter the
ever-evolving threat posed by TCOs. This enhancement will support the
FBI's Joint Criminal Opioid Darknet Enforcement (J-CODE) initiative to
disrupt and dismantle the Darknet illicit marketplaces facilitating the
distribution of fentanyl and other opioids. This critical initiative
brings together agents, analysts, Federal, State, local, and Tribal law
enforcement with expertise in drugs, gangs, and healthcare fraud from
across the U.S. Government to target the trafficking of fentanyl and
other opioids on the Darknet.
Understanding the need to address violent crime at our borders with
our State and local partners, the Department is requesting $6 million
for a new grant program in the Office of Justice Programs (OJP): the
Southwest Border Rural Law Enforcement Violent Crime Reduction
Initiative. This program will empower rural law enforcement agencies by
providing training, technical assistance, and resources to interdict
drug and human traffickers who are exploiting the corridors into our
country.
enforcing immigration laws
Enforcement of the Nation's immigration laws also remains a vital
mission of the Department. As I have said many times, the United States
has some of the world's most liberal and expansive immigration laws,
and we aim to admit visitors and immigrants equitably from all around
the globe. But the integrity and fairness of our immigration system
depends on robust enforcement against those who flout or circumvent our
laws. To safeguard our borders and ensure due process, the Department
is requesting an additional $72.1 million for immigration enforcement.
This request includes funding for 100 new immigration judges, which
will bring EOIR's authorized immigration judge level to 634 by the end
of fiscal year 2020--a 31 percent increase since fiscal year 2018. The
Department believes that these new immigration judges are necessary to
provide some relief from a critical backlog in the immigration courts.
At the end of the first quarter of fiscal year 2019, there were over
820,000 cases pending in immigration courts nationwide. That caseload
is by far the largest-ever pending caseload before the Department,
marking the 12th consecutive year of increased backlogs. The 100 new
immigration judges will help us to reverse that trend--but it is
important to note that the continued influx of cases originating from
the border constrains our ability to manage the backlog of cases, and
other reforms are necessary.
The request also includes an increase of roughly $1 million for the
Department's Environment and Natural Resources Division (ENRD) to
support their Land Acquisition Section. The President has prioritized
efforts to build and maintain physical barriers at the Southern Border.
The Land Acquisition Section is responsible for assisting DHS and other
Federal partners in acquiring real property for border security
projects. These funds will allow ENRD to commit 6 more attorneys to
these efforts.
combating the opioid epidemic
Overdose deaths--and in particular, deaths from opioid overdoses--
remain a public health crisis, and trafficking of illegal drugs is
closely tied to the ongoing problems of violent crime and border
security. The Department of Justice has been working hard to fight drug
trafficking and diversion, but much, much more remains to be done. That
is why the Department is requesting an additional $295 million to
combat the opioid crisis and bolster drug enforcement efforts.
The Department's approach to combating the opioid epidemic includes
a request for $11.1 million to fund five new heroin enforcement groups
that will be deployed to Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) Field
Divisions that have identified heroin as the first- or second-greatest
threat to their area. These resources will also allow for more agents
at DEA Field Divisions to target the Mexican TCOs that pose the
greatest drug threat to the United States. An additional $1.65 million
will go to support DEA's flagship Sensitive Investigative Unit (SIU)
Program to combat highly sophisticated TCOs known for supplying illicit
substances to distributors and users in the United States. The
Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces (OCDETF) Program has
requested $2 million in operational funds to support the ongoing and
rapidly expanding National Opioid Initiative. This will support the
hundreds of Federal agents and prosecutors who are handling the
expansion of opioid investigations.
Further, DEA manages or participates in Translation and
Transcription Support Services, known as Judicial Wire Intercept
Programs (JWIP), in approximately 20 countries. An additional $10
million in funding will go to support the consolidation of nine core
legacy judicial wire intercept systems into one new judicial wire
intercept platform in Colombia. In addition, DEA requests $11.7 million
to invest in its cyber investigation capabilities. With these funds,
DEA intends to place technical specialists in each of DEA's 23 field
offices to assist agents in cyber-specific cases.
Finally, the President's budget proposes to permanently transfer
management of the $254 million High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas
(HIDTA) Program from the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)
to DEA to facilitate stronger coordination with other drug enforcement
assets. Transferring the HIDTA grants to DEA will enable the agency to
focus on combating drug trafficking in areas where the threat is the
greatest and where there is a coordinated law enforcement presence.
national security
National Security remains among the Department's top priorities.
Threats are constantly evolving, requiring additional investments to
mitigate these threats. Therefore, the Department's fiscal year 2020
budget includes a request of $132 million in program enhancements
focused on cyber, counterterrorism, and counterintelligence. It also
reflects an increased role for the U.S. Marshals Service (USMS) in
dignitary protection to promote government-wide efficiency.
Election security is a key issue for the Department. Working
together with our partners in the Federal Government, I will build on
the work already done by the Department in this area and ensure that
the full might of our resources are brought to bear against foreign
persons who unlawfully interfere in our elections. I believe that our
country must respond to any foreign interference with the strongest
measures, and we must work with partners at the State level to ensure
that our election infrastructure is completely protected.
Similarly, we must protect Americans against cyber attacks, whether
foreign or domestic. The Department requests an additional $70.5
million to enhance the FBI's cyber information- sharing abilities and
cyber tools and capabilities. The FBI's multi-pronged cyber enterprise
strategy uses predictive means and investigative partnerships to impose
consequences against cyber adversaries who target U.S. interests.
Additionally, to protect high-value assets and information in the
Department's data centers, DOJ must improve security monitoring at all
levels. As such, the Department requests $2 million to extend its
detection and response capabilities beyond the on-premises network to
the places where our data resides.
In our efforts to combat terrorism, the Department is requesting
$16.6 million for the National Vetting Center (NVC). This request will
provide for the vetting of people seeking to enter or remain within the
United States. The NVC will increase the government's ability to
identify terrorists, criminals, and other nefarious actors. These
resources will help enable the NVC to provide timely information
regarding the risk an individual poses. Furthermore, the Department
requests $17.1 million to enhance the FBI's capability to respond to
threats posed by chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear devices
found within the United States and its territories.
In addition, the Department is requesting $18.3 million for the FBI
to address counterintelligence threats, particularly those from hostile
foreign intelligence agencies and other non-state and criminal
adversaries employing advanced cyber-based attacks. These resources
will allow the Department to combat these growing and serious threats
by bolstering cyber investigative and collaborative capabilities and
capacities. The request will also assist the FBI in providing support
to the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS),
which reviews foreign acquisitions of domestic entities that might
affect national security. Additionally, the Department is requesting $5
million to support efforts of the National Security Division (NSD) to
prevent foreign intelligence services from accessing sensitive
information and technology. The request will support NSD's review,
mitigation, and monitoring of foreign investments in the United States
for national security risks including filings on behalf of CFIUS. The
Department also requests $1.4 million to support NSD's growing mission
of protecting national assets against cyber threats, including
thwarting efforts by terrorists and nation states to infiltrate our
critical infrastructure and combating economic espionage.
In an effort to improve services and to save taxpayer money in the
long run, the Department is requesting $1 million for the Protective
Detail Consolidation evaluation. The USMS will evaluate protection
requirements for civilian Cabinet and sub-Cabinet level officials in
support of the President's 2018 Government Reform and Reorganization
Plan. The USMS will coordinate with executive branch agencies to assess
existing agency protective plans, develop standards and best practices
for protective detail staffing and evaluation, and prepare a range of
policy options to promote standardization and effective monitoring,
assessment, and response to potential threats.
state, local, and tribal assistance
The Department supports its partners in State, local, and Tribal
law enforcement, whose actions are crucial in the fight against violent
crime and the opioid epidemic. The fiscal year 2020 budget continues
that commitment to State, local, and Tribal public safety officials by
investing approximately $4.3 billion in discretionary and mandatory
funding in programs to assist them. This includes $405.2 million in
total funding for the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant
Program (Byrne JAG). This funding is the primary source of flexible
funding for State, local, and Tribal jurisdictions across all
components of the criminal justice system. Byrne JAG funding is used to
address critical gaps in their criminal justice systems in order to
increase public safety and prevent crime. In 2020, Byrne JAG will also
fund other important officer safety programs serving State, local, and
Tribal law enforcement, including $22.5 million for the Bulletproof
Vest Program, $22.5 million for the Body Worn Cameras Program, $3.6
million for the National Missing and Unidentified Persons System
(NamUs), and $15 million for the Valor Initiative. Two additional set-
asides include $5 million for the Public Safety Partnership (PSP)
Program, which leverages DOJ resources to reduce violence in cities
with the highest violent crime rates, and $6 million for the Southwest
Border Law Enforcement Violent Crime Initiative, which I discussed
previously. Finally, our budget request includes $330 million for
programs authorized by the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act of
2016.
In December, Congress passed and the President signed the First
Step Act of 2018, which seeks to reduce recidivism, refine sentencing
laws, and eliminate disproportionate penalties for certain crimes. I
intend to robustly fund and diligently implement this bill at the
Department. The Act directs the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) to
evaluate Second Chance Act programs no later than 5 years after its
enactment. Therefore, the fiscal year 2020 budget requests $1.5 million
for NIJ to support the first phase of this evaluation, which will focus
on identifying appropriate outcome measures for Second Chance Act
programs. In addition, related to the First Step Act, the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (BOP) is requesting $14 million to incentivize the
development of innovative pilot projects in reentry and recidivism-
reduction approaches. BOP is also requesting $1 million to expand the
availability of medication-assisted treatment for inmates with opioid
abuse disorders and to enable more inmates to get treatment.
We can never forget that crime statistics represent crime victims
whose lives have been changed by criminal acts. In recognition of
National Crime Victims' Rights Week, the Department renews its
commitment to strive for justice and to connect these survivors with
vital services as they heal. The President's budget includes $2.3
billion from the Crime Victims Fund to assist victims and survivors of
crime, to build capacity to enhance response to crime victims' needs,
and to increase offender accountability. Of this total, $115 million
will be devoted to improving services and justice for Tribal victims of
crime, as the violent crime rate in Indian Country remains
extraordinarily high.
In addition, the budget includes $77 million in discretionary
funding for grants to support human trafficking victims and those
providing direct services for survivors and improving the community
response to victims through outreach, training, and technical
assistance.
restructuring initiatives
The administration is committed to establishing a leaner, more
productive Federal Government that reduces both bureaucracy and costs
to the American taxpayer. Since 2017, the Department of Justice has
undertaken efforts to refocus resources and return our efforts to our
core mission. To support the President's executive order on
reorganizing the executive branch, the Department of Justice has begun
taking steps to streamline and improve its good stewardship of
taxpayers' dollars. As part of the fiscal year 2020 President's budget,
the Department is proposing a number of initiatives to achieve savings,
reduce the size of government, and maximize agency performance.
Highlights of the restructuring initiatives include:
--The fiscal year 2020 budget proposes legislation that will move the
responsibilities related to alcohol and tobacco enforcement
from ATF to the Department of Treasury's Alcohol and Tobacco
Tax and Trade Bureau. ATF will retain its current enforcement
responsibilities for firearms and explosives. The transfer of
the alcohol and tobacco authorities will allow ATF to devote
additional resources to its primary mission of combating
violent crime through initiatives such as its highly effective
NIBIN and Crime Gun Intelligence Centers.
--The Department proposes to improve our service to our State, local,
and Tribal partners and our grant programs in a variety of
ways. The Department is developing one grants- management
system to streamline and improve the grants process. The
request also consolidates the Office of Community Oriented
Policing Services (COPS) within OJP. The budget also proposes
to transfer activities of the National Institute of Corrections
from the BOP to OJP. This will help to consolidate the
Department's State and local corrections research and
evaluation programs and better align efforts to assist State,
local, and Tribal corrections professionals with OJP grant
programs.
--The budget also proposes to transfer the functions of the Community
Relations Service to the Civil Rights Division, allowing to the
Department to perform its community mediation work in a more
centralized manner and at a greater savings to the taxpayer.
--As previously noted, the budget proposes to transfer the HIDTA
grant program from ONDCP to DEA. This change will eliminate
redundancies within Federal organizations by moving this
program, which supports States and communities fighting the
scourge of illegal drugs, into the same agency leading the
enforcement efforts in those communities.
Chairman Moran and Ranking Member Shaheen, it is my pleasure to
highlight our efforts to be good stewards of the resources and
authorities bestowed on us as we strengthen the Department's ability to
ensure safety, equality, and justice for all Americans. As Attorney
General, I am committed to making the Department of Justice run as
efficiently and effectively as possible, without adding to the burden
on the American taxpayer. I thank you for your past support of the
Department's financial needs, and for the opportunity to present our
fiscal year 2020 budget request. I look forward to working with you
through the upcoming fiscal year to ensure that the Department of
Justice remains on solid financial footing and can accomplish its
multiple and varied missions effectively. I look forward to your
questions. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Attorney General, thank you for your brief
statement, and thanks for the opportunity to ask you questions.
I would just reiterate and ask for an answer to the
question I raised----
Attorney General Barr. Sure.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Senator Moran [continuing]. In my opening statement. I was
uncertain as to what you were conveying yesterday during your
House testimony about whether you will provide a report of the
report or a redacted version of the actual Mueller Report.
Attorney General Barr. Yes. It is my intention to provide
the latter as I said in my confirmation hearing.
The regulation under which we are operating did not
contemplate and specifically was meant to avoid these public
reports, but I feel I have the discretion in these
circumstances to make the report public as long as it is
consistent with the law. And as I said at my hearing, that I
was going to try to be as transparent as possible, and that is
what I have been working toward.
There are four areas. I intend to release the report with
redactions made in four areas, and they were specified in my
March 29 letter.
The first area is Rule 6(e) material because--and I am
talking here, by the way, about a report that would be
available to the public generally, and then I will talk a
little bit about the report available to committees of
Congress.
The report I am working on now, I would like to make
available with redactions that would enable me to make it
public generally, and there are four categories; the grand jury
material, which by law must be retained within the Department
absent very specific circumstances which I do not think exist
here.
The second category is any material identified by the
intelligence community that would put at risk intelligence
sources and methods.
The third category is information that would impair
existing prosecutions and investigations that are going forward
right now, either by affecting the ability of the Department to
pursue them as effectively as we would like or being unfair to
the individuals who are actually parties to that prosecution.
You will recognize that Special Counsel Mueller did spin
off a number of cases which continue and are being handled in
the Department, and so we have to make sure that nothing in the
report impinges on those ongoing cases.
And the final category is information that implicates the
privacy or reputational interests of peripheral third parties
who were not charged.
Now, the people who are making these redactions and
implementing these four categories are the Department lawyers
working with the Special Counsel Office lawyers, and those are
the people involved in making the redactions.
So, as I mentioned yesterday, we plan to identify very
specifically which redactions relate to which category and try
to explain why that redaction was made.
I also said yesterday that when it comes to Congress, once
I get this done and the public--everyone has the report, I am
willing to work with the committees. The regulation requires
that--it does not require, but it has my notification go to the
Judiciary Committees, and I intend to take up with the House
and the Senate Judiciary Committees, the Chair and the Ranking
Members of each, what other areas they feel they have a need to
have access to the information and see if I can work to
accommodate that.
As has been correctly said here, the fact that information
is classified does not mean that Congress cannot see it. So I
am willing to work on some of these categories.
The category I think is the most inflexible under the law
right now is the grand jury material, but even there, once the
redactions are completed, I intend to sort of read the report
and see if there are areas where it affects the intelligibility
or really has an impact on the report, and I am willing to work
with the Judiciary Committees to see if there is a work-around
that could address any concerns or needs that they have.
Senator Moran. General, under the assumption that your
answer was of interest to my colleagues, I am going to continue
with another question beyond my time.
SANCTUARY CITIES
I want to talk about grant funding that has been delayed
due to litigation surrounding sanctuary cities. So, in the
past, the Department has tried to enforce Federal immigration
law by imposing special conditions or bonus points on
recipients of Federal grant funding. These conditions restrict
grant funding, the jurisdictions that certify they are in
compliance with Federal law, stating that they are not
sanctuary cities or States.
That is not something that I am complaining about in this
question. What I am concerned about is the money that has been
held up as a result of that litigation because of pending
litigation in regard to Byrne JAG grant funds. We have had
success in that occurring, but unfortunately, that has not been
the case in the fiscal year 2018 COPS hiring grants.
These solicitations were pulled, and applicants are still
unable to apply for COPS hiring grants going back to fiscal
year 2018 awards.
Have you reviewed the Department's policies? Is there a
plan to figure out how we can provide those necessary resources
to local law enforcement to retain and hire law enforcement
officers?
Attorney General Barr. Yes. I think this--the problem is
really a function of this phenomenon of nationwide injunctions
that are imposed by district court judges, and this is actually
a fairly recent phenomenon.
The old practice in law was that if a district court judge
issued a decision, the judge could redress the grievances of
the parties before the court, but now courts are granting
nationwide injunctions as a result. If a district court in
California, which is I think the court that may have been
involved here, grants an injunction, they enjoin the grant
program nationwide.
Now, one of the reasons we were able to--and Lee can
correct me if I am wrong about this, but one of the reasons we
were able to get out the Byrne JAG grants was that there had
been a district court in Chicago that had enjoined it
nationwide.
We went to the Seventh Circuit. They required the court to
reduce its injunction just to its jurisdiction, and when that
happened, we were able to get out of the Byrne JAG grants.
What has happened with the COPS grants is that it is
enjoined by a district--several district court judges. We are
arguing, if not today, within the next few days, in the Seventh
and Ninth Circuit to try to have that addressed so we can get
those grants out.
But, frankly, I think we need to come to grips with this
issue of nationwide injunctions because I think the way the
system should do these issues should percolate up through
various circuit courts and so forth up to the Supreme Court,
and the idea that one district court judge can kill programs
nationwide is a serious problem.
Senator Moran. Thank you for your answer.
If you are successful in finding a path to see that the
COPS grants are available, please be prepared as a Department
to proceed quickly if and when that occurs, and I do not think
local law enforcement has been able to even submit a grant
application. So it is significantly delayed, and maybe there is
a way that those grant applications--I do not know what the
injunction covers, but maybe there is a way to submit the grant
application, even if you cannot award a grant until you receive
judicial authority to do so.
Attorney General Barr. I will look into that.
Senator Moran. Thank you.
Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me just
echo what Senator Moran was saying about the COPS grants.
Particularly in States like New Hampshire, where we have no
sanctuary cities, it is very onerous for us to be affected by
these rulings.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
I want to go back to your comments about the four reasons
that you intend to redact portions of the Special Counsel's
report. The fourth one was information that would unduly
infringe on the personal privacy and reputational interests of
peripheral third parties. Does that mean that you will redact
information to protect the reputational interests of the
President?
Attorney General Barr. No. I am talking about people in
private life.
Senator Shaheen. Okay.
Attorney General Barr. Not public officeholders.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
News just broke today that you have a special team looking
into why the FBI opened an investigation into Russian
interference in the 2016 elections. I wonder if you can share
with this subcommittee who is on that team, why you felt a need
to form that kind of a team, and what you intend to be the
scope of their investigation.
Attorney General Barr. Yes. As I said in my confirmation
hearing, I am going to be reviewing both the genesis and the
conduct of intelligence activities directed at the Trump
campaign during 2016, and a lot has already been--a lot of this
has already been investigated. And a substantial portion of it
has been investigated and is being investigated by the Office
of Inspector General at the Department.
But one of the things I want to do is pull together all the
information from the various investigations that have gone on,
including on the Hill and in the Department, and see if there
are any remaining questions to be addressed.
Senator Shaheen. And can you share with us why you feel a
need to do that?
Attorney General Barr. Well, for the same reason we are
worried about foreign influence in elections, we want to make
sure that during--I think spying on a political campaign is a
big deal. It is a big deal.
The generation I grew up in, which is the Vietnam War
period, people were all concerned about spying on the anti-war
people and so forth by the Government, and there were a lot of
rules put in place to make sure that there is an adequate basis
before our law enforcement agencies get involved in political
surveillance.
I am not suggesting that those rules were violated, but I
think it is important to look at that. And I am not talking
about the FBI necessarily, but intelligence agencies more
broadly.
Senator Shaheen. So you are not suggesting, though, that
spying occurred?
Attorney General Barr. I do not--well, I guess you could--I
think there was--spying did occur. Yes, I think spying did
occur.
Senator Shaheen. Well, let me----
Attorney General Barr. But the question is whether it was
predicated, adequately predicated, and I am not suggesting it
was not adequately predicated. But I need to explore that. I
think it is my obligation.
Congress is usually very concerned about intelligence
agencies and law enforcement agencies staying in their proper
lane, and I want to make sure that happened. We have a lot of
rules about that, and I want to say that--I have said I am
reviewing this. I have not set up a team yet, but I do have in
mind having some colleagues help me pull all this information
together and let me know whether there are some areas that
should be looked at.
And I also want to make clear this is not launching an
investigation of the FBI. Frankly, to the extent there were any
issues at the FBI, I do not view it as a problem that is
endemic to the FBI. I think there was probably a failure among
a group of leaders there at the upper echelon, and so I do not
like to hear attacks about the FBI because I think the FBI is
an outstanding organization. And I think Chris Wray is a great
partner for me. I am very pleased that he is there as the
Director.
If it becomes necessary to look over some former official's
activities, I expect that I will be relying heavily on Chris
and work closely with him in looking at that information.
But that is what I am doing. I feel I have an obligation to
make sure that Government power is not abused. I mean, I think
that is one of the principal roles of the Attorney General.
Senator Shaheen. I certainly agree. I think we all have an
obligation to ensure that Government power is not abused.
The question I have is, what happens when the executive is
potentially playing that role? And that is where it does not
seem to me there has been adequate oversight.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Attorney General.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT (ACA)
Last June your predecessor, then Attorney General Sessions,
announced that the Department would no longer defend the
Affordable Care Act's preexisting conditions provisions because
they were inseverable from the ACA's individual mandate.
Two weeks ago, your Department went much further, deciding
that it would not defend any provisions of the ACA. This puts
at risk other important provisions in addition to protection
for people with preexisting conditions, such as the Medicaid
expansion, dependent coverage for young adults, up to age 26,
and coverage for preventive services.
Now, the individual mandate is a highly regressive penalty,
and I have long opposed it. And Congress repealed it, but I
disagree strongly with the Department's decision not to defend
the rest of the ACA.
In a letter that I wrote to your predecessor last June and
to you on April 1, I made the point that the individual mandate
can be struck down and severed from the ACA while the remainder
of the law can stay in place, and this is not just my opinion.
In 2010, the Chief Justice Roberts said in the Free Enterprise
Fund case that under the Doctrine of Severability that,
generally speaking, when confronting a constitutional flaw, we
try to limit the solution to the problem severing any
problematic portions while leaving the remainder intact.
In 1990, when you were head of the Department's Office of
Legal Counsel under President George Herbert Walker Bush, you
authored an opinion finding that the President could enforce
the remainder of the statute after an unconstitutional
provision had been severed. I agree wholeheartedly with your
1990 opinion.
What led you to take a different approach?
Attorney General Barr. Thank you, Senator.
When I visited with you before my confirmation, I promised
you that I would personally take a look at this issue, and I
did. And I studied it carefully, and I provided my views
robustly within the deliberative process that was going on
within the executive branch.
As I have said, when the Attorney General is providing
legal advice, I think the first obligation is to provide the
advice that you think is the right legal answer and how you
would decide the case if you were a judge, which is the advice
I gave.
But I also have said that if the other stakeholders in the
executive branch and the people involved, the agencies and so
forth, end up in a different place, as litigator for the United
States, the Attorney General should be able to advance
positions that he believes are defensible and reasonable legal
positions, even if they are not positions that the Attorney
General would adopt if the Attorney General was the judge
deciding the case.
In this situation, the ultimate decision was to support the
position of the States, including Texas, and the decision of
the district court judge. The rationale for that is that it is
a defensible and reasonable legal position, given that that was
the decision of the district court and the position of four
justices the original National Federation of Independent
Businesses (NFIB) case who felt that If the mandate goes, the
rest of the statute goes.
I know there is an additional point there, which is the
fact that Congress did take out the penalty from the mandate,
and therefore, should that act be viewed as essentially
validating the rest of the statute, and those issues were
debated. But at the end of the day, I felt that the position
was a defensible position, and it was the decision of the
executive branch.
Senator Collins. I would just make the final point that
Congress had the opportunity to strike other provisions and
chose not to.
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Collins.
Senator Leahy.
Senator Leahy. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Attorney General, thank you for being here. Over the
decades, we have had a chance to talk at these hearings many
times.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Let me go back to the discussion of your March 24 letter,
and you said the President did not commit obstruction of
justice. You said that before any reference to Congress.
Of course, you have the position that no matter the
evidence, you do not believe a President can be indicted while
in office. You said the mechanism is through the ballot or
Congress, not criminal courts.
Did you have any conversation with the Special Counsel
about why he did not reach a conclusion, one way or the other,
on obstruction?
Attorney General Barr. Yes, I did, and he also has a fuller
explanation of that in the report that I will be making
available, hopefully next week.
Senator Leahy. Did he express any expectation or interest
in leaving the obstruction decision to Congress?
Attorney General Barr. He did not say that to me, no.
Senator Leahy. So he said the obstruction decision should
be up to you?
Attorney General Barr. He did not say that either.
Senator Leahy. All right.
Attorney General Barr. But that is generally how the
Department of Justice works.
Generally, grand juries are to investigate crimes, and a
prosecutor's role at the end of the day is binary. Are there
charges or no charges? Or is this a crime or not a crime?
Senator Leahy. I have had some experience in the field.
Attorney General Barr. I know. I thought you would agree
with me.
But let me say I do not feel--you know, I am looking
forward to explaining my decision that I briefly outlined in
the March 24 letter, but I do not feel I can do it until the
report is out because I think the report contains a lot of the
information that would give meaning and content to the
decision, and I really cannot do it in the absence of getting
it out.
So I am anxious to get it out. That is what I have been
working toward.
Senator Leahy. Well, let me----
Attorney General Barr. I said I would come up to the Hill
as soon as the Hill will have me, which I guess is at the end
of the month to testify about that.
Senator Leahy. Well, to sort of follow up on something
Senator Moran asked in determining what should be redacted,
have you overruled Mr. Mueller or his team on any redaction
question?
Attorney General Barr. No.
Senator Leahy. One way or the other?
Attorney General Barr. No.
Senator Leahy. Okay. Have you discussed any specific
redactions with the White House?
Attorney General Barr. No.
Senator Leahy. I am just curious. Before this came out, you
were at sort of an annual St. Patrick's Day event at the White
House with the Taoiseach, the Prime Minister of Ireland,
exchanging shamrocks and so on. You had a long discussion and
apparently a very--you both seemed very happy in the
discussion, you and the President. Were you discussing the
report?
Attorney General Barr. Was I?
Senator Leahy. Yes.
Attorney General Barr. No. It was actually in front of
several Justices of the Supreme Court----
Senator Leahy. I understand.
Attorney General Barr [continuing]. And other dignitaries.
I was not alone with the President.
Senator Leahy. Okay. You are sure of that?
Attorney General Barr. What?
Senator Leahy. So anybody thinking they heard you say
anything else would be wrong?
Attorney General Barr. Right.
Senator Leahy. Okay. You have indicated you redact grand
jury material, but of course, in both the Watergate and the Ken
Starr investigations, grand jury secrecy was overcome to allow
congressional access. Have you asked the district court to
release grand jury material to Congress?
Attorney General Barr. Did you say--were you citing the
Starr investigation?
Senator Leahy. And the Watergate, yes.
Attorney General Barr. Okay. Well, the Starr investigation
involved the specific statute that----
Senator Leahy. Rule 6(e)? 6(e), rather?
Attorney General Barr. No. The statute setting up the
independent counsel provided for the report going to Congress
and overrode Rule 6(e). So I do not think the Starr situation
is addressed.
Senator Leahy. Well, have you--but, more specifically, have
you asked the district court to release grand jury material?
Attorney General Barr. No.
The law right now is, in the District of Columbia, that the
court can only waive Rule 6(e) for one of the grounds specified
specifically in 6(e). There is no sort of inherent power in the
court to do that, and if someone shows me and makes a
persuasive argument that it is covered, I am willing to listen
to that. But I do not see it.
ATF'S BUDGET
Senator Leahy. And lastly, in a dollar amount, your budget,
we are told from ATF would result in--could lose 370 positions
under the President's budget, even though it shows a slight
increase because of attrition and everything else.
Are you satisfied with ATF, at a time of violent crime and
everything else, losing these positions?
Attorney General Barr. Are you talking about the 377
positions that Mr. Brandon had mentioned?
Senator Leahy. I understood 370, but----
Attorney General Barr. Okay.
Senator Leahy [continuing]. Whichever.
Attorney General Barr. We do not think he will lose those
positions. There is some complicated accounting here that I am
sort of a little mystified by, myself, but as I understand it,
we have been continually investing and increasing the number of
ATF agents. And they were worried about bringing on too many
agents in excess of funds that were going to be appropriated,
and they had sort of--the way they quickly make up for that is
to just take out head count rather than make cuts across the
board.
We do not think that they are, and Mr. Loftus here can give
you more of an explanation, if you would want one, but let me
just say that ATF----
Senator Leahy. My time is up, but I really would like more
because you can either do his 370 or the administration's 46.
Either way, it looks very much like cuts in ATF.
Mr. Lofthus. I can add, Senator, just to say that ATF does
have a 4 percent increase in this budget, and I have spoken
with the ATF chief. I think he is an outstanding guy. I have
worked closely with him over many years, and I do know that
they are concerned about the resources in their budget.
But we have looked at the 4 percent increase. We do not
think the 4 percent increase translates into a loss of hundreds
of positions, but we are willing to work very closely with ATF
and make sure that we can protect certainly their agents.
And, again, any money that ATF receives, I think can be put
to very good use, and we look forward to working with both ATF
and the subcommittee on this one.
Senator Leahy. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator Leahy, thank you.
We have three votes scheduled at 11:45. My intention is to
go until those votes are called and do not anticipate coming
back after that occurs.
Senator Kennedy is recognized.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, I do not intend to talk much about your budget. I
think we both know that Congress will make sure that you are
adequately funded.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
I want to talk a little bit about the Mueller Report. I
think it was inevitable that some people were going to be
disappointed in the result or results that Mr. Mueller reached.
You can only be young once. You can always be immature.
There will be some who were so disappointed in the result that
they are going to attack the process in bad faith. I would
strongly encourage you to ignore that. Just call them like you
see them. Follow the law.
Can we agree that if you turned over the Mueller Report,
without grand jury material redacted, to only Members of
Congress, can we agree that there is a material risk that the
grand jury information would leak?
Attorney General Barr. I think so.
Senator Kennedy. I mean, that has been known to happen.
Attorney General Barr. Yes, occasionally.
Senator Kennedy. Yes, sir.
In a sentence or two, why would that be bad?
Attorney General Barr. Well, because we depend on the
secrecy of the grand jury for our whole system of justice, and
people have to be assured when they go into the grand jury that
these are going to be confidential sessions.
Senator Kennedy. I got it. I got it.
Can we agree that if you turned over an unredacted report
to the Members of the United States Congress that included
material that might impair an existing investigation or
investigations that there is a material risk that that
information might leak?
Attorney General Barr. Yes, Senator, there is a risk.
Senator Kennedy. Why is that bad?
Attorney General Barr. Well, presumably, the reason people
are interested in seeing the report is because they believe it
is important for the criminal justice process to work.
Senator Kennedy. Yes, sir.
Attorney General Barr. Allowing this other information to
come out would frustrate from the prosecutors' standpoint the
system from working in other cases and from the defendant's
standpoint would be unfair--potentially unfair to the
defendant.
Senator Kennedy. Let us talk about reputational risk. If
you turn over a report----
Attorney General Barr. Excuse me, Senator. Could I just add
something?
Senator Kennedy. Certainly.
Attorney General Barr. In some of these cases, there are
gag orders from the court prohibiting this information from
going out.
Senator Kennedy. Okay.
If you would turn over a unredacted report containing
unredacted information that could raise reputational risk, can
we agree there is a material risk that that would leak?
Attorney General Barr. Yes, Senator.
Senator Kennedy. Whether is that bad?
Attorney General Barr. Well, it goes back to the--if
someone has not committed a crime at the end of the day--and in
this context, if they are not public officeholders, they are
private citizens, the Government is not in a position to say
they did anything wrong--it would be unfair, just fundamentally
unfair to put that information out.
Senator Kennedy. Would that be especially the case if
someone thought their communication was confidential?
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Kennedy. Kind of like Dr. Ford, who thought she was
making a confidential communication until some Member of the
Judiciary Committee or their staffs turned her life upside-down
and leaked that?
Attorney General Barr. I am not aware of the circumstances,
myself.
Senator Kennedy. I am not either. I wish I were.
It was probably the greatest injustice I have seen in the
time I have been here.
Let me talk a little bit in the minute I have left, and I
am going to land this plane on time, Mr. Chairman.
I know you are taking a look at the genesis of the
investigations with respect to 2016 election. Just quickly, can
we agree that the FBI is the premier law enforcement agency in
all of human history?
Attorney General Barr. Absolutely. And----
Senator Kennedy. Can we agree that we want FBI agents and
Justice Department members to have thought about the world,
thought about socioeconomic problems, and thought about how to
solve those problems? You do not want a dummy working for the
FBI or the Justice Department, correct?
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Kennedy. But they are not supposed to act on those
political beliefs, are they?
Attorney General Barr. No, Senator.
Senator Kennedy. It appears to me--I am not going to ask
you this question--that there were a handful of men and women
at the FBI and possibly at the Department of Justice who did
act on their political beliefs in 2016. Some of them were for
Donald Trump. If you do not believe me, ask Secretary Clinton.
Some of them were for Secretary Clinton. If you do not
believe me, ask President Trump.
And that is not right, and we need to stop this from ever
happening again.
My plane has landed.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Kennedy.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Attorney General.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Let me return to your March 24 letter to the Judiciary
Committee and along the lines of Senator Leahy. You quote the
special prosecutor--excuse me--Director Mueller with respect to
the allegations of obstruction of justice, and you say while
this report does not conclude that the President committed a
crime, it also does not exonerate him, which raises the
question in my mind. Did the Special Counsel find probable
cause that a crime had been committed?
Attorney General Barr. I am not going to characterize his
report. The report will speak for itself, and that is why I
want to get it out.
Senator Reed. Well, then let me just follow up.
Attorney General Barr. But I think my letter says that he
did not find a crime was committed?
Senator Reed. No. I understand that, but it is I think
important to note that you took his language and said I did not
find a crime, but I cannot exonerate the President. That
suggests that there is a possibility that probable cause
existed for a crime; however, someone, either Director Mueller
or yourself, made a determination that the evidence would not
be beyond--could not convince a jury beyond a reasonable doubt
or that the policy of the Department was not to charge the
President because of the constitutional issue of impeachment.
So this is--again, I am trying to understand why not only
Director Mueller said this, but you repeated it that the
President was not exonerated from the obstruction of justice
allegations.
Attorney General Barr. Well, as I explained yesterday, I
was trying to state just the bottom-line conclusions and not
characterize it or try to summarize the report beyond just
stating its bottom-line conclusions, and I thought the best way
of doing that was taking that language from Mueller's report
itself.
Senator Reed. Well, let me sort of turn the question
around. If there was no evidence or probable cause, then I
would presume he could have said very clearly that there was no
crime committed. That he could, in fact, exonerate the
President, as he seems to have done with the allegations of
conspiracy between the campaign and Russia.
Attorney General Barr. Well, I think that sentence says he
did not find--he is not finding that there was a crime, and he
is not exonerating.
Senator Reed. Which puts it----
Attorney General Barr. I am not going to sit here and try
to characterize his reasoning or his report. That is why it is
important to get the whole report out instead of trying to read
these little tea leaves.
Senator Reed. No, I absolutely----
Attorney General Barr. Probable cause is a very low
standard for determining when you start investigating
something. A lot of things have probable cause.
Senator Reed. I understand that, but I think it is
important--I agree with you completely. It is important to get
the whole report out to the American public because there are
serious questions that we are just going back and forth on, and
your response I think is very critical. Those questions are not
going to be resolved until the American people see this report,
not sections of it, not paraphrases of it, but this entire
report.
Let me just quickly ask another question which is, do you
have any specific evidence that there was anything improper in
the counterintelligence investigation by the FBI or anything
improper in the way the investigation was carried out by the
Special Counsel with respect to the 2016 election? Do you have
any evidence?
Attorney General Barr. I am sorry. It was a compound
question.
Senator Reed. Compound question. There was a
counterintelligence investigation by the FBI with respect to
the 2016 election involving primarily the Trump campaign. There
was the investigation by Director Mueller into the 2016
campaign and other issues. Have you any evidence that there was
anything improper in those investigations?
Attorney General Barr. I have no specific evidence that I
would cite right now. I do have questions about it.
Senator Reed. So this panel you are putting together is----
Attorney General Barr. I am not putting together a panel.
Senator Reed. So you just have some interest in this. You
do not have any evidence?
Attorney General Barr. I have concerns about various
aspects of it.
Senator Reed. Do you believe that the investigation that
Director Mueller undertook was a witch hunt or illegal, as has
been asserted by the President?
Attorney General Barr. As I said during my confirmation, it
really depends on where you are sitting. If you are somebody
who is being falsely accused of something, you would tend to
view the investigation as a witch hunt.
Senator Reed. Well, you are sitting as the Attorney General
of the United States with a constitutional responsibility. So
if you could answer in that regard?
Attorney General Barr. Well, I am not going to characterize
the--it is what it is, you know. Mueller and his team conducted
an investigation and are issuing a report.
I will use my own adjectives.
Senator Reed. You can use your own adjectives, and those, I
do not assume include ``witch hunt'' or ``illegal.'' Is that
correct? Those would not be in your answer?
Attorney General Barr. I have not referred to the
investigation in that way.
Senator Reed. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, welcome.
Attorney General Barr. Hi.
MARIJUANA
Senator Murkowski. I am going to start my questions with
the issue of marijuana. Senator Gardner has really taken the
lead on this issue over here in the Senate. I have been
supportive of his efforts. He is trying to move forward with
the STATES Act. I am cosponsoring that.
When we visited--and during your confirmation process--you
explained that you believe that the current conflict between
Federal and State marijuana laws is untenable--was the words
that you described.
You also explained that you will not upset settled
expectation or the reliance interests that have developed
because of the policies from the prior administration, but you
did state that you believe the current situation really has to
be addressed.
I know and understand that you do not support the wholesale
legalization of marijuana. You made it clear that we face a
binary choice between the Federal prohibition and a ``Federal
approach'' to correct the disconnect between Federal and State
marijuana laws.
And so I think you committed to me and to others that this
is something that Congress has to address right way, which is
through legislation, and we would agree with that. I think we
think that the STATES Act is an approach that does what you
have recommended. It adjusts the Federal law the right way to
create a Federal approach to marijuana. I think the President
has expressed some support for it.
So can you share with me, share with the subcommittee,
where you are on this approach that has been outlined in this
STATES Act and whether or not we can work with you on this
issue?
Attorney General Barr. Yes, Senator.
The situation that I think is intolerable and which I am
opposed to is the current situation we are in.
Senator Murkowski. Right.
Attorney General Barr. And I would prefer one of two
approaches rather than where we are.
Personally, I would still favor one uniform Federal rule
against marijuana, but if there is not sufficient consensus to
obtain that, then I think the way to go is to permit a more
Federal approach so States can make their own decisions within
the framework of the Federal law and so we are not just
ignoring the enforcement of Federal law.
Now, I have not studied specifically the STATES Act, but I
have just circulated it through the Department for comment. I
think that is the process it is in now. Once we get those
comments, we will be able to work with you on any concerns
about the STATES Act, but I would much rather that approach,
the approach taken by the STATES Act than where we currently
are.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I think you will have a group of
folks over here that would like to work with you, would like to
work with the Department on that.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ACT (VAWA)
Let me move to the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) and
Special Domestic Violence Criminal Jurisdiction. In the 2013
reauthorization of VAWA, we recognized Tribal Special Domestic
Violence Criminal Jurisdiction that allowed Tribes to prosecute
non-Native domestic violence offenders in Tribal courts, and
this was for a limited class of offenses.
TRIBAL AFFAIRS
So just last week, the House passed its reauthorization
vehicle that expands this jurisdiction to a broader class of
sexual assault and domestic violence offenses as well as crimes
against children and assaults on Tribal police officers.
The vehicle there, the reauthorization vehicle, also allows
for a pilot project that is specific to Alaska Native villages
that have 75 percent or greater Native population to exercise
this jurisdiction. I think that all these provisions in the
House bill are a step in the right direction.
You and I have had discussion about the issues of just
protection in general in outlying areas of very remote parts of
my State, where we really have got to be thinking outside of
the box when it comes to how we provide for protection.
So allowing for these limitations based on jurisdiction are
really, really hard when you have women and children that are
vulnerable.
So I am hoping that we can continue to work with you on
these jurisdictional issues. I am hopeful that we will have a
chance to bring you up to the State so we can get you out into
some of these villages, see how these Tribal courts are
functioning, and again better explore the opportunities to
provide for a level of safety.
I do appreciate you including the 5 percent Tribal set-
aside from the Crime Victims Fund. I think that this is going
to make a difference, but if you can comment in any way on this
aspect of Tribal jurisdiction and what it might mean for
domestic violence protection?
Attorney General Barr. Well, I think Alaska Native women
face unacceptably high levels of violence in very remote areas,
and I have actually scheduled a trip up to Alaska specifically
to visit some of these communities.
Senator Murkowski. Good.
Attorney General Barr. And so I would approach this with a
great deal of sympathy for the need to think outside of the box
and to do something that is effective in protecting this
vulnerable population, and I am prepared to work with you to
try to fashion something that will work.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I appreciate that, and also
working on the murdered and missing indigenous women's
initiatives that we are working on----
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Murkowski [continuing]. I look forward to that as
well too and welcome you to the State.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Attorney General, for being here and your
service.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
I am only going to say one thing about the Mueller Report.
I would just compassionately ask the more that you can reveal,
if it does not interfere with a criminal investigation or with
intelligence that we need to protect, the more you can do, the
more healing will happen for our country, I believe. And that
would be very, very helpful. So I hope you would consider that
when you are releasing your report back to us.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT (ACA)
The other thing I wanted to say is on the ACA. I think my
friend Senator Collins has spoken that we are all concerned. No
matter what side of the aisle we are on, we are concerned about
the healthcare of America, how we take care of some of the most
vulnerable, but also how we prevent the gouging that is going
on in some of those in the middle. And we have fixes for that.
If the Fifth Circuit or the Supreme Court is not favorable
to your client in the quest to basically have this completely
repealed and is successful and upholds--and I think it will. I
think the courts will overturn. One of those courts will
overturn basically the position that has been taken by the
administration. If that is the case, what process do you have
and what procedure? How do you proceed if your client is still
not acceptable towards the defeat by the highest court in the
land, if it goes there? How do we get back to where we protect
the Affordable Care Act so we can repair it and fix it and make
sure the American public have access?
Attorney General Barr. So if the position taken by the
Department just recently in the Fifth Circuit ultimately
loses----
Senator Manchin. Hopefully.
Attorney General Barr. Ultimately, I said.
[Laughter.]
Attorney General Barr. Then the ACA stays in effect, and--
--
Senator Manchin. But does that put you in a precarious--I
mean, since you have had--you have a client you have to
represent. You are representing that client. Then you have to
come back and represent the people of the United States of
America, which if still intact, and we are trying to fix it. I
think it has basically harmed us from fixing the repair that we
have had for over a year and a half that could tremendously
help this.
We have not been able to move forward because there has
always been a chance of repealing it in Texas, now the Fifth
Circuit, and on and on. I am interested in what position--are
you going to be in a position to defend the ACA if the highest
court in the land does not accept their----
Attorney General Barr. Yes. Yes, Senator. Yes, absolutely.
OPIOIDS
Senator Manchin. I am just very much concerned about that.
West Virginia has been ravaged by an opioid epidemic, and I
have supported by the special agents in charge of the region of
FBI office and their efforts to catch the largest distributors.
It is now well known that a single pharmacy in West
Virginia town of Kermit, a little town of Kermit, less than 400
people, received shipments of roughly 9 million--9 million pain
pills in this little town.
It is less well known that the DEA, Drug Enforcement
Agency, explicitly requested to Congress to help in amending
the existing statute to restore the authority to intercept
these illegal shipments.
So my question would be, do you still support amending the
immediate suspension order standard from substantial likelihood
to probable cause, which gives the DEA the clout to stop these
horrific shipments into our little State and all over this
rural America? Have you looked at that, or has it come----
Attorney General Barr. I have not looked at it. I would
support it. I do not know if the Department has taken a
position on that, but anything that will strengthen
enforcement----
Senator Manchin. We need all our legal eagles there. We
really need help here, and we need your support on putting it
back to probable. Basically, it is a very contentious change
that went in, substantial, which basically stopped the DEA cold
in its tracks going after and stopping these shipments before
they hit the streets.
Attorney General Barr. Let me look into that, but
obviously, I want to----
Senator Manchin. It is very, very important. It is
tremendous harmful to our States.
FOREIGN INVESTMENT/ESPIONAGE
My final one would be on foreign investment, sir. I am very
much concerned about what is going on, and I am concerned about
the attempts of foreign countries to make investments and gain
control over certain American critical technologies and
industries, whether it is financial, the things that we see
going on and the investments they are making. And sometimes
they have a front for this, and we have not engaged it.
So is there any law enforcement agency or anyone in your
Department keeping track of the types of actions taken by
foreign countries that could be harmful? Artificial
intelligence, machine learning, on and on and on, that we know
what they have been doing through espionage and sabotage.
Attorney General Barr. Yes. The FBI is at the forefront of
that effort. This budget seeks enhancements of $18 million to
their program of watching for this kind of economic espionage
and also intelligence, but also another $5 million for
monitoring and upgrading our ability to review transactions in
the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
(CFIUS) process too.
Senator Manchin. We want to work with you on that. We have
a tremendous concern, and we know what is going on. The only
thing I would say, that just a simple--in West Virginia, they
understand that if we are not allowed to go into China and
Russia and have investments or ownerships or control over any
of their critical infrastructure, why in the world do we allow
them to come and use a front in order to have control when the
Government basically is controlling their----
Attorney General Barr. Right. This is one of my highest
priorities.
Senator Manchin. Thank you. It is very, very much a
concern. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Attorney General, for your service.
BUREAU OF PRISONS (BOP) STAFFING/HIRING
I wanted to ask about the Bureau of Prisons. During the
shutdown, obviously our correctional officers and staff
remained on duty, but we have Hazelton in West Virginia. We
have had several murders at Hazelton. We have had--and I am
sure Senator Manchin has the same thing. We have had complaints
from staffing that there are staffing shortages, that it is not
safe for our correctional officers. They are being asked to
perform different duties maybe than what they are originally
assigned for.
And in the budget, there is a funding reduction for
correctional officer staffing and salaries in the budget. Could
you help me square with that, and this is a national problem
that you are finding across the BOP?
Attorney General Barr. I think this is an area where we
have stumbled, and I will tell you. I have been looking into
this. This has been very frustrating to me because I have
always supported Bureau of Prisons in the past and think it is
a great organization, and if we are going to have people
incarcerated, we have to make sure they are incarcerated under
proper conditions.
Senator Capito. Right.
Attorney General Barr. The way I look at it, our authorized
level is good and adequate. It is that we are 4- to 5,000
people short of our authorized level.
Now, why has that come about? A part of that overall number
may be because of the hiring freeze, which I lifted yesterday.
Senator Capito. Oh, good.
Attorney General Barr. But those slots were really in the
regional offices and in the headquarters. The shortages out in
the prison facilities themselves were not affected by the
freeze.
I think what it is is, frankly, bureaucracy, and I do not
say this in a bad sense. Just the way these organizations go
about bringing in people, they leave much too much of a lead
time.
So the way it works in the Bureau of Prisons, if a person
at this level leaves, then the next person moves up, and they
do not start the process of hiring a new person until sort of
everyone has taken a new chair.
Senator Capito. Right.
Attorney General Barr. And then they go out, and it takes
months and months and months to get that person on board. That
makes no sense because every year, we lose 2,600 of these
correctional officers.
So my view is we just have to turn on the spigot and just
keep these new entry-level people coming in at a rate where we
are going to be able to get up to and maintain our enacted
level. So I think this is largely a snafu by the Department,
and that is how I interpret it, and that is how I am
approaching it.
Senator Capito. Well, thank you.
I am glad to hear what you have said in terms of getting
more people because the ratios are going up, and certain
situations can be very dangerous for the officers that are
working there. And then that discourages people from wanting to
stay.
Attorney General Barr. Right.
Senator Capito. It is a tough job.
Attorney General Barr. It is tough.
Senator Capito. So anything we can do to help on that.
OPIOIDS
I would like to ask you about the opioid crisis. When you
came to visit me, we talked about this. It is just a scourge on
our Country, but really in our particular region.
I know that you are increasing the budget in that area, but
are there areas that are working better on the disruption part
of the drug interdiction that you think we need to put more
emphasis on rather than spread out as far and wide as we are?
Attorney General Barr. I really cannot say that.
I think where we are, we are having a lot of success, so I
think it is taking that and reproducing it elsewhere.
And, as you know, we have essentially a two-pronged
strategy. One is the legal drugs that have been overprescribed
and diverted and created this population of people who are
addicted, and we have to push that down to a smaller group.
I know Senator Manchin mentioned that hotspot. We have a
lot of resources now focused on doing that, and I think we are
going to be announcing some major successes in doing this.
Then the other is going after the big operations in
Mexico----
Senator Capito. Right.
Attorney General Barr [continuing]. And then the local
distribution. We are adding $254 million of High Intensity Drug
Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) program money to our budget, where it
will be administered through DEA as well.
Senator Capito. Well, I think when we see the squeeze-down
on legal prescriptions that are then used illicitly, that is
when heroin and the fentanyl and all of that comes in, and now
it is crystal meth that is coming in--
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Senator Capito [continuing]. Across the southern border.
I just want to--as a clarification, as a non-lawyer here,
we hear--this is the Mueller Report--we hear a cry on Capitol
Hill to release the entire report. I just want to reemphasize
what you said, stated to Senator Kennedy for those of us who
are non-legal.
That would be very unprecedented and damaging to just put
the whole thing out there and an unreasonable request. Am I
stating that correctly?
Attorney General Barr. I do not know if it would be
unprecedented since I am not really sure what happened in the
Watergate situation. I know the report came out 50 years later,
I think.
Senator Capito. And from a legal----
Attorney General Barr. It is essentially unprecedented, I
would say.
Senator Capito. All right. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Thank you.
BOP HIRING FREEZE
Mr. Attorney General, you said something in your response
to the question. This subcommittee, this subcommittee has been
encouraging the Department of Justice to lift the BOP hiring
freeze for which the Department's response has been there is no
hiring freeze, and you just announced you eliminated it
yesterday, so----
Attorney General Barr. Well, that is Department-wide as
well.
Senator Moran. Okay.
Attorney General Barr. There has been a hiring freeze since
2017.
Senator Moran. We have been encouraging the hiring freeze
at BOP to be lifted for quite a while.
Attorney General Barr. It is. It is lifted.
Senator Moran. We are glad to hear that.
Senator Van Hollen.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT (ACA)
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, I gather from your testimony that if
you were a judge, you would find against the position that DOJ
has taken in the ACA case; is that right?
Attorney General Barr. I did not say that.
Senator Van Hollen. You said that your recommendation
within the administration was a judge would likely conclude
against the position, but you said that as the client of the
administration, you were taking this position. Did I
misunderstand your testimony?
Attorney General Barr. Yes. I was saying--I was talking in
general.
Senator Van Hollen. Yes. Your assessment within the
administration was----
Attorney General Barr. Whatever----
Senator Van Hollen. As I understood it, it was that if you
were a judge, you would not find in favor of the case.
Attorney General Barr. I did not say that. I said whatever
advice I gave the administration----
Senator Van Hollen. Yes.
Attorney General Barr [continuing]. Would have initially
been my personal view as to the best legal----
Senator Van Hollen. Right. And your personal view, if you
were a judge, you told them that you would not support the
case, the administration's position. Is that not what happened
internally?
Attorney General Barr. I am not going to say what my advice
was in the internal deliberations of the executive----
Senator Van Hollen. I think it was clear, Mr. Attorney
General, from your testimony. You said that they had--they
still had some basis for going forward.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Let me ask you with regard to the Mueller Report in your
March 24 letter. You say that Mueller set out evidence on both
sides of the question that leaves unresolved what the Special
Counsel views as ``difficult issues of law in fact concerning
whether the President's action and intent could be viewed as
obstruction.'' Do you agree with the assessment of Bob Mueller
that the evidence is in fact presenting difficult issues of law
in fact on those matters?
Attorney General Barr. I am not going to comment on it
until the report is out and everyone is singing from the same
sheet.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Attorney General, I am not--but I
am not asking you for what is in the report.
You sent a letter to the United States Congress that
included something, which was a principal conclusion, which was
not a conclusion reached by the Mueller Report. You indicated
that they did not exonerate the President. You did.
And so I am asking you whether you agree with Mueller that
there were difficult issues of law in fact in making that
assessment?
Attorney General Barr. That is not a question I really can
answer until I think----
Senator Van Hollen. Well, you did it--but you made-- you
looked at the report, right? And you looked at the evidence of
the report, and you made a decision. And you said that the
President is not guilty of criminal obstruction of justice.
I am asking you, in your review of the report, did you
agree with Mueller that there were difficult issues of law in
fact?
Attorney General Barr. I am going to give my reaction and
comments about the report after the report is out.
Senator Van Hollen. But you put your view of the report out
there on this issue of obstruction of justice, right? Nobody
asked you to do that.
Attorney General Barr. I did not put my view of the report.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, you put your assessment on--you
made a conclusion on the question of obstruction of justice
that was not contained in the Mueller Report, and I am simply
asking you, when you looked at the evidence, did you agree with
Mueller and his team that there were difficult issues of law in
fact?
Attorney General Barr. As I said, I am going to explain my
decision, and to the extent that requires any assessment of the
Mueller Report, I am going to do that the Mueller Report is
out. I am not going to----
Senator Van Hollen. Did your decision--did your decision
require you to look into the intent of the President of the
United States with respect to obstruction of justice?
Attorney General Barr. I am not going to discuss my
decision. I will lay it out after the report is out.
Senator Van Hollen. Mr. Attorney General, the thing is you
put this out there. I mean, the President went out and tweeted
the next day that he was exonerated. That was not based on
anything in the Mueller Report with respect to obstruction of
justice. That was based on your assessment. That was on March
24, and now you will not elaborate at all as to how you reached
that conclusion because I am not asking you what is in the
Mueller Report. I am asking you about your conclusion.
Let me ask you this. You said----
Attorney General Barr. Well, it was the conclusion--it was
the conclusion of a number of a people, including me, and I
obviously am the Attorney General. It was also the conclusion
of the Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein----
Senator Van Hollen. I understand. No, I have read your
letters very----
Attorney General Barr [continuing]. As well as others, and
I will discuss that decision after the report is out.
Senator Van Hollen. Did Bob Mueller support your
conclusion?
Attorney General Barr. I do not know whether Bob Mueller
supported my conclusion.
Senator Van Hollen. So in your June 2018 memo, you
indicated that a President can commit obstruction of justice in
the classic sense of sabotaging a proceeding's truth-finding
functions.
Did you see any evidence in this report about whether or
not President Trump committed what you call a classic sense of
obstruction of justice?
Attorney General Barr. I am not going to characterize or
discuss the contents of the report. The report will be made
public hopefully next week, and I will come up and testify at
that point about it.
Senator Van Hollen. But the thing about it is, Mr. General,
you put your conclusion out there, and now you refuse to talk
about any basis of your conclusion.
I am not asking you for what is in the report. I am asking
you how you reached your conclusion.
Last question. Can you assure us that the key factual
evidence relevant to charges of obstruction of justice will be
included in the public report?
Attorney General Barr. Could you just say that----
Senator Van Hollen. Can you assure us that the key factual
evidence in the Mueller Report related to charges of
obstruction of justice will be available in the public report?
Attorney General Barr. I believe it will, and that is one
of the reasons why I want to review it after, you know, when
the redaction team is done making the redactions to make sure
that there is nothing in there that would prevent that, and to
the extent--and, by the way, redactions can cut both ways.
Senator Van Hollen. My last question relates to redaction
process. My understanding from your House testimony was you are
allowing the Mueller team to make the redactions in three of
the four areas you mentioned, all of them except for
intelligence. Is that a correct understanding of your testimony
yesterday? In other words, you are leaving the discretion to
them on the three of the four criteria that you mapped out?
Attorney General Barr. I have stated what the categories
are, and the people implementing it area the Justice lawyers
with the Special Counsel's lawyers. They are implementing those
categories.
Senator Van Hollen. And you are not going to overrule this
Special Counsel's judgment with respect to any of those
categories, right?
Attorney General Barr. I have not.
Senator Van Hollen. Can you tell us you will not?
Attorney General Barr. If an issue comes up, I do not want
to prejudge it, but it is not my intention. My intention is to
allow the team to make the redactions, and the people in the
Department are making those redactions.
Senator Moran. Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much for being here. We appreciate your
service.
OPIOIDS
We have really talked about a lot of things that are very
important. I want to talk about one that really is sweeping the
country, and it has been mentioned briefly before. And that is
the opioid epidemic, and not just that, we have an opioid
epidemic, but we also have an addiction epidemic.
In Arkansas, we are number two in prescribing. Literally,
we have got 3 million people. We have had hundreds of millions
of pills prescribed last year, and so your team, I understand,
have ranked that very high. You have kept that ranking.
But I would really like to talk about how we can come up
with some innovative new strategies in order to do that. So if
we provide you additional resources, do you have any ideas as
to anything different that we can do that we are not doing now?
We are making a dent, but there were 72,000 deaths last
year, these are statistics. Sadly, we are spending a lot of
money, but I do not know that we are having great success.
Attorney General Barr. I do think we are starting to see
some good results. I think the initial data suggests that we
finally have stopped seeing an increase in opioid overdose
deaths. It seems to be leveling out, and we hope----
Senator Boozman. Part of that is just the ability to have
the Narcan. In fact, my understanding is that drug dealers are
carrying it to keep their clients alive. So that is part of
that. I do not know what the statistic would be if we did not
have that.
Attorney General Barr. Right.
I also think we are making progress on reducing diversion
and over-prescription of the drugs, and we are locking up a lot
of healthcare providers. And we are bringing a lot of civil
actions, and I think----
Senator Boozman. And I applaud you on that.
Attorney General Barr. And we are now applying technology a
lot more to detecting places where there are suspicious
patterns of over-subscription and so forth and attacking them
very aggressively.
So on the first leg of the strategy, which is to reduce the
addicted population from illicit drugs, I think we are making
some progress.
On the illicit drugs, I think a huge part of this is to
address the problem of the traffic coming up from Mexico.
Mexico is our drug supplier, all kinds of drugs, and the
organizations in Mexico are very formidable criminal
enterprises. And we have to address that problem to stop the
flow of these really deadly drugs and increasingly deadly
drugs.
Senator Boozman. Right.
Attorney General Barr. The fentanyl mixed in with all other
kinds of drugs, so people really do not know what they are
taking. We have to address--we have to stop the flow of drugs
from Mexico or make a much bigger dent in it.
That is one of the reasons that I do think that a wall, a
barrier system across the southern border, is an important part
of that.
Senator Boozman. Another part of that is the mail, and our
postal inspectors are doing a good job. There is just not a
whole lot of them, and in the past--it is much better now, but
in the past, the interoperability has not been there. That is
much better now than it used to be.
But I wish you would look into that in the sense that you
mentioned the southern border, and I agree with you totally.
The mail from China is a huge problem.
Attorney General Barr. Right.
Senator Boozman. And then also getting these shipments and
then distributing them throughout the rest of the Country from
someplace here is a huge problem.
Attorney General Barr. Right.
Well, the FBI has a great tool, what we call J-CODE, which
is starting to get some big successes on Internet trafficking
of drugs, and I think attacking both the dark net and the
regular Internet and these online--and policing the mails is a
very important part of it, and we are now applying the
technology to get a lot more progress on these online dealers.
On the mail front, there are some sensing technologies that
are coming along that are very promising in terms of being able
to intercept them.
DRUG COURTS
Senator Boozman. And then, finally, one of the tools that
we have that I think is one of the most effective are the drug
courts. The VA is doing that now. Others are doing that. Having
the ability to make somebody stay clean, have a job so they can
support their families--most of them do--really is a great
asset. So I would hope that you would support that. That is the
way that we can I think really also make a dent.
Attorney General Barr. Yes. I very much support the drug
courts, the veterans courts, and there is $75 million in our
budget for those. So we will continue to support that.
Senator Boozman. Good. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. You are welcome.
In approximately 15 minutes, we have a vote, a set of votes
of three. Senator Coons is next, followed by Senator Graham,
then Schatz, then Senator Feinstein.
We will, as I said earlier, attempt to--we will conclude
shortly after the vote is called.
Senator Coons.
Senator Coons. Thank you, Chairman Moran.
Thank you, Attorney General Barr, for your service and for
being here, and for Mr. Lofthus, I have many questions about
the budget. But I am going to first turn to some questions that
I think are more urgent and concerning about the Special
Counsel's report.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
The primary purpose of the Special Counsel's investigation
was both to thoroughly investigate issues around the 2016
election but also to provide a clear and objective conclusion
in a report to the American people.
I am concerned that over the last 3 weeks, your actions
have created some confusion and distrust around the process and
look forward to the imminent release of as much of that report
as you can to the American people and to Congress.
You stated that the redacted portions of the Special
Counsel's report will be color-coded and accompanied by
explanatory notes to describe the basis for redactions. Will
those notes merely indicate which of the four categories was
applied or provide some information to Congress about the
specific justification for redactions?
You mentioned you envision a situation where Congress,
under the appropriate safeguards, could verify the redaction
categories were not abused. Can you tell me something about the
safeguards you have in mind?
Attorney General Barr. You know, I do not know how detailed
the descriptions will be. Some of them may just be generic, but
some of them may be able to provide additional information.
So, for example, if there is a gag order in a case that
says--apart from whatever we feel about impinging on the case,
there is a gag order that would be implicated by release. I
expect that that will be put in.
Senator Coons. And are those safeguards likely to be worked
out with the Chair and Ranking of Judiciary----
Attorney General Barr. Right.
Senator Coons [continuing]. Who also just happen to----
Attorney General Barr. In terms of the safeguards--so, for
example, an easy one in my view is the classified information.
I would just want to make sure there were adequate safeguards
and shared with a limited number of people, that kind of thing,
the thing we would normally do in this situation.
Senator Coons. I was struck that the District Court of the
District of Columbia reported recently the grand jury convened
by Mueller has not been discharged and is continuing its
investigation.
Did anyone pressure the Special Counsel to conclude his
investigation and submit his report before it was complete?
Attorney General Barr. I did not.
Senator Coons. Did anyone else to your knowledge?
Attorney General Barr. Not that I am aware of.
Senator Coons. There are press accounts that members of the
Special Counsel's team, his investigators, prepared summaries
for public release of sections of the report. Why did you
summarize the principal conclusions reached by the Special
Counsel and the results of investigation rather than releasing
some of these prepared-for-public-release summaries?
Attorney General Barr. So, actually, Deputy Attorney
General Rosenstein and I were expecting a report that would
make it very easy for us to determine what had to be taken out
and what was not, and that is not how the report came to us.
So I immediately recognized that there was going to be some
significant lag time between our receipt of the report and when
we could actually get it out and decided that--none of it was
releasable as I received it because none of it had been vetted
for Rule 6(e) material, but every page on it had a warning that
it could contain 6(e) material.
So as of----
Senator Coons. So every page had a warning, and you were
certain that the Mueller team had not vetted it?
Attorney General Barr. It had not been vetted.
Senator Coons. There were not summaries.
Let me get to two other questions, if I could. Forgive me
since----
Attorney General Barr. So I am just saying that on--I felt
it was important to just advise the Country as to what the
bottom-line conclusions were. I was not interested actually,
even if I had summaries available, which I did not on Sunday,
that were vetted, I would not have put out summaries because I
think summaries, no matter who is preparing them, are going to
be subject to criticism.
What people have to remember, that generally the Department
of Justice does come out with binary conclusions, and so just
stating the bottom line on each of those I think was entirely
appropriate.
Senator Coons. Who, if anyone, outside the Justice
Department, has seen portions or all of the Special Counsel's
report? Has anyone in the White House seen any of the report?
Attorney General Barr. You know, I am not going to--as I
say, I am landing the plane right now, and I have been willing
to discuss my letters and the process going forward, but the
report is going to be out next week. And I am just not going to
get into the details of the process until the plane is on the
ground.
Senator Coons. At what point will you allow Congress to
know whether or not the White House was given the full report,
briefed on the report, shared sections of the report?
Attorney General Barr. Once I go up to----
Senator Coons. It is striking the President claimed
complete and total exoneration if he did not either see the
report or was briefed on the report.
Attorney General Barr. As I said, once the report is out, I
am happy to discuss the process.
Senator Coons. I very much look forward to that.
My last question. Given your unsolicited June 8 letter to
the Justice Department regarding obstruction of justice, did
you ever consider recusing yourself from making a conclusion
about whether a charge of obstruction of justice should have
been made?
Attorney General Barr. Well, I consulted with the career
ethics officials at the Department.
Senator Coons. And they concluded that your memo on that
topic did not require your recusal?
Attorney General Barr. That is correct.
Senator Coons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. You are welcome.
Chairman Graham, the Attorney General has been very
faithful to his insistence that he not disclose anything of
significance until he is in front of your committee.
Senator Graham. Great. But you cannot possibly be surprised
that President Trump would claim exoneration without having
read anything.
[Laughter.]
Senator Graham. So, anyway, I hate to talk about
appropriations in Appropriations Committee, but I will.
Senator Moran. We will welcome that.
Senator Graham. Okay.
If sequestration goes back into effect--and it is due to do
that--how would it affect the FBI and your ability to defend
the Nation?
Attorney General Barr. Could I turn that over to my trusty
sidekick here?
Senator Graham. Yes. Or did you pick a winning lottery
ticket to be here with him?
Attorney General Barr. Throw the hard ones.
Senator Graham. Yes.
SEQUESTRATION
Mr. Lofthus. I can tell you the last time we had full
sequestration in 2013, the Department had $1.3 billion at risk.
People at the FBI, the rest of our law enforcement agencies,
the Bureau of Prisons, all those agencies had their funding
impacted, their staffing impacted. People were at risk for
furlough. We had to move several hundred million dollars from
other accounts into the Department, into our S&E accounts to
keep our people working. Sequestration had a tremendous,
tremendous impact on the Department of Justice, took tremendous
work to avoid the detrimental effects of sequestration the last
time----
Senator Graham. Do you believe that if we go back down that
road, it would make us less safe?
Mr. Lofthus. I believe it would curtail the safety
operations of the Department of Justice and its national
security operations.
Senator Graham. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Attorney General, I am sure you share that assessment?
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Senator Graham. Okay. As to what you are going to do on May
1, we will save that mostly for May 1, but I am intrigued by
the idea of this working group or some group looking at the
other side of the ledger.
Do you agree with me that every American should be
concerned as to whether or not a warrant was obtained against
an American citizen with unverified information?
Attorney General Barr. Absolutely. I think the Fourth
Amendment is one of our most cherished civil liberties.
Senator Graham. So you think that is an appropriate thing
to look at, and you will look at it?
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Graham. Okay. Do you share my concern that if you
are going to open up a counterintelligence investigation
against a presidential candidate that you have to have a very
good reason?
Attorney General Barr. Yes, absolutely.
Senator Graham. And a counterintelligence investigation is
designed to protect the target of foreign influence; is that
correct?
Attorney General Barr. That is correct.
Senator Graham. It is not a prosecutorial function, is it?
Attorney General Barr. No, unless espionage or some
violation of espionage law develops.
Senator Graham. So would it be odd that the candidate was
never really briefed by the Department of Justice that your
campaign may be targeted by a foreign entity?
Attorney General Barr. That is one of the questions I have
I feel normally the campaign would have been advised of this.
Senator Graham. And can you think of a good reason right
now why they would not have been?
Attorney General Barr. I am interested in getting that
answer. They had two former U.S. Attorneys in Chris Christie
and Rudy Giuliani involved in the campaign, and I do not
understand why the campaign was not advised.
Senator Graham. Apparently, when Senator Feinstein had a
person on her staff that was supposedly connected to the
Chinese government, she was briefed. Is that the normal way you
do things with a counterintelligence investigation?
Attorney General Barr. I think----
Senator Graham. Well, she was briefed about a staff member
that they thought might be connected to the Chinese government,
and she took action and fired the guy. Is that sort of what you
are supposed to be doing?
Attorney General Barr. That is what I would--if I were
Attorney General and that situation came up, I would say,
``Yes. Brief the target of the foreign espionage activity.''
Senator Graham. Okay. So you are pledging to this
subcommittee and I guess to the country as a whole as to find
out what happened with the warrant application, find out about
the counterintelligence investigation to make sure that the law
was followed, and if there was any abuse of the law, to report
it to the Congress and the public. Is that accurate?
Attorney General Barr. That is accurate. I just want to
satisfy myself that there was no abuse of law enforcement or
intelligence powers.
Senator Graham. I am glad you are doing that.
When it comes to Mr. Mueller, are you talking to him about
the 6(e) material?
Attorney General Barr. I have not personally talked to him
about the Rule 6(e), but his people are working on the 6(e)
material.
Senator Graham. So there is a collaboration between your
people and Mueller people about what to take out and what to
leave in on the grand jury side?
Attorney General Barr. Yes. As it was described to me,
people are sitting at the same table.
Senator Graham. When it comes to ongoing criminal
investigations, you are making sure that prosecutors, they have
a say about what is released because it may jeopardize their
cases?
Attorney General Barr. That is right, the people involved
in those cases.
Senator Graham. And when it comes to classified
information, you are talking to the intelligence community----
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Graham [continuing]. To make sure they are okay?
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Graham. Thank you very much.
Senator Moran. Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Attorney General, for being here.
I want to give you a chance to rephrase something you said
because I think when the Attorney General of the United States
uses the word ``spying,'' it is rather provocative and, in my
view, unnecessarily inflammatory.
I know what you are getting at because you have explained
yourself in terms of answering Senator Graham's questions and
the questions of others.
Do you want to rephrase what you are doing? Because I think
the word ``spying'' could cause everybody in the cable news
ecosystem to freak out, and I think it is necessary for you to
be precise with your language here. You normally are, and I
want to give you a chance to be especially precise here.
Attorney General Barr. I am not sure of all the
connotations of that word that you are referring to, but
unauthorized surveillance, I want to make sure there was no
unauthorized surveillance.
Senator Schatz. Okay. Thank you.
Attorney General Barr. Is that more appropriate in your
mind?
Senator Schatz. This is your call. I really did want to
give you a chance to say it how you wanted to say it and make
sure that you did not misspeak because you have talked for a
long time. You had yesterday, and I want to make sure that
you----
Attorney General Barr. I appreciate that.
Senator Schatz [continuing]. Use the words that you want to
use.
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Schatz. Okay. On the Mueller summaries, on the
Mueller team summaries within the report, I get that on every
page, there was a sort of admonition that this may contain 6(e)
material. The question I have relates to your desire to make
sure that the whole thing is intelligible. Are these reports
going to be--excuse me. Are these summaries when the report is
released going to be intelligible? I assume there may be some
redactions. There may be none. But the basic question I think
for the public is, Are we going to get the gist of this, or is
it going to be on January of 2015 and then you have to flip 15
pages to find the next text?
Attorney General Barr. You will get more than the gist.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
COLE MEMORANDUM
I want to ask you about the Cole Memorandum. In your
confirmation hearing, you said, ``I am not going to go after
companies that have relied on the Cole Memorandum.'' Are you
planning on restoring it? Are you planning on establishing your
new guidance?
I heard what you said about marijuana generally, but those
are public policy questions. Assuming we cannot come to an
agreement on a new statutory framework, what is the plan for
the Department of Justice?
Attorney General Barr. I am going to have to make some
difficult choices.
Senator Schatz. Do you care to elaborate?
Attorney General Barr. Well, for example, reliance suggests
people who have already taken action based on the Cole
Memorandum.
I mean, one open question in my mind is if States continue
to pass these laws, are we going to continue to forebear on
those new States? I would like to see Congress address this
issue.
Senator Schatz. Is there any internal guidance regarding
these sort of difficult questions?
Attorney General Barr. None that I have given.
Senator Schatz. So the Department of Justice is operating
without guidance?
Attorney General Barr. The Department of Justice is
operating under my general guidance that I am accepting the
Cole Memorandum for now, but I have generally left it up to the
U.S. Attorneys in each State to determine what the best
approach is in that State.
Senator Schatz. Okay.
Attorney General Barr. I have not heard any complaints from
the States that have legalized marijuana.
Senator Schatz. A year ago, Attorney General Sessions said
we are moving forward, and we will add fairly soon, additional
suppliers of marijuana under the Controlled Substances Act. I
have sent two follow-up letters. Where are we on this?
Attorney General Barr. I have been pushing very hard over
the last few weeks to get that process under way, and I think
we are going to move forward on it. I think it is very
important to get those additional suppliers.
Senator Schatz. Can you assure me that I am not going to be
here a year later asking the same question?
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT (ACA)
On defending the ACA, how often has the Department of
Justice declined to defend a Federal statute?
Attorney General Barr. It has happened--I cannot give you a
number.
Senator Schatz. Is it fair to say it is infrequent?
Attorney General Barr. It is infrequent, but it happens,
and it happens under different kinds of--you know, the Obama
administration refused to defend----
Senator Schatz. Sure. And I think that was the only one,
and I think that that is sort of telling that as policy, you
try to make these choices as infrequently as possible.
Attorney General Barr. Correct.
Senator Schatz. And under the Obama administration, they
refused to defend the Defense of Marriage Act, and under the
Trump administration, you are refusing to defend the Affordable
Care Act.
So it sort of has to rise to a level of political and
public policy importance that supersedes the judgment of a lot
of career attorneys. Would you agree with that?
Attorney General Barr. Well, I think I am not sure whether
it is a question of career attorneys or non-career attorneys. I
mean, there frequently are disputes among lawyers within an
administration, whether they be career or non-career.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Attorney General Barr. Okay.
Senator Moran. Senator Feinstein.
Senator Feinstein. If I may, Mr. Chairman. On Senator
Schatz's question of you, Mr. Attorney General, I am really
surprised by the answer because the Supreme Court did uphold
the law, the ACA, and now the Attorney General is saying we
will not defend it, regardless.
It seems to me that that is as problem. That if something
is duly passed and upheld as legal that the Attorney General
has a duty to defend it.
Attorney General Barr. Well, the law was originally upheld
because the mandate was upheld as a tax, and Chief Justice
Roberts' opinion said that it can be upheld as a tax even
though it could not otherwise be upheld.
But for finding it a tax, you would have had five votes
against it.
Senator Feinstein. But that----
Attorney General Barr. Once the penalty was removed, the
financial penalty was removed, that provision could no longer
be justified as a tax, which means that it would have to fall.
So the mandate fell. The mandate in my opinion--I do not think
it is even a close question. The mandate was unconstitutional
because it can no longer be upheld as a tax.
Then the question becomes if the mandate falls, even though
there was no penalty attached to it, what is its impact on the
rest of the statute? Four of the justices in the NFIB felt that
the whole statute had to fall. So, as I said before you
arrived, Senator, at the end of the day, I felt that this was a
defensible legal position to take.
Senator Feinstein. In my experience, which I guess I have
been here 26 years, I have never seen this before that a
decision like this would be made by one individual on the basis
of what has been a huge decision legislatively and signed by a
President based on--I am not sure quite what, despite what you
said, so----
Attorney General Barr. Who was the one individual? Me?
Senator Feinstein. No, no.
Attorney General Barr. Oh, okay.
Senator Feinstein. No, you misunderstood what I said.
Attorney General Barr. Okay.
Senator Feinstein. But it is not important.
You are saying despite the fact that the Supreme Court of
the United States upheld what has been a major law duly passed,
duly signed by the President, that you are just not going to
defend it?
Attorney General Barr. That does happen. It happens
occasionally in our system.
I think the principle over at the Department of Justice is
that our default position, our preference is to defend
statutes, even if we do not agree with the statutes and even if
we think the argument is a weak argument.
For example, last time I was in the Justice Department, I
thought the flag statute was unconstitutional, but we defend it
in the no burning of the flag. We defended it. We lost because
the Justice Department was correct on that.
Senator Feinstein. But why would not you defend this?
Attorney General Barr. Because occasionally the
administration determines that another position should be
taken.
Senator Feinstein. Is this determined by the White House?
Attorney General Barr. It is determined by the process
within the executive branch. There are a number of agencies.
There are a number of different players even in the White House
that get involved in these things.
Senator Feinstein. Well, I assume you would not take this
position unless this is what the President wanted----
Attorney General Barr. Well, that would be a safe
assumption.
Senator Feinstein [continuing]. Because this is as mega
law. You know, it affects preexisting conditions. It affects
everybody in the United States. It is not--it went through a
great deal of hearing and testimony and amendment passage.
Attorney General Barr. Yes. It was a very controversial
law.
Senator Feinstein. Exactly. But it is a big law.
Attorney General Barr. Right.
Senator Feinstein. And it has been operational for a period
of time, and people depend on it, millions of people, for their
healthcare.
Attorney General Barr. Okay.
Senator Feinstein. And so, all of a sudden, along comes--
and this is just my frame of way of saying it--somebody and,
oh, I am going to take this whole thing on and----
Attorney General Barr. Well, there were 20, I think, or
more States that were challenging it. There was a lot of
opposition to it. A lot of States have weighed in, and I think
the administration is on the side of those States.
As I said yesterday, I think people should sort of take a
deep breath. If this is such a whacky position that the
administration is taking, then there is nothing to fear, right?
Senator Feinstein. Well----
Attorney General Barr. Then the law will be upheld.
Senator Feinstein. In 26 years, I have never seen this kind
of thing, and I----
Attorney General Barr. Well, Defense of Marriage Act
(DOMA), I mean, we mentioned that before. I know it happens
rarely in each administration, but I would be surprised if not
any--you know, most administrations have from time to time
declined----
Senator Feinstein. Well, maybe--I do not want to take the
time. Maybe we can discuss this because this struck me like
lightning that one person decided--I assume the President wants
you to--that made this decision, and everything that was done
by way of proper legislative action has been taken and
signature of a President. I just do not ever recall anything
like this happening in the past quarter of a century.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Feinstein.
Attorney General, we are about to conclude. I have a
follow-up question, so does Senator Shaheen. Then we will wrap
up.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
I want to go back to something you said in your testimony.
You have indicated that there is the possibility that
unauthorized surveillance or spying occurred, and my question
is maybe twofold. My question is, what is the basis for
reaching that conclusion or a belief that something like that
occurred? And what are the consequences for those who committed
unauthorized surveillance?
Attorney General Barr. Did you say that I said that it
occurred?
Senator Moran. You indicated--I think I tried to at least
reflect on what your quote was. That you thought spying on a
political campaign occurred in the course of an intelligence
agency's investigation into Russian interference in 2016.
Attorney General Barr. Well, I thought the question was did
I have any basis for saying that.
Senator Moran. And I am now asking what the basis is or
what the facts are that lead you to that thought.
Attorney General Barr. Okay. I felt I am concerned about
it, and I was asked about whether there was any basis for it.
And I believe there is a basis for my concern, but I am not
going to discuss the basis.
Senator Moran. And what is potential consequences for those
who violated the law?
Attorney General Barr. Well, it depends what the facts
ultimately prove to be.
Senator Moran. Which would be determined in a prosecution?
Attorney General Barr. Possibly. But, you know, there can
be abuses that may not rise to the level of a crime, but that
people might think is bad and want to put in rules or
prophylaxes against it.
I mean, I remember when there was a lot of people upset at
the FBI spying on or surveilling Civil Rights groups or anti-
war groups or nuclear freeze groups and so forth, and as a
result of that, there were a lot of safeguards built in. There
were also concerns about surveilling reporters, and so
safeguards have been put in. So it does not necessarily have to
result in a criminal investigation or a finding of a crime, but
part of my responsibility is to protect the civil liberties of
the American people. And I think something that is important is
that the law enforcement and intelligence agencies respect the
limits on their powers.
Senator Moran. I share that view with you, Mr. General, and
I am of the same generation in which those things occurred and
were alleged to have occurred.
Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Yes. Mr. Chairman, I remember that too,
and I remember when J. Edgar Hoover's FBI surveilled student
groups as well, having been in one of those student groups that
was surveilled.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ACT (VAWA)
I want to ask a couple of what I hope will be very short
questions. Over the past 2 years, this subcommittee and
Congress has provided record levels of funding for the Office
of Violence Against Women. That is true about the recent
omnibus as well.
We have not yet reauthorized the Violence Against Women
Act, and I want to be reassured that the Justice Department,
despite this lapsed authorization, will continue to provide the
funding that has been appropriated by Congress.
Mr. Lofthus. Absolutely.
Attorney General Barr. Yes. I support the----
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Attorney General Barr [continuing]. Reauthorization of the
Act.
Senator Shaheen. Yes. Thank you. I hope you will share that
with some members of your administration.
Attorney General Barr. Well, I have not seen any specific
vehicle for that, but in concept, I certainly support it and
would like to see it done.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
FORMER AG SESSIONS' MEMOS
The other question I have is that the prior Attorney
General issued a number of memos, and during his tenure, that
provided guidelines for everything from sentencing for U.S.
Attorneys on drug offenses to immigration policy to even the
protective detail for Secretary DeVos. Do you intend to review
any of those memos, and should we expect that there might be a
different outcome after your review for many of that?
IMMIGRATION JUDGE QUOTAS
And I have a particular specific question because that is
around the issue of quotas for immigration judges and whether
you believe that judges should have--both Federal judges and
immigration judges should have quotas around the number of
cases that they are expected to get through in a period of
time.
Attorney General Barr. You want the specific or the general
question or both?
Senator Shaheen. Both would be nice.
Attorney General Barr. Okay. Well, both. I actually-- I
have been in the job 7 weeks, and I have not put in process
anything for reviewing all the stuff. And so right now it is
just a question of something being brought to my attention, and
I have not looked at that particular guidance.
I understand that it is important to understand our metrics
and how productive our judges are so we can figure out how to
manage the caseloads.
Certainly, I would be not happy with hard and fast quotas.
They have to have enough give in them that people can take into
account the factors that could go into productivity such as the
complication of the case and things like that.
Senator Shaheen. Okay. Thank you.
PROTECTIVE DETAIL (USMS)
Mr. Lofthus. Can I add one thing on the protective details?
Senator Shaheen. Yes.
Mr. Lofthus. There is a million dollars in this budget for
the U.S. Marshals to do basically a feasibility look at
providing executive branch-wide protective details based on
real threat assessments. That is an expertise of the Marshals.
I think people think highly of the Marshals' capabilities in
that area.
OMB asked the Department to take a look at doing it
executive branch-wide. It would take resources for the Marshals
if they go in that direction, but we have been asked to take a
look at it. And that is what that million dollars in the budget
is all about.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Is there a reason to believe that there are more valid
threats against members of this administration or in the
executive branch now than there has been in the past?
Mr. Lofthus. That is not something I can--I do not have
that information. I do not know.
The way the question came to us was simply take a group
that does judicial and executive protection as their
profession, who does real professional threat assessments and
looks at this, and have a group like that take a look at it for
the administration.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Attorney General Barr. Mr. Chairman, could I just add one
point of clarification?
Senator Moran. Please.
SPECIAL COUNSEL MUELLER'S INVESTIGATION
Attorney General Barr. That I just want to make it clear,
thinking back on all the different colloquies here, that I am
not saying that improper surveillance occurred. I am saying
that I am concerned about it and looking into it. That is all.
Senator Moran. Thank you.
I will give you both a chance to clarify anything that you
said earlier.
I want to highlight--I mentioned this in my opening
statement. In other times, other circumstances, this would have
been a more significant topic of conversation in this hearing,
but there are a number of requests by the Department of Justice
related to immigration that are included in the conversations
that we will be having as far as the appropriations for the
Department of Justice.
DOJ FUNDING REQUESTS
DOJ has requested $110 million increase above the enacted
2019 levels to fund 100 new immigration judges and 500
additional positions, including 100 attorneys and 100 judicial
law clerks. And in addition to that, as you indicated, the
Marshals Service, there is a request for $32 million for
Federal prisoner detention programs to support housing and
transportation, care for Federal detainees that are not
criminals but are within the immigration system awaiting
adjudication or following adjudication.
And the Office of Solicitor General, the Environmental and
Natural Resource Division, as well as the Southwest Border
Rural Law Enforcement Violent Crime Reduction Initiative, I
wanted to give you a chance, if you cared to indicate anything
about these issues and their importance to the current
circumstance we find ourselves in related to immigration.
Mr. General.
EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW (EOIR)
Attorney General Barr. Yes. I mean, absolutely, we need
those additional resources, especially the additional judges to
process the backlog.
Right now the--even though our judges are being very
productive in deciding these cases, the pipeline is actually
greater than their productivity.
Senator Moran. If there is 800-and-some-thousand cases----
Attorney General Barr. Sixty. 860,000.
Senator Moran. In addition, I would highlight for you the
importance of electronic records and moving forward with
getting the Department in this regard out of the paper world
and on to computers.
Attorney General Barr. Mm-hmm.
Senator Moran. Okay. My opportunity to every witness that
appears before my subcommittee is to say--and, Mr. Attorney
General, you are always very circumspect, so I doubt this
applies to you, but if there is something you want to amend,
alter, correct, if there is something that you failed, we
failed to ask you that you wanted to make certain that we hear,
we would welcome either you or Mr. Lofthus to do so.
Attorney General Barr. No. No. I mean, after I--if I review
the transcript and see a problem, I will let you know.
Senator Moran. I wish it always--I wish it worked that way.
Attorney General Barr. Yes.
Senator Moran. Thank you very much for your presence here
today. Thank you for the information that you conveyed to us.
Senator Shaheen and I are grateful.
If there are no further questions, this--is it the
afternoon?
Senator Shaheen. Yes.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Senator Moran. If there are no further questions this
afternoon, Senators may submit additional questions for the
subcommittee's official hearing record. We would request that
the Department of Justice respond within 30 days. As I
indicated, we value that, your efforts to accomplish that in
the past.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. William P. Barr
Questions Submitted by Senator Jerry Moran
contraband phones in prisons
Question 1. I was pleased to see a pilot program included in the
request to attempt to solve the issue of contraband cellphones in the
Federal Prison System. Contraband cellphones pose a myriad of threats,
both inside and outside of Bureau of Prison (BOP) facilities. Will you
please provide more detail as to what this program will do if funds are
provided?
Answer. The $4.625 million requested for fiscal year 2020 to
implement cell phone detection and mitigation technology will allow BOP
to conduct a proof-of-concept of a Managed Access Solution (MAS) and/or
Micro-Jamming Solution (MJS) at two facilities and perform valuable
mobile MAS assessments. MAS and MJS are the two viable wireless
interdiction technologies that are technically feasible and deployable
today. MAS is deployed by a vendor under a sub-license from a wireless
carrier, captures all cellular signals within the geo-spatial confines
of a prison and disables unauthorized cellular signals from contraband
devices. In contrast, MJS jams all cellular signals within the geo-
spatial confines of a prison. The objective is to render cellular
communication within the geospatial area useless. The pilot would run
for 1 year. BOP expects to gauge the efficacy of both technologies and
determine their cost-effectiveness. Both pilots are necessary to assess
the technologies' ability to address the compelling public safety issue
of contraband cell phones. This testing is mission critical as these
devices are used by inmates and co-conspirators to conduct illicit
criminal activity, foment escape, facilitate the introduction of
dangerous contraband, and threaten staff, other inmates and members of
the public.
In April, BOP conducted a pilot test of MJS at the Broad River
Correctional Institution in Columbia, S.C. The test--the first
collaboration of this kind in a State corrections facility--was
conducted to determine if micro-jamming could prevent wireless
communication by inmates using contraband cellphones in a housing unit.
The test results are promising, showing that MJS technology could be
effective in preventing the use of contraband cellphones in prisons.
This test followed two earlier tests at a Federal corrections facility
in Cumberland, Md., one of which included a micro-jamming test showing
that the technology rendered cellular signals inoperable inside a
single cell.
Typical quotes received from MAS or MJS solution providers to
install a system with only cellular wireless interdiction usually
exceed $1 million per facility. The infrastructure costs (network,
fiber optic cabling, switches, sensors, etc.) are comparable for MAS or
MJS applications. While no two sites are exactly the same, there are
three general contexts for implementation: (1) an institution in a
rural location, (2) an institution in a light urban area, and finally,
(3) an institution in a metropolitan location. Each context has its own
unique set of challenges and opportunities.
By grouping sites in this manner, and using MAS or MJS as the
technology solution, BOP can provide a gross estimate of the required
pre-deployment efforts to modify the facility infrastructure, deploy
system electronics, and sustain the capability with a focus on
efficacy, affordability, and maintainability. The current estimated
cost to implement a viable cellphone detection and mitigation
technology in these three contexts ranges are as follows:
--Rural Sites Surveys and Deployments $795,000-$1,795,000
--Light Urban Sites Surveys and Deployments $1,050,000-$2,050,000
--Metropolitan Sites Surveys and Deployments $2,080,000-$3,080,000
The proposed tests would occur in a rural and light urban setting.
Thus, the BOP is requesting $2 million for a MAS pilot and $2 million
for a MJS pilot.
The BOP also requests 25 mobile MAS assessments for $625,000.
Mobile MAS assessments are used by the agency to dynamically target
correctional facilities that have made significant contraband cellphone
seizures. Such assessments cost $25,000 per 2-day assessment. This
technology is portable and can be relocated as needed; it is a valuable
and flexible measure to react quickly to an identified or trending
threat without a requirement to install infrastructure. In calendar
year 2019, we are conducting 10 mobile MAS assessments using existing
internal funds targeting institutions with significant numbers of
seized cell phones, like FCI Fort Dix. BOP is collaborating with DOJ on
a new seizure warrant process to disable contraband cell phones
identified within the geo-spatial confines of a Federal prison using
data derived from a mobile MAS assessment.
Any MAS or MJS solution should augment existing sound correctional
procedures and physical security technologies already in operational
daily use.
drones/unmanned aircraft systems (uas) and counter uas measures
Question 2. Technology is ever changing and advancing, which
unfortunately means threats are also often evolving. There have been
reports of drone use over and around prisons. What is BOP doing to
prevent outside drones from entering the airspace above its facilities,
and what are the counter drone or counter unmanned aircraft system
(UAS) resource needs for BOP? Additionally, are there Drone or UAS
needs to monitor and secure BOP facilities?
Answer. The Bureau of Prisons (Bureau) is fully committed to
addressing the threat posed by drones to the safety and security of its
facilities. The Preventing Emerging Threats Act of 2018 included in the
FAA Reauthorization Act signed into law in October 2018 provides the
Department and its components, including the Bureau, the legal
authority to detect and disrupt unmanned aircraft systems deemed to be
a ``credible threat'' to certain covered facilities and assets,
including Bureau institutions at high risk from the drone threat,
notwithstanding laws that could otherwise prohibit or limit such
activities. The Bureau played a leading role in securing this
authority, completed numerous briefings on the threat, and potential
mitigation measures, to Congressional Members and staff in 2017 and
2018. The Department is working to implement the new authorities and is
developing guidance for its law enforcement components to deploy
counter-UAS systems consistent with the law.
In the interim, the Department is working closely with the FAA and
with the Bureau to protect institutions. The Bureau has made great
strides in laying the groundwork for counter-UAS protection at its
facilities. Currently, 108 of 122 BOP sites are covered by a Temporary
Flight Restriction (TFR) or pending TFR (Notice to Airmen, or NOTAM,
for last 55 sites effective 11/7/2019). While TFRs do not prevent
illegal overflights, they establish both fair warning for careless and
clueless operators, and set up potential criminal sanctions for
criminal ones. This is the first step to preventing outside drones from
entering the airspace above its facilities. Next, consistent with the
Preventing Emerging Threats Act, and after completing testing and
evaluation of various c-UAS systems in fiscal year 2020, the Bureau
aims to deploy protective systems at multiple high security United
States Penitentiaries in fiscal year 2021. The Department will continue
to provide semi-annual briefings to relevant Congressional committees
about counter-UAS activities.
Question 3. I understand there are several DOJ Working Groups
regarding drones and counter drone measures. How many groups are there
and what is each group's focus? Which components are involved in these
working groups?
Answer. The Department takes both the threat and promise of
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) seriously and has dedicated significant
resources to ensure effective operational and policy outcomes in this
area. In doing so, the Department confronts a wide range of legal,
policy, and operational issues, which span three primary categories:
(1) countering UAS threats pursuant to new statutory authority; (2)
contributing to interagency discussions on UAS policy and coordinating
the Department's own use of UAS in the National Airspace System (NAS);
and (3) criminal enforcement activities.
The Department's Office of Legal Policy (OLP) chairs a Department-
wide UAS Working Group, which includes representatives from numerous
Department components including: the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the Drug Enforcement Administration, the United States Marshals
Service, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the
Bureau of Prisons, the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, the
Office of Legal Policy, the National Security Division, the Criminal
Division, the Executive Office for United States Attorneys, the Office
of Justice Programs, the Office of Community Oriented Policing, the
Office of Privacy and Civil Liberties, the Office of the Chief
Information Officer, and the Office of Legislative Affairs. The Working
Group coordinates the Department's efforts related to UAS under the
supervision of the Office of the Deputy Attorney General.
In conjunction with the National Security Division, OLP is
overseeing the process of drafting and implementing Department-wide
Guidance on the use of counter-UAS equipment to protect certain key
sites, such as Federal prisons and courthouses, and events, such as the
Super Bowl and the World Series. The Guidance is required by the
recently enacted Preventing Emerging Threats Act of 2018, which grants
DOJ the authority to mitigate credible UAS threats. In February 2019,
the Department used the authority for the first time to protect Super
Bowl LIII from potential drone threats. That operation proved very
successful, leading to the detection and seizure of dozens of drones
that violated protected airspace around the stadium. In October 2019,
the Department again used the authority to protect the World Series
from potential drone threats in Houston and Washington, D.C. The
Department also used the authority to protect the New York City
Marathon.
To further support its counter-UAS efforts, the Department also
recently formed a Counter-UAS Operational Test and Evaluation Committee
(COTEC), which evaluates the most promising counter-UAS technologies
for use by Department components. The COTEC performs that function in
close coordination with the Departments of Defense and Homeland
Security. Each of the Department's law enforcement components are
represented on the Committee.
Additionally, the UAS Working Group is focused on supporting FAA in
developing policies on UAS and coordinating the Department's
affirmative use of drones, ensuring that such use advances the
Department's missions, promotes public safety, and protects privacy and
civil liberties.
Finally, the Executive Office of United States Attorneys (EOUSA)
coordinates the Department's efforts to train and educate prosecutors
and investigators across the country and across agencies on criminal
and civil enforcement tools available to respond to UAS incidents, such
as the use of drones to smuggle contraband into Federal prisons, to
violate restricted airspace or to interfere with firefighting
operations. Recent efforts by law enforcement have included, for
example, the investigation and prosecution of a Georgia man who
illegally operated a UAS with the intent to deliver marijuana into the
Autry State Prison in Pelham, Georgia. The prosecution ultimately
resulted in the defendant's guilty plea in the Middle District of
Georgia to the charge of Operating an Aircraft Eligible for
Registration Knowing that the Aircraft is Not Registered to Facilitate
a Controlled Substance Offense. On October 31, 2019, the defendant was
sentenced to 48 months in prison, followed by 3 years of supervised
release.
Question 4. Are there policies and procedures in place for DOJ
components and grantees regarding the purchase of UAS or Counter UAS
systems? Do these policies and procedures address foreign made UAS or
Counter UAS systems?
Answer. First, DOJ Policy Order 0904: Cybersecurity Program
requires that IT acquisitions follow supply chain risk management
(SCRM) procedures. That policy applies to DOJ components, but not
grantees. In fiscal year 2019, DOJ's Justice Management Division issued
a Department-wide policy clarifying that Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(UAS) and counter-UAS systems are generally IT systems and, as such,
are subject to the supply chain risk management process. In general,
those procedures generally require a review of the risks associated
with UAS or counter-UAS systems, and consideration of any appropriate
mitigation measures.
Second, Department Memorandum 14-03 provides guidance to DOJ
components on the acquisition of high or moderate-impact IT systems.
Third, DOJ Procurement Guidance Document (PGD) 16-02 governs the IT
Acquisition Review Board process. Together, these policies ensure that
DOJ components: maintain proper technical security controls and
managerial oversight processes regarding the purchase of UAS or
counter-UAS systems; identify any threats posed by foreign made IT
systems and components; and implement appropriate risk mitigation plans
to mitigate such threats. In order to ensure the security of systems
purchased by grantees through the DOJ Office of Justice Programs (OJP)
grants process, the Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) program specifically
prohibits the use of grant funds for the purchase of Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAV) and UAS items (among other items specifically prohibited
under the statute (34 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 10151-10158)) unless the Bureau
of Justice Assistance ``Director certifies that extraordinary and
exigent circumstances exist, making them essential to the maintenance
of public safety and good order.'' To request that such a certification
be made, the grant recipient must submit a request for a Grant
Adjustment Notice along with a letter from the authorized
representative of the grant recipient that includes a detailed
justification for the request.
eoir's resource needs
Question 5. In fiscal year 2019, Congress appropriated the
President's request for the Executive Office of Immigration Review,
EOIR. However, on March 6, 2019, EOIR Director James McHenry, emailed
all EOIR employees, stating EOIR's fiscal year 2019 funding level was
insufficient and left EOIR unable to fulfill all of its current
operational needs. What resource shortfalls, if any, is EOIR
experiencing? If there are shortfalls, why were these not communicated
to Congress?
Answer. Although I was not with the Department at the time, it is
my understanding that prior to January 2019, the House of
Representatives was recommending $630 million in funding for the
Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) in fiscal year 2019,
which was roughly $66 million more than the Department's request. Thus,
there was not necessarily a basis to seek additional funding from
Congress, as the House had already recommended funding above the
Department's request. Due to the shutdown and the timing of the
appropriations process, EOIR did not have an effective opportunity to
raise concerns or address recent interpreter cost projections prior to
the enactment of the fiscal year 2019 appropriations. The Department's
fiscal year 2020 request includes increases for EOIR that meet its
operational needs. The Department remains appreciative of Congress's
continued support of EOIR, and is committed to ensuring sufficient
resources are dedicated to processing immigration court cases in a
timely and efficient manner consistent with due process.
Question 6. EOIR's interpreter contract seems to be the root cause
of concern for Director McHenry's email. It is my understanding that
the original interpreter contract cost $20 million, but then ballooned
to over $110 million, and has now receded to $70 million. Why did the
cost of this contract fluctuate so dramatically? What efforts is the
Department making to ensure EOIR is using its resources responsibly and
that poor contractor performance is not being rewarded?
Answer. Although I was not with the Department when the issues with
the cost of in-person interpretation services first manifested, my
understanding is that the cost of EOIR in-person interpretation has
risen for two principal reasons: an increase in the terms of the
contract itself following a renegotiation and an increase in the need
for interpreter services due to increases in the number of immigration
judges and the number of hearings being held in immigration court.
First, the market rate for interpreters has increased significantly
since the current interpreter contract was let in 2015. This increase
in market rates for interpreters is primarily due to competition for
interpreters at the local, State, and Federal levels, as well as the
private sector. At the time the contract was let in 2015, the
contractor's rates appeared viable. Increased market demand for
interpreters soon caused those rates to become below-market, and the
contractor had difficulty recruiting qualified interpreters which led
to higher no-show rates and, in turn, assessments of liquidated damages
against the contractor. Accordingly, in 2016, the contractor requested
a renegotiation of terms, including higher rates for their contract
interpreters. The Department and the contractor concluded the
renegotiated contract in 2017, which included increased rates for
interpretation and a higher minimum cost for an in-person interpreter.
The Department completed a thorough analysis of the contract to ensure
that the pricing and terms are consistent with current industry
standards and norms.
Second, the number of immigration judges and the number of
immigration court hearings have increased significantly since 2015,
which has further increased the need for interpreters. EOIR has added a
net of 188 immigration judges since September 2015 when the current
contract went into effect, and the number of hearings has nearly
doubled, from 964,916 in fiscal year 2015 to nearly 1.9 million in
fiscal year 2019. As a result, the number of interpreter orders has
also essentially doubled, from 62,835 in fiscal year 2015 to 125,015 in
fiscal year 2019. Further, the percentage of hearings in English has
declined by approximately 7 percent over that same time period, and the
overall number of cases requiring a non-Spanish contract interpreter,
which is more expensive than a Spanish contract interpreter, has
increased.
These factors combined have led to an increase in the cost of
interpretation services from approximately $14,000,000 in fiscal year
2015 to over $75,000,000 in fiscal year 2019. These costs are expected
to increase further due to the continued influx of illegal immigration,
as the Department of Homeland Security filed the highest number of new
cases with the immigration courts in history: 443,729 in fiscal year
2019.
To address these increases, the Department has re-calculated the
baseline cost for an immigration judge (IJ) team in EOIR's request so
that the current IJ team cost includes the increased interpretation
costs. The Department is also examining other methods to manage
interpreter costs such as adding more full-time Federal employee
interpreters.
Question 7. In fiscal year 2019 Congress provided the President's
request of $25 million to develop an Electronic Case Monitoring System
(ECAS). Congress also included Report Language directing EOIR to
develop a plan to integrate the existing case backlog into this new
ECAS system and submit a report to the Committee within 30 days of
enactment regarding this plan. To date, the Committee has not received
this report. What is the Department's plan to incorporate existing
cases into this new system so that these cases might also receive
electronic efficiency benefits? When can Congress expect EOIR's ECAS
system to be fully operational?
Answer. Although the delay in enacting the fiscal year 2019
appropriation necessarily delayed the ordering of certain IT equipment
required to begin the nationwide rollout of EOIR's electronic case
filing system (ECAS), EOIR expects to begin that rollout in late 2019.
The rollout is expected to proceed in phases over the next two to 3
years. Full operational capability for the ECAS system will depend, in
some part, on the timing and funding level allocated to EOIR through
the fiscal year 2020 appropriation process and potentially future
appropriation processes. EOIR's fiscal year 2020 request includes
$10.9M for activities associated with the second year of ECAS
programming, purchasing, rollout and maintenance; a reduction from the
$25 million initially appropriated in fiscal year 2019. This funding is
necessary to provide for the teams of trainers and the remaining
equipment necessary to roll out the ECAS program to the immigration
courts. Integrating all current pending cases into ECAS may not be
logistically feasible because of the time necessary to scan the files
of all pending cases and the phased nature of ECAS implementation.
Moreover, EOIR would still need to maintain the paper file for pending
cases, essentially requiring EOIR to maintain two sets of records.
Further, many cases are close to completion, and there would be no
benefit scanning cases that are nearly completed.
After December 31, 2022, the Federal Records Centers (FRCs) will no
longer accept transfers of records in paper format. As a result, the
Department has made it a priority for its agencies to accession as many
paper files as possible to the FRCs prior to the deadline. Any files
not sent prior to that deadline will need to be digitized or maintained
locally. The Department is still developing its plan for addressing
those records, and EOIR cannot predict at this time which current cases
will still be pending as of December 31, 2022. Nevertheless, the
Department expects that a funding request associated with digitizing/
scanning files due to the FRC deadline will be forthcoming in future
budget requests, and that digitization may potentially allow those
cases to be integrated into ECAS as well.
EOIR has submitted a report regarding ECAS each month since March
2019. It is included at the end of the monthly report transmitted by
JMD titled ``Fiscal Year 2019 Personnel, Hiring, and Caseload Report.''
EOIR submitted additional information directly addressing these
questions with the July 2019 monthly report.
Question 8. What is the total cost associated with integrating the
existing backlog into ECAS?
Answer. The expenses associated with integrating existing cases
into ECAS would include: (1) scanning all current cases that are not
electronic and that are not completed by the date ECAS is implemented
at a particular court, (2) scanning all future cases filed at a court
until the date that ECAS is implemented at that court, (3) scanning all
reopened or remanded cases and (4) the opportunity costs and
miscellaneous costs associated with reallocating employee work to this
project, especially for cases that will be completed in the near
future. EOIR cannot presently estimate any of these costs with
precision because it cannot predict when cases will be completed, how
many and when new cases will be filed in the future, or which cases
will be reopened or remanded in the future. Nevertheless, using the
pending caseload as a rough proxy and a baseline for the first cost,
EOIR estimates that it would cost $49,500,000 and take 10 years to scan
the approximately 990,000 current pending cases, based on an estimation
of scanning 100,000 files per year at a rate of $50 per file with each
file taking 1 hour to scan.
Question 9. It is my understanding that, currently, when an
individual moves, or for any other reason, appears in front of
different immigration court dockets, their paper file is mailed or
shipped to the new court. What are these mailing/shipping costs for the
Department?
Answer. Over fiscal year 2019, the immigration courts spent
approximately $728,575 in FedEx shipping costs.
grant funding delayed due to sanctuary city conditions
Question 10. In the Department's fiscal year 2020 Budget Hearing,
we discussed special conditions and bonus points applied to DOJ grants.
These conditions relate to Sanctuary Cities, and as I stated then, I
agree that the need for compliance with Federal law is paramount, but
so is the need to fight violent crime on the State and Local level. As
we discussed, several nationwide injunctions have been issued and are
being litigated; I also asked if there was a way to submit COPS Hiring
grant applications so that they may at least be reviewed while the
outcome of these cases is pending. You agreed to look into this, and I
appreciate that. Can you tell me if this is possible, or if there is
some other way to expedite the review and disbursement of 2018 and 2019
COPS Hiring grants?
Answer. In September 2017, the City of Los Angeles challenged the
Department of Justice's ability to use programmatic authority to
prioritize grant funding through the COPS Office. In April 2018, a
district court in California issued a nationwide injunction preventing
the Department of Justice from using its programmatic authority to
incentivize cooperation on immigration policy, a decision that the
Department immediately appealed in May 2018. Oral arguments were held
on August 30, 2018, and on July 12, 2019, the United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the district court's ruling. The
Ninth Circuit held that the Department did not exceed its statutory
authority in awarding bonus points for immigration-focused priorities
or cooperation. On August 2, 2019, the City of Los Angeles filed a
Petition for Rehearing or Rehearing En Banc with the Ninth Circuit and
a decision on that petition is still pending. The Department filed a
Motion to Expedite the Issuance of Mandate, or to Stay the Injunction
Pending Issuance of Mandate on July 29, 2019, but that motion was
denied on August 27, 2019.
The COPS Office is working diligently to finalize a solicitation
for both fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019 COPS Hiring Program
funding, with the intention of opening the program as soon as possible
following the issuance of the mandate lifting the injunction by the
Ninth Circuit. Once resolved, the Department and the COPS Office are
committed to acting as quickly as possible to expedite the program to
ensure these critical public safety dollars get directly into the hands
of State, local and Tribal law enforcement.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeanne Shaheen
bureau of prisons
Question 1. Over the past 2 years we've heard that the BOP has left
thousands of positions unfilled and I appreciate the Attorney General
finally lifting the hiring freeze for BOP. How many positions are
vacant for the 122 institutions across the country and how long have
these positions been unfilled? Please break out by institution, job
series and job title. What is DOJ's plan to speed up the hiring process
and bring an end to what is a longstanding and perennial problem of
understaffing in our Federal prisons?
Answer. While staffing at some Bureau institutions can be
challenging, particularly in institutions that are located remotely or
in areas where the prevailing wage is higher than the Federal pay
scale, the Bureau is committed to the goal of 100 percent staffing at
its facilities nationwide. To that end, the Bureau has put in place
recruitment and retention incentives at hard-to-fill locations, and has
instituted a nationwide incentive to retain retirement eligible staff.
These incentives are already bearing fruit. In March 2019, for the
first time since 2016, the Bureau had more staff hires than staff
departures, and this trend has continued each month since.
The Bureau has also put in place specialty incentives for certain
hard to recruit positions, such as physicians, nurses, dentists, and
psychologists. These include student loan repayment and specialty pay
rate incentives. Finally, the Bureau has recently been approved to use
3,000 temporary positions that will allow it to move forward more
expeditiously in filling vacancies.
Enclosed is a spreadsheet delineating current vacancies by
institution, job series, and job title. Data on how long a position has
been vacant is not tracked nationally and cannot be obtained.
[See total vacant and filled positions by location in attachment 3
in the appendix at the end of the hearing.]
[See vacant and filled positions BOP-wide by location in attachment
4 in the appendix at the end of the hearing.]
Question 2. For far too long, BOP used teachers, counselors and
other administrative staff as correctional officers--a practice known
as augmentation. This Committee has directed the BOP to significantly
curtail augmentation. What is your plan to accomplish that?
Answer. The safety of staff, inmates, and the public is the highest
priority for the BOP. BOP is working diligently to enhance its
recruitment efforts to increase its correctional officer complement. It
is currently trying to fill over 4,000 vacancies nationwide. While that
process will take time, BOP is making meaningful progress. BOP has made
almost 10,500 selections since March 2018, with hires exceeding
separations each month. They have established 10 percent recruitment,
relocation, and retention incentives at our hard-to-fill locations, and
a 5 percent nationwide retention incentive for retirement-eligible
employees. BOP has also established a higher entry pay scale for newly-
hired Correctional Officers for individuals who have relevant
experience. This pay scale should make these positions more attractive
for applicants who have solid correctional experience. BOP is also
using 3,000 temporary positions to provide for seamless transition as
staff promote or retire, avoiding the lag caused by waiting until the
position is vacant to begin the hiring process.
It is also important to bear in mind that, while BOP strives to
fill all of its correctional positions with full-time officers, all
staff assigned to correctional facilities are law enforcement officers
and are considered correctional workers first, regardless of their
occupation. All staff receive the same formal training (both initial
and continuing) as the correctional officers, and all staff are
informed at the time of hiring that they are expected to perform law
enforcement functions during routine and non-routine situations. Staff
correctional responsibilities precede all others. Accordingly, all
staff receive law enforcement pay and law enforcement retirement
benefits. When an insufficient number of correctional officers are
available to cover mission critical correctional posts, the BOP may
assign non-custody staff as officers to reduce the need to vacate posts
deemed critical for the safety and security of the institution. All
staff are made aware at the time of hiring that when BOP institutions
must use augmentation, this may curtail or delay the normal duties they
perform.
Question 3. When did development on the Risk and Needs Assessment,
the tool that's being used determine individual prisoners ``recidivism
risk'' required as part of the First Step Act, start? What is the
expected cost of IT development, deployment and usage for the Risk and
Needs Assessment for fiscal year 2020 and each year after that?
Answer. The Department was partially shut down until Friday,
January 25, 2019. Most of the staff working on First Step Act-related
projects were furloughed until that date, and nearly all FSA-related
work, including development of the Risk and Needs Assessment System,
did not qualify as excepted work that could be performed during a
partial shut down. When the Government reopened on Monday, January 28,
2019, the Department began the process of identifying organizations
that might serve as the Host Committee and worked to identify sources
of funding for the Independent Review Committee.
The Department is working with the administration and Congress to
ensure that necessary funds to implement the First Step Act--including
for IT development, deployment, and usage for the Risk and Needs
Assessment--will be available in fiscal year 2020 and beyond.
Question 4. The fiscal year 2020 budget request for BOP included
less than $100 million for the BOP's Buildings and Facilities (B&F)
account even though BOP's own list of ``Modernization and Repair
Unfunded Priorities'' totaled nearly $712 million. In light of this
large amount of unfunded M&R and some recent large and high-profile
issues regarding prison facilities, such as the heating and electrical
malfunction at MDC Brooklyn on some of the coldest days of the year and
the ongoing problem of arsenic in the water at USP Atlanta, what is
being done to proper M&R is covered?
Answer. Given the limited amount of funding provided to BOP's
Modernization and Repair Program, BOP must prioritize its needs.
Institution Facilities staff perform detailed annual inspections of all
areas and provide two lists of projects to the respective Regional
Office identifying items in need of corrective action: one list of
projects costing less than $300,000 and one list of projects costing
more than $300,000. Regional Office staff review the justifications and
for those projects under $300,000 prioritize them to receive funding
from the regional office. For those projects costing more than
$300,000, a priority list is developed and sent to the Bureau's
headquarters or Central Office. Central Office reviews all projects
submitted from all six Bureau regional offices and identifies those
projects in need of funding. They are added to the M&R Unfunded
Priority List. With the assistance of the regional office staff, those
projects on the M&R Unfunded List in the most critical need are
identified and funding is allocated to as many as feasible. In
addition, as the fiscal year progresses, emergencies may arise. BOP
must re-prioritize needs in order to fund emergencies as they occur. At
times, funded projects may be canceled and those funds redirected to
cover the emergencies. BOP also identifies additional projects for
funding, to include emergencies, throughout the fiscal year as
contracts are awarded and costs are less than expected.
refugee vetting
I understand that Security Advisory Opinion (SAO) processing delays
are in part responsible for the administration's failure to reach even
half of its 45,000 refugee admissions goal in fiscal year 2018. The FBI
is integral to the refugee security vetting process and in particular,
SAO processing. The administration set a new record low admissions goal
of 30,000 in fiscal year 2019, and is on track to resettle only about
20,000 by the end of this fiscal year.
Question 5. Given administrative changes to the security process
for refugees--especially those from SAO countries--what increases in
the capacity of the FBI have happened and are still needed to restore a
robust refugee resettlement program?
Answer. The FBI is only one agency involved in the vetting process.
While an individual subject to a SAO may clear one agency, it may not
be cleared in another. The FBI can address only those SAOs it has
received and returned. The FBI is not the adjudicating agency and
provides relevant information to the adjudicating agency to inform
their determination. The FBI continues to support the Department of
State and the Department of Homeland Security as appropriate,
recognizing that it has only one small piece of the overall refugee
vetting program.
Question 6. What is the average time it takes to process one SAO,
and what is the current backlog of SAOs awaiting determination? Does
the FBI have any benchmarks or goals for processing times?
Answer. The FBI vets SAO Merlins, which are a subset of refugee
applicants subject to additional screening based on potential threats
and national security concerns. These requests are worked on a first-
in/first-out workflow system and require in-depth review of not just
principal applicants but also their family and associates. A thorough
manual review of one application can take a vetting analyst 1 day or up
to several days, depending on the number of individuals listed and the
complexity of the application, and whether or not derogatory
information is identified. The Department of State and USCIS will often
request the FBI to expedite the review of certain cases, which the FBI
prioritizes ahead of those already in the workflow system. In the
instances that the application is relatively straightforward, the FBI
is able to complete its process quickly. From October 1, 2018 to March
31, 2019, the FBI was able to return responses on more than 5,000
applications where no derogatory information was identified. The total
number of refugees in the USRAP pipeline is unknown to the FBI.
Question 7. Will any new staffing or reassignment of staff be
required to carry out these new requirements?
Answer. There are currently a total of 28 FBI agents, professional
staff, and contractors dedicated solely to vetting refugees, which is a
significant increase over prior years' staffing levels. However, this
current resource level is not sufficient to guarantee that all of the
refugee applications are completed in a timely manner.
The FBI has been working on technological enhancements to clear
applicants with no derogatory information in FBI holdings faster and
the 2020 budget requests additional automation enhancements and
personnel for manual reviews.
Question 8. How might Congress seek to increase capacity at the FBI
in order to see the USRAP operate in a timely manner, so that the
fiscal year 2019 (and fiscal year 2020) admissions goal(s) can be met?
Answer. The FBI is supporting the National Vetting Center (NVC)
pursuant to the President's National Security Memorandum. The FBI has
prioritized the NVC above any technical upgrades to the refugee vetting
process. Even though the FBI's process for reviewing SAO Merlins
changed in 2016, the processing time has consistently remained the
same. The new process is more thorough and entails a review of not only
principal applications, but also family members and associates.
Therefore, a thorough review for one application can take up to several
days. Though the level of effort the FBI applies to each application
increased in 2016, the FBI has shifted internal resources to maintain
consistent processing times. As of November 2019, the FBI has nearly
completed its backlog of SAO Merlin applications. The 2020 Budget
requests additional resources to hire additional personnel for the
manual reviews and to work on technological enhancements to further
automate the process.
Question 9. Recent Special Immigrant Visa arrivals represent a more
than 60 percent drop compared to average monthly arrivals in fiscal
year 2017, despite the fact that Afghan SIVs have not been subject to
the same pauses and additional vetting procedures DHS has instituted
for other countries and for refugee populations more broadly. Total SIV
arrivals overall in the first few months of fiscal year 2019 show that
the U.S. is not on track to resettling the number of Afghan SIVs it
planned for this year. How is DOJ working to ensure Afghan SIVs
continue to be processed in a timely manner?
Answer. Under its new vetting structure, the FBI has been
constantly working since summer 2018 to refine the processes in such a
way that will allow for the most efficient and accurate vetting of the
Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) population. From June to December 2018,
the FBI vetted 640 SIV applicants. Since January 2019, the FBI has
vetted 3,150 SIV applicants.
Question 10. U.S.-affiliated Iraqis (Iraqi P-2s) are individuals
who provided critical services, like translation, to U.S. missions
abroad and now face persecution as a result. Conservative estimates
suggest that there are tens of thousands of Iraqis with close
affiliations with the U.S. Government waiting for interviews to have
their cases for resettlement processed. What is DOJ doing to increase
the number of U.S.-affiliated Iraqis who arrive this year and next?
Answer. The FBI continues to work with the Department of State and
Department of Defense to mitigate potential derogatory information for
the Priority-2 Iraqi population. The FBI does not track individuals who
provided translation or other services separately.
wire act
Question 11. The Office of Legal Counsel recently released a memo
that reinterpreted the Wire Act in a way that has put both Internet
lottery sales and brick-and-mortar sales of traditional lottery at risk
of being considered in violation of the Act. Billions of dollars
generated annually from lottery proceeds fund worthy causes including
public education in States like New Hampshire.
The Supreme Court also indicated its agreement with two Federal
circuit courts of appeal that held the Act applies solely to betting or
wagering on sports events, and further noted the importance of Federal
policy respecting the policy choices of citizens in each individual
State. State lotteries are authorized and regulated by State law;
operated by the State or the State's statutory designee; conducted by
licensed lottery retailers or through legal Internet channels of
distribution that are within the State; and purchased only by persons
physically present within the State.
I appreciate that DOJ extended the enforcement moratorium on the
memo in light of the suit filed by the New Hampshire Lottery
Commission. I also understand that DOJ is currently reviewing whether
the Wire Act applies to State lotteries and their vendors.
What steps does DOJ plan to take to clarify that the Wire Act is
not intended to prohibit the operations of State lotteries whether
online or in-person sales?
Answer. The Wire Act was enacted in 1961, decades before State
lotteries sought to sell tickets over the Internet. Should Congress
wish to ensure that the Wire Act does not prohibit State lotteries and
their vendors from using the Internet for online sales, then Congress
could amend the terms of the Wire Act and accomplish the result.
Congress has previously adopted such measures to create exemptions from
other Federal laws regulating gambling and lotteries. See, e.g., 18
U.S.C. 1307; 1953(b)(4).
The Department is currently involved in litigation concerning
whether Section 1084(a) of the Wire Act applies exclusively to sports
gambling. On June 3, 2019, a Federal district court held that it is so
limited, and the Department's appeal is now pending. With respect to
State lotteries, the Deputy Attorney General issued a memorandum on
April 8, 2019 directing Department attorneys to refrain from applying
Section 1084(a) to State lotteries and their vendors, if they are
operating as authorized by State law. The memorandum provides that, if
the Department determines that the Wire Act does apply to State
lotteries or their vendors, then Department attorneys should extend the
forbearance period for 90 days after the Department publicly announces
this position. This would allow Congress a reasonable time to amend the
statute, should it choose to do so, or otherwise allow State lotteries
and their vendors to conform their operations to Federal law.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Susan M. Collins
regional information sharing system
Question 1. The Regional Information Sharing System, known as
``RISS,'' is a program that links thousands of criminal justice
agencies through secure communications and information sharing services
to help combat multi-jurisdictional crimes. I'll give you an example:
Law enforcement officials in Auburn, Maine, used the RISS databases to
solve a local break-in. They were able to identify the stolen items
through RISS, and ultimately locate and arrest two suspects who had
fled to Florida. Despite the proven effectiveness of this program, this
year's budget requests cutting funding for RISS. Looking forward, will
DOJ prioritize support for RISS, which has proven to effectively serve
the law enforcement community?
Answer. I appreciate your interest in RISS, and we will take this
information into consideration in future budget requests as we
determine how to address an array of funding priorities for DOJ. In
fiscal year 2020, the President's budget prioritizes resources
addressing violent crime prevention and reduction. While the six
regional centers that make up the Regional Information Sharing System
offer a range of justice information sharing and investigative support
services, only part of their activities are focused on addressing
violent and drug-related crime. The $10 million request for RISS in the
fiscal year 2020 President's budget will continue to provide support
for those efforts.
opioid crisis
Question 2. Congress has increased funding and Federal efforts year
after year to combat the opioid crisis, yet the Department's budget,
once again, proposes eliminating the COPS Anti-Heroin Task Forces. Why
does the Department propose eliminating the program, which has helped
local law enforcement partners take on the opioid crisis?
Answer. Combating the opioid epidemic is a top priority for the
Department and the administration. To ensure more streamlined efforts
throughout the Federal Government to combat this issue and avoid
duplicative efforts, no funding is requested in fiscal year 2020 by the
COPS Office for the Anti-Heroin Task Force program. By redirecting this
funding, the Department will be able to increase resources toward
supporting other mission critical initiatives, such as Federal funding
for DEA prescription opioid and heroin enforcement programs.
anti-semitism
Question 3. I am a strong supporter of the U.S.-Israel
relationship, and I recognize there are many legitimate criticisms of
Israel and various Israeli governments. However, groups and individuals
have often hid under the veil of legitimate criticism of Israel to
express hateful and harmful anti-Semitic rhetoric. Jews and people of
all faiths in the United States stand at risk of injury and harm as
these anti-Semitic tropes and expressions become normalized in American
discourse. The Justice Department is tasked with defining anti-Semitism
and enforcing Federal hate-crime legislation. Could you discuss the
importance of addressing certain anti-Israel activity in the
Department's definition of anti-Semitism?
Answer. Combatting anti-Semitism is an important priority for me
and for the Department of Justice. We hosted a summit on the topic in
July. As I stated then, I am deeply concerned about the rise in hate
crimes and political violence that we have seen over the past decade,
including a marked increase in reported instances of anti-Semitic hate
crimes.
The Department's main role in combatting anti-Semitism comes in the
prosecution of hate crimes. Federal hate-crime laws cover threats or
attacks motivated by animus based on race, religion, and national
origin (among other attributes), whether actual or perceived. The
Department therefore prosecutes crimes committed out of anti-Jewish or
anti-Israeli attitudes as hate crimes. In such cases, we must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted because of anti-
Jewish or anti-Israeli bias as a ``but for'' motivating factor for the
crime. We evaluate such matters on a case-by-case basis, and look at
the full facts and context of each incident, including statements made
by the alleged perpetrator, to determine if the crime was in fact
motivated by anti-Jewish or anti-Israeli bias.
I thus agree that anti-Israel activity can cross the line from
criticism of policies of the Israel Government into anti-Semitism. For
example, at the Department's summit in July, I noted that, ``[o]n
college campuses today, Jewish students who support Israel are
frequently targeted for harassment, Jewish student organizations are
marginalized, and progressive Jewish students are told they must
denounce their beliefs and their heritage in order be part of
'intersectional' causes.'' While the First Amendment sometimes limits
what the Government can do, the Department will not shy away from
prosecuting hate crimes where appropriate. Ultimately, we depend on our
society as a whole to reject anti-Semitism in all of its forms and to
change the hearts and minds of those who harbor it.
iran sanctions
Question 4. The Trump administration has imposed strong sanctions
on Iran as part of the President's Iran strategy, and the Justice
Department plays a vital role in enforcing these sanctions. Several
cases over the last 5 years have shown the willingness of large
companies to violate U.S. sanctions when faced with lax enforcement. Do
you intend to make the prosecution of Iran sanctions violations a
priority?
Answer. The Department of Justice vigorously works to disrupt
violations of U.S. sanctions and export controls related to Iran and
Hezbollah. The Department, including the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, has consistently and aggressively investigated and
prosecuted Iran sanctions violations and will continue to do so. Iran
sanctions matters comprise more than 40 percent of all export control
and sanctions cases that the Department handles nationwide--more than
any other single foreign jurisdiction.
hezbollah
Question 5. The terrorist organization Hezbollah has claimed the
lives of more Americans than any terror group other than Al-Qaeda, and
continues to pose a significant threat to the United States and its
allies. In addition to terror, Hezbollah maintains a vast criminal
network that proliferates weapons, traffics narcotics, and launders
money around the globe, Former Attorney General Sessions labelled
Hezbollah as a top transnational criminal organization priority for the
Justice Department. How is the Justice Department in 2019 continuing to
fight Hezbollah and maintain the high urgency of prosecutions?
Answer. The Department's Hezbollah Financing and Narcoterrorism
Team (HFNT), created by former Attorney General Sessions, continues to
do important work and meet with partners as appropriate to advance
investigations and prosecutions of Hezbollah-related targets around the
country. In May 2019, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern
District of New York obtained the first U.S. conviction of an operative
of the Islamic Jihad Organization, a component of Hezbollah, on
terrorism charges. In August 2019, the Criminal Division's Money
Laundering and Asset Recovery Section completed the prosecution of
Kassim Tajideen, who was designated by OFAC as a Specially Designated
Global Terrorist in 2009 based upon his tens of millions of dollars of
financial support of Hezbollah. Tajideen operated a multi-billion-
dollar commodity distribution business primarily in the Middle East and
Africa through a web of vertically integrated companies, partnerships,
and trade names. He conspired to conduct over $50 million in
transactions with U.S. businesses that violated these prohibitions.
Tajideen pled guilty to money laundering conspiracy, is serving 5 years
in prison, and agreed to pay $50 million in forfeiture in advance of
his sentencing, which he did. The Department also continues to engage
actively in overseas capacity-building with our foreign law enforcement
partners engaged in the fight against Hezbollah, including at a June
2019 law enforcement coordination workshop bringing together Department
representatives with counterparts from Interpol, Ameripol, Argentina,
Peru, Colombia, Panama, Paraguay, and Chile, among others.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Lindsey Graham
first step act
Question 1. The FIRST STEP Act was a monumental, bipartisan
accomplishment that works to reduce recidivism, improve the reentry of
inmates back into society, and reform sentencing for certain nonviolent
Federal offenses.
The law authorizes $75 million to implement the provisions of the
FIRST STEP Act, yet the funding request is $15 million. Why did the
Department request this funding level?
Answer. As you know, the First Step Act was signed into law on
December 21, 2018 and as such the President's fiscal year 2020 budget
request had already been formulated. While the full scope of resources
needed to implement the First Step Act (FSA) continues to be evaluated,
the fiscal year 2020 President's budget included $16.5 million as an
initial investment, including $15 million for the Bureau of Prisons and
$1.5 million for the National Institute of Justice.
On July 19, 2019, the Department announced the re-direction of $75
million in existing funds for FSA implementation in fiscal year 2019.
The Department has worked with the CJS subcommittee on fiscal year 2020
First Step Act resource needs, totaling $116.1 million. Both the fiscal
year 2020 Senate and House Marks provide $75 million for the First Step
Act. We continue to work with the subcommittee on needs for the First
Step Act upon request.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Patrick J. Leahy
special counsel's report
Question 1. During your testimony on April 10, I asked whether you
spoke with Special Counsel Mueller about his decision not to arrive at
a conclusion with respect to obstruction of justice; you confirmed that
such a conversation took place. You stated that he didn't express to
you any expectation or interest in leaving the obstruction question to
Congress, but that he also didn't say that the obstruction decision
should be left to up you.
1a. Now that you have released a redacted version of the Special
Counsel's report, with as much detail as your memory allows, please
describe what Special Counsel Mueller told you--and what you told him--
during that conversation about why he didn't arrive at a conclusion on
the obstruction of justice question, and how--and by whom--that
question should be resolved.
Answer. I transmitted a letter to Congressional leaders on March
24, 2019, which provided the principal conclusions reached by Special
Counsel Robert Mueller, including as to the obstruction-of-justice
issue central to Volume II of the Special Counsel's ``Report on the
Investigation Into Russian Interference In The 2016 Presidential
Election.'' This letter is enclosed.
[See the letter of March 24, 2019, in attachment 1 in the appendix
at the end of the hearing.]
On April 18, 2019, I released a version of the Special Counsel's
confidential report to the public. As I explained in my letter of the
same date to the Chairmen and Ranking Members of the Senate Judiciary
Committee and House Judiciary Committee, the public report is ``subject
only to those redactions required by the law or compelling law
enforcement, national security, or personal privacy interests.'' In
addition, I have made a minimally redacted version of the Special
Counsel's report available to certain congressional leaders and staff.
The public report, which addresses Special Counsel Mueller's reasons
for not reaching a conclusion about obstruction of justice, speaks for
itself.
In addition to the report, Special Counsel Mueller has made public
statements and given congressional testimony about his investigation,
report, and findings. Those statements speak for themselves.
1b. Was there any written correspondence between Special Counsel
Mueller and his team and the Justice Department with respect to why he
did not arrive at a conclusion on the obstruction of justice question?
If so, can you provide this Committee with copies of such
correspondence?
Answer. Special Counsel Mueller addressed this issue in his
confidential report, which I have since made public, as well as in
public statements and congressional testimony. The public report,
statements, and testimony speak for themselves.
Question 2. During your testimony on April 10, you stated that
``the court can only waive 6(e)'' grand jury secrecy ``for one of the
grounds specifically in 6(e).'' But there are avenues for disclosure
under Rule 6(e) that do not require any action from a court. Rule
6(e)(3)(D), for example, allows the Attorney General--without the prior
approval of a court--to release grand jury material to ``any
appropriate Federal . . . official, for the purpose of preventing or
responding to'' foreign threats or hostile acts.
2a. Have you considered Rule 6(e)(3)(D) for disclosure of grand
jury material?
Answer. The Department understands and takes very seriously the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, including the confidentiality
requirements under Rule 6. The Department addressed this issue in a
June 12, 2019 letter to Representative Adam Schiff, Chairman of the
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, which is enclosed.
[See the letter of June 12, 2019, in attachment 2 in the appendix
at the end of the hearing.]
2b. Do you agree that Members of Congress--and certainly relevant
committees, such as the Judiciary, Intelligence, Foreign Relations, and
Appropriations committees--have a significant role to play in
``responding to'' and ``preventing'' attacks on our elections by
hostile foreign actors?
Answer. Please see the enclosed June 12, 2019 letter to Chairman
Adam Schiff.
Question 3. In the FOIA context, courts have repeatedly found that
the executive branch has waived executive privilege through informal
statements that contain no explicit mention of a waiver, including: (1)
the executive's representations about purportedly privileged materials;
(2) use of those representations to convince the public; and (3) an
overlap between what has been disclosed and what is purportedly
privileged.
Has the Justice Department applied the President's repeated claims
about the Russia investigation to this standard? Did the President not
waive any claims to executive privilege through his repeated, public
discussions of this investigation?
Answer. Executive privilege has several components, including the
national security, deliberative process, law enforcement, attorney-
client, and presidential communications components. The legal standards
governing waiver of each of these components differ in important ways,
and the Department carefully analyzes these doctrines prior to making,
recommending, or defending any assertion of privilege.
2020 census
Question 4. The Census Act includes strict confidentiality
protections for personal data. Public confidence in the statutory
promise that personal information cannot be shared or used against an
individual for any purpose, including law enforcement, is critical for
a successful census.
With the 2020 Census less than a year away, will you commit to
ensuring that the Justice Department will take no steps to violate
these confidentiality protections, and will not allow an end-run around
those protections via Executive Order or a reinterpretation of the law?
Answer. As the Department has consistently maintained, the
Department will abide by all laws that protect the confidentiality of
personal data collected through the 2020 Census.
zero tolerance policy
Question 5. When you were asked your views about the ``zero
tolerance'' prosecution policy implemented by Attorney General Sessions
at your confirmation hearing, you stated that because you were ``not in
the department,'' you didn't ``know all the details.''
Now that you have been in charge of the Department for 2 months,
does the Department have evidence to demonstrate that the zero
tolerance policy had any measurable deterrent effect on illegal
crossings at our southwest border? If so, please share with this
Committee.
Answer. The Zero Tolerance Prosecution Initiative directs the U.S.
Attorney's Offices along the Southwest Border, to the extent
practicable and in consultation with DHS, to adopt a zero-tolerance
policy for all offenses referred for prosecution under 8 U.S.C.
Sec. 1325(a). The prosecution policy is still in place and therefore,
its full effects have yet to be seen. I will note that, in fiscal year
2018, the number of defendants prosecuted under Section 1325(a)
surpassed 60,000 for the first time since fiscal year 2014.
anti-heroin task force grants
Question 6. The Trump administration's fiscal year 2020 budget
request zeroes out all funding for Anti-Heroin Task Force grants. These
grants, which we appropriated at $32 million in fiscal year 2019,
support law enforcement task forces disrupting drug trafficking
organizations to keep heroin and other opioids out of our communities.
6a. Was the Department consulted about the administration's
decision to zero out all funding for Anti-Heroin Task Force grants in
its 2020 budget request? Did you include funding in your original
request, but the passback the Department received from the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) eliminated the funding?
Answer. The Executive Branch communications that led to the
President's budgetary decisions are confidential and may not be
disclosed either by the Department or by those who have prepared the
budget.
6b. Does the Department not consider these grants critical to
efforts combatting our opioid epidemic?
Answer. Combating the opioid epidemic is a top priority for the
Department and the administration. To ensure more streamlined efforts
throughout the Federal Government to combat this issue and avoid
duplicative efforts, no funding is requested in fiscal year 2020 by the
COPS Office for the Anti-Heroin Task Force program. By redirecting this
funding, the Department will be able to increase resources toward
supporting other mission critical initiatives, such as providing $11.1
million in additional Federal funding for DEA prescription opioid and
heroin enforcement programs. This will allow DEA to fund 5 new heroin
enforcement groups and add 35 new DEA agents.
Question 7. Between the Justice Department's testimony before House
appropriators on April 9, Senate appropriators on April 10, and the
Acting Director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives' testimony before the House last month, it is clear that
there is a difference in opinion between the Department and ATF on the
impact of the President's fiscal year 2020 budget on ATF personnel. The
concern is that the slight budget increase allocated to the ATF in the
President's budget will be fully consumed by program increases and a
$25 million budget shortfall from last year, which will result in
losses of more than 370 ATF personnel in the coming year through
attrition.
Can you commit to protecting ATF by doing everything you can to
ensure the Bureau does not lose agents or other personnel through the
coming budget cycle, taking into account expected losses from
attrition?
Answer. The Department and ATF are working together to ensure that
ATF can support program increases in critical areas while maintaining
agent levels at the number proposed in the fiscal year 2020 President's
Budget. A final determination regarding the allocation of ATF's
resources is dependent on the funding received in fiscal year 2020, but
agent hiring will remain a Departmental priority.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Dianne Feinstein
voting rights
Question 1. In response to Questions for the Record submitted after
your confirmation hearing, you wrote that you would make the protection
of civil rights and voting rights ``a priority for the Department'' if
you were confirmed. (Barr Response, DF QFR 49)
Since becoming Attorney General, what specific steps have you taken
to make the protection of voting rights a priority for the Justice
Department?
Answer. The Department is committed to the zealous and evenhanded
enforcement of the Federal voting laws and to free and fair elections
for all Americans. Since I was sworn in as Attorney General, the
Department has carried out that mission all across the country. In June
2019, the Department entered into a consent decree to resolve its
lawsuit in United States v. Eastpointe, which the United States filed
to protect the voting rights of African Americans under Section 2 of
the Voting Rights Act. The United States had alleged that the at-large
method of electing city councilmembers in Eastpointe, Michigan
illegally diluted African-American voting strength in violation of
Section 2. The consent decree between the United States and the City
resolves that violation and was entered by the district court on June
28, 2019.
In February 2019, the Department entered into a memorandum of
understanding with the State of Connecticut under the Help America Vote
Act (HAVA) and the National Voter Registration Act (NVRA). That
memorandum of understanding will ensure that the State fulfills its
Federal-law obligation to coordinate its statewide voter registration
database with Connecticut Department of Public Health Records to
identify and remove from the voter rolls individuals who have died.
Additionally, the Department has entered into settlement agreements
with four local jurisdictions under the Americans with Disabilities Act
to ensure that those jurisdictions provide access at the polling place
to voters with disabilities. One of those settlements resolved long-
running litigation with Harris County, Texas, whose voting program--the
third largest in the country--includes over 750 polling places. Two of
those settlements--with McKinley County, New Mexico and Sandoval
County, New Mexico--cover polling places on Tribal lands. The final
agreement was reached with Concord, New Hampshire. All of these
settlements are part of the Department's ADA Voting Initiative, which
focuses on protecting the voting rights of individuals with
disabilities and, to date, has resulted in Department surveys of more
than 1,600 polling places and increased polling place accessibility in
more than 35 jurisdictions.
Question 2. In Questions for the Record for your confirmation
hearing, I asked about President Trump's claims regarding alleged voter
fraud. As I noted in my question to you, President Trump said on the
day before the election that ``[t]here are a lot of people--a lot of
people--my opinion, and based on proof--that try and get in illegally
and actually vote illegally.'' (Washington Post story quoting Trump
(Nov. 5, 2018)) I asked if you were aware of any evidence that ``a lot
of people'' vote illegally. You responded that you had not studied the
issue raised ``in great detail'' and that you were not familiar with
the data or statistics on the matter.
2a. Now that you have been in office, have you found any data
supporting this claim? Are you aware of any evidence that ``a lot of
people'' vote illegally? If so, what is it?
Answer. I am aware that people do vote illegally and that the
Department investigates and prosecutes such cases where appropriate.
For instance, the Eastern District of North Carolina has, upon
predication from local election authorities, and through investigation
by the Department of Homeland Security, initiated at least 20 alien
voting cases, including both felony and misdemeanor offenses.
2b. Are you concerned that statements like this undermine the
public's faith in election results?
Answer. It is my hope that all members of the public have faith
that any properly predicated cases of illegal voting will be
investigated and prosecuted pursuant to the Principles of Federal
Prosecution.
extreme risk protection orders
Question 3. At your confirmation hearing, you stated that: ``I also
think we need to push along the [Extreme Risk Protection Orders] so
that we have these red flag laws to supplement the use of the
background check to find out if someone has a mental disturbance. This
is the single most important thing I think we can do in the gun control
area to stop these massacres from happening in the first place.''
Will you support enactment of my bill (S. 506) to create grants to
incentivize States into creating their own extreme-risk laws?
Answer. The Federal Commission on School Safety, of which the
Department was a member, recommended that States adopt Extreme Risk
Protection Order (ERPO) laws that incorporate an appropriate
evidentiary standard and protect due process and Second Amendment
rights. Seventeen States and the District of Columbia have already
passed ERPO laws, and many others are actively considering them. The
Department would be pleased to review your legislation on this issue.
domestic violence and firearms
Question 4. Many domestic violence abusers who have been convicted
of a misdemeanor crime or are subject to a protection order are still
able to stockpile an arsenal of firearms and ammunition--despite being
prohibited from possessing either under Federal firearms law.
Local domestic violence programs often attempt to help victims by
seeking enforcement of Federal law and removal of the firearms, but
they are unable to get assistance from the Department of Justice and
other Federal agencies.
4a. What steps have you taken to improve the Department of
Justice's response to cases like these? If none, will you commit to
correcting this?
Answer. The Department is committed to enforcing Federal gun laws
and to ensuring that prohibited persons--including those ``convicted in
any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence"--do not possess
firearms.
On November 13, 2019, I announced Project Guardian, which is a
nationwide strategic plan to reduce gun violence. While many aspects of
Project Guardian should help in this area, the plan includes specific
emphasis on enforcing the background-check requirement for purchases by
those convicted of domestic violence misdemeanors or against whom a
protective order has been issued. Project Guardian also includes
measures to improve the information in the NICS database to make it
easier to identify prohibited persons who attempt to purchase firearms.
Other DOJ efforts help as well. Training on the Federal domestic
violence gun laws is included in all violent crime and Project Safe
Neighborhoods (PSN) trainings. In addition, Violence Against Women Act
points of contact are kept apprised of all legal developments in this
area to assist in the implementation of these laws. DOJ is also seeking
to broaden these domestic violence firearms prohibitions to include,
for example, local convictions--as suggested in the VAWA
Reauthorization Bill--which would enhance DOJ's ability to protect all
domestic violence victims.
While there is always room to improve, DOJ has done significant
work to address firearm possession by domestic violence offenders. In
fiscal year 2017, ATF initiated 2,648 field investigations based upon
referrals from the National Instant Criminal Background Check System
(NICS) involving allegations of the attempted acquisition or actual
acquisition of a firearm by a person convicted of a misdemeanor crime
of domestic violence. In fiscal year 2018, ATF initiated 2,596 of these
types of investigations and in the first quarter of fiscal year 2019
alone, ATF initiated 1,264 of these types of investigations. The number
of cases prosecuted under the Federal domestic violence gun laws
continues to rise.
4b. What kind of resources are you devoting to make sure that guns
are not as accessible to domestic abusers?
Answer. In June 2019, the Department announced the creation of a
Domestic Violence Working Group aimed at keeping guns out of the hands
of domestic abusers, using the tools of Federal prosecution to stop and
prevent domestic abuse. However, DOJ's task to prosecute abusers with
firearms has been made more challenging by the Supreme Court decision
in Rehaif v. US, requiring the government in gun possession cases to
prove not only a defendant's knowledge of gun possession but also of
the status that makes the defendant prohibited. This decision will
require significant outreach to our State, local and Tribal partners to
try and ensure that this knowledge is communicated during State, local
and Tribal proceedings. It will also require significant resources as
USAOs respond to challenges from previously convicted domestic violence
misdemeanants under the Gun Control Act.
The Department is also working to support the work of State and
local officials on this issue. Since 2016, the Department's Office on
Violence Against Women (OVW) has partnered with the Battered Women's
Justice Project (BWJP) to establish a national resource center on
domestic violence and firearms. The project provides resources and
training for relevant disciplines, including victim advocates, civil
attorneys, prosecutors, and law enforcement officers, about preventing
gun possession by domestic violence offenders and has a website,
https://www.preventdvgunviolence.org/, with comprehensive resources and
information. OVW is also working with the National Council of Juvenile
and Family Court Judges on an initiative to provide a small number of
pilot sites with intensive training and technical assistance on
enforcement of laws to prevent domestic abusers' access to firearms.
immigration
Question 5. President Trump stated last week that the United States
should ``get rid of judges''--specifically immigration judges--and
``get rid of the whole asylum system.''
5a. Do you agree that we should ``get rid of'' immigration judges?
If so, who should adjudicate immigration cases?
Answer. EOIR's mission is to adjudicate immigration cases by
fairly, expeditiously, and uniformly interpreting and administering the
Nation's immigration laws. This includes cases involving detained
aliens, criminal aliens, and aliens seeking asylum as a form of relief
from removal, while ensuring the standards of due process and fair
treatment for all parties involved.
The asylum system is being overwhelmed by the burdens created as
the result of increased apprehension and processing of hundreds of
thousands of aliens along the southern border. The majority of these
aliens do not have meritorious asylum claims. The increase in
apprehensions along the southern border has increased the immigration
court backlog, delayed the removal of those without a valid basis to
remain in the United States, and frustrated those who do have valid
claims to remain. The Department stands ready to work with Congress to
address the many inefficiencies in the immigration system and to ensure
that claims are addressed expeditiously and consistent with due
process.
5b. Do you agree that we should ``get rid of the whole asylum
system''?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 5(a) above.
Question 6. Immigration courts face an unprecedented backlog of
over 800,000 pending cases. As a result of a decision by Attorney
General Sessions in 2018, immigration judges are no longer able to
manage their dockets. Judges are now required to reopen approximately
350,000 cases that were previously closed, for immigrants who pose no
danger to the community. As a result, the backlog of cases is likely to
increase to well over 1 million.
Would you commit to allowing immigration judges to manage their
dockets by giving them flexibility to close cases where immigrants are
eligible for visas that would protect them from deportation?
Answer. The decision to limit administrative closure of cases in
2018 was based on a determination that immigration judges generally
lack the legal authority to close cases in that way. Experience also
showed that administrative closures did not help to reduce the backlog
of cases, as the backlog of cases increased by over 400,000 in the
approximately 6 years that immigration judges exercised such authority.
I do not believe that discretionary administrative closures represent a
sound docket-management policy.
Question 7. This week you ruled that people who have established a
credible fear of persecution or torture cannot be released on bond
while they wait for months and years for their immigration court case
to proceed. In doing so, you overruled a binding decision of the Board
of Immigration Appeals and created a de facto new category of mandatory
detention.
7a. Can asylum seekers who establish a credible fear of persecution
or torture be granted parole from detention while their immigration
cases are pending if they arrive in the U.S. between ports-of-entry?
Answer. In Matter of M-S-, 27 I&N Dec. 509 (A.G. 2019), I
determined that an alien who is transferred from expedited removal
proceedings to full removal proceedings after establishing a credible
fear of persecution or torture is ineligible for release on bond and
must be detained unless paroled under section 215(d)(5)(A) of the INA.
That decision is the subject of active ongoing litigation, and in
accordance with longstanding Department policy, it would not be
appropriate to comment on it further. Because parole decisions
regarding aliens are made by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
I would respectfully defer any specific questions about the parole
process to DHS.
7b. Are those asylum seekers subject to mandatory detention? Does
such mandatory detention before an immigration hearing without a bond
hearing violate the Constitution, including the due process clause of
5th Amendment?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 7(a) above.
7c. Given that the administration has limited capacity at ports-of-
entry and asylum seekers are waiting months to enter the U.S. to
express a fear of persecution or torture, do asylum seekers have a
realistic chance at receiving parole?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 7(a) above.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
foreign meddling in u.s. elections
Question 1. Do you agree with the unanimous assessment of our
Intelligence community that: ``Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered
an influence campaign in 2016 aimed at the U.S. presidential election.
Russia's goals were to undermine public faith in the U.S. democratic
process, denigrate Secretary Clinton, and harm her electability and
potential presidency'', and that ``Putin and the Russian Government
developed a clear preference for President-elect Trump.''
Answer. I agree that Russia took steps to interfere with the 2016
presidential election.
Question 2. Do you agree that the Russian Military Intelligence
units or GRU, hacked ``into the computers of U.S. persons and entities
involved in the 2016 presidential election, stole documents, and timed
the release of that stolen information to interfere with the 2016
presidential election'' as concluded in the Special Counsel's
indictment from July 2018?
Answer. The Department announced on July 13, 2018, that a Federal
grand jury in the District of Columbia returned an indictment charging
12 Russian military officers for conspiring to interfere with the 2016
presidential election. Consistent with longstanding Department policy
and practice, it would not be appropriate for me to comment further on
this pending matter.
Question 3. Do you agree that the Kremlin-linked troll organization
known as the Internet Research Agency: ``knowingly and intentionally
conspired...to defraud the United States by impairing, obstructing and
defeating the lawful functions of the government through fraud and
deceit for the purpose of interfering with the U.S. political and
electoral processes, including the presidential election of 2016,'' as
concluded by the Special Counsel's indictment of February 2018?
Answer. On February 16, 2018, a grand jury in the District of
Columbia returned an indictment charging 13 Russian nationals and three
companies, including Internet Research Agency, LLC, for seeking to
interfere with the U.S. political system, including the 2016 U.S.
presidential election. Consistent with longstanding Department policy
and practice, it would not be appropriate for me to comment further on
this pending matter.
Question 4. Was it correct for the Intelligence Community to
investigate the threats at the time they were occurring? Would you
define such actions as ``spying''?
Answer. There are two pending reviews at the Department of Justice,
one by the Office of the Inspector General and one by U.S. Attorney
John Durham, that relate to the investigation of Russian interference
in the 2016 Presidential election. Consistent with longstanding
Department policy and practice, it would not be appropriate for me to
comment further while those reviews remain pending.
Question 5. You acknowledged in response to my question that you
have no specific evidence of any impropriety in the FBI's
counterintelligence investigation begun in 2016, nor do you have any
specific evidence of any impropriety in the investigation as carried
out by Special Counsel Mueller.
Given the lack of evidence, why did you choose to repeatedly state
that you believe ``spying did occur''?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 4 above.
Question 6. What specific ``spying'' action or actions, by which
agencies or persons, were you referring to? And what specific evidence
do you have to support you claim of concerns that the investigation may
not be ``adequately predicated?''
Answer. Please see my response to Question 4 above.
Question 7. Is it your belief that our Intelligence Community
should investigate threats of foreign interference in the 2020
election? Do you believe that such actions would constitute ``spying''?
Answer. Counterintelligence activities, including
counterintelligence investigations of any threats of malign foreign
influence targeting the 2020 election, remains a critically important
area for the Department and the Intelligence Community. In light of the
efforts that foreign intelligence services made to influence previous
elections, the FBI established a Foreign Influence Task Force (FITF) in
2017 to investigate and combat malign foreign influence, including
efforts to interfere with election infrastructure. The FITF works
closely with the Intelligence Community to investigate those threats
and will continue to do so through the 2020 election.
russian interference
Question 8. Russia is attacking our democracy using hybrid warfare
and malign influence operations. The Justice Department has worked to
expose these operations. The Special Counsel, Mr. Mueller, has worked
with the Western District of Pennsylvania and separately with the
Eastern District of Virginia to secure indictments of Russian Military
Intelligence units (GRU) and the Kremlin-linked troll organization,
known as the Internet Research Agency.
Attorney General Barr, do you concur with the Director of National
Intelligence Coats' assessment that Russian hybrid warfare operations
are: ``persistent, ongoing'' and have the intent ``to undermine
America's democracy on a daily basis, regardless of whether it is
election time or not''?
Answer. I share concerns about the efforts of the Russian
government to interfere in our elections and to undermine our
democracy. The Department of Justice is committed to opposing these
efforts in cooperation with the Intelligence Community. For further
information, please see my answer to the preceding question.
Question 9. Do you support a whole of government approach to
counter and deter Russian hybrid warfare operations against the United
States, our allies, and partners?
Answer. I support a whole-of-government approach that works closely
with our allies and partners to counter and deter Russian
disinformation and malign influence operations in our election system
and democratic processes.
Question 10. As described in last summer's report of the Attorney
General's Cyber Digital Task Force: ``[t]he Department of Justice has a
significant role in investigating and disrupting foreign government
activity in the United States that threatens U.S. national security. In
particular, the Department has an important role in identifying and
combatting malign influence operations and in enforcing Federal laws
that foreign agents may violate when engaging in such operations.''
Has the President directed you to take action to counter and blunt
Russian hybrid warfare and malign influence operations?
Answer. This administration takes Russia's malign influence
activities very seriously and has directed the Department to take a
number of actions to counter those activities. Consistent with the
President's direction, the Department participates in the National
Security Council process, which coordinates the administration's
responses to counter and blunt Russian malign influence. As part of
that process, the Department has participated in developing the
administration's National Security Strategy and other strategic plans
that detail and direct interagency actions to respond to Russian's
malign influence operations.
Moreover, the President has issued Executive Order 13848, Imposing
Certain Sanctions in the Event of Foreign Interference in a United
States Election, to counter and blunt foreign efforts to interfere in
or undermine public confidence in United States elections. Among other
things, the Executive Order directs the Director of National
Intelligence to assess any information indicating that a foreign
government acted with the intent or purpose of interfering in a Federal
election; directs the Attorney General to assess (in consultation with
the Secretary of Homeland Security) whether any such efforts materially
affected the security or integrity of either election or campaign
infrastructure; and directs the Secretary of the Treasury (in
consultation with the Attorney General, among others) to impose all
sanctions that might be appropriate in light of those assessments. The
Department has also participated in a number of specific responses to
Russian malign influence operations, some of which were administration-
directed, including sanctions targeting Russian individuals and
entities for malign influence operations, actions to call out and
confront Russian efforts to undermine the United States, and efforts to
strengthen our alliances and stand up to Russia's malign influence
across the globe.
Question 11. General Curtis Scaparrotti, the outgoing European
Commander, recently testified to the Armed Services Committee that U.S.
efforts to counter Russian influence operations still lacked
``effective unification across the interagency.'' Equally troubling was
his assessment that the United States has yet to develop ``a multi-
faceted strategy to counter Russia.''
Do you agree with General Scaparrotti's assessment that the U.S.
Government still lacks an ``effective unification'' among Federal
agencies? Do you agree with the need for a multi-faceted strategy to
counter Russia?
Answer. No, I do not agree that we lack ``effective unification
across the interagency'' when it comes to election interference. The
Department participates in several processes to coordinate Federal
responses to Russian malign influence. For example, the National
Security Council leads coordination of the U.S. Government's strategy
to counter malign foreign influence operations and campaigns, including
Russia's influence operations. As part of that process, the Department
has helped develop the administration's National Security Strategy and
other strategic plans that detail and direct interagency actions to
respond to Russian's malign influence operations. The Department also
participates in a State Department-led Active Measures Abroad Steering
Committee, which oversees an interagency strategy to counter Russian
propaganda, disinformation, and other malign influence efforts abroad.
The Department also is a member of a joint State Department-Defense
Department effort to develop a tailored strategy against the problem of
Russian influence operations in Europe. We also are involved in other
interagency groups that are working to integrate U.S. Government
efforts to combat influence efforts that target our political processes
and institutions, including elections. As the Department, the FBI, the
Office of the Director of National Intelligence, and DHS announced in a
joint statement shortly before the 2018 election, we ``have been
working in unprecedented ways to combat influence efforts.'' We will
continue to enhance our interagency unity and strategies going forward.
Question 12. Do you believe efforts across the government--
including the FBI's Foreign Influence Task Force--should be expanded in
the face of these ongoing threats?
Answer. The FBI's efforts to combat malign foreign influence
initially focused on the threat posed by Russia. In the lead up to
2020, the FBI has expanded its efforts to include the malign foreign
influence threats from China, Iran, and other global adversaries. The
FBI's Counterintelligence Division partnered with the Counterterrorism,
Criminal Investigative, and Cyber Divisions to advance the FBI's
strategy in countering, identifying, and defeating efforts by our
adversaries to undermine U.S. democratic institutions and to address
malign foreign influence targeting the U.S. that comes from around the
globe.
Question 13. Are our activities changing Putin's behavior, in your
assessment?
Answer. The FBI's Counterintelligence Division assesses that
Russia's intelligence services continue to use human and technical
sources to collect voluminous amounts of intelligence from the public
and private sectors, which informs Russia's influence activities,
broader foreign policy, military posture, and economic interests. The
Department defers to the Intelligence Community for assessments of any
impact of our activities on Putin's behavior.
special counsel's report--obstruction
Question 14. You testified that you do not know whether Special
Counsel Mueller supports your conclusion that President Trump did not
commit obstruction of justice. Did you ask Mr. Mueller whether he
supports your conclusion? If not, why not?
Answer. Former Special Counsel Mueller has made public statements
and testified before Congress on July 24, 2019. I would refer you to
Mr. Mueller's statements and testimony, which speak for themselves.
Question 15. Was your independent conclusion that the President did
not commit a crime based on the finding of the Mueller report or was it
based on the Department of Justice interpretation that a president
cannot be indicted?
Answer. During my hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee on
May 1, 2019, I stated that, although Deputy Attorney General Rod
Rosenstein and I ``disagreed with some of the Special Counsel's legal
theories and felt that some of the episodes examined did not amount to
obstruction as a matter of law, we accepted the Special Counsel's legal
framework for purposes of our analysis and evaluated the evidence as
presented by the Special Counsel in reaching our conclusion. We
concluded that the evidence developed during the Special Counsel's
investigation is not sufficient to establish that the President
committed an obstruction-of-justice offense.''
Question 16. What does it mean that the President was not
exonerated?
Answer. On April 18, 2019, I released to the public and provided to
Congress a public version of the confidential report prepared by
Special Counsel Mueller. In addition, I have made a minimally redacted
version of the Special Counsel's report available to certain
congressional leaders and staff. The public report speaks for itself.
mueller report composition
Question 17. Exactly how many pages are in the Special Counsel's
report? How many pages are in any attached summaries, tables or
appendices? Why have you kept this basic information from the public
and Congress?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 16 above.
peripheral third parties
Question 18. You wrote that you will redact ``information that
would unduly infringe on the reputational interests of peripheral third
parties.'' Please define ``peripheral third parties.'' Would that
include organizations described in criminal complaints, such as the
National Rifle Association?
Answer. It would defeat the purpose of redacting information that
might unduly infringe on the reputational interests of peripheral third
parties for me to give hints or suggestions about whose identity has
been redacted. In addition, I have made a minimally redacted version of
the Special Counsel's report available to certain congressional leaders
and staff.
affordable care act
Question 19. In Texas v. the United States, the Department of
Justice has taken a legal position that the Affordable Care Act,
including the protections for people with pre-existing conditions,
should be struck down. If DOJ's view prevails and these protections are
stripped away, the President says ``don't worry'' because Republicans
will reveal a plan after the 2020 election to fix the healthcare system
and restore these protections.
In taking its legal position, did DOJ also analyze what a ``win''
for the administration in court would mean in terms of enacting reforms
to the health system in the future? Did DOJ have any concern that its
legal position in the Texas v. United States case will result in a
decision that will limit the ability of this or future administrations
to pursue healthcare reform legislation?
Answer. This matter is the subject of ongoing litigation before the
Fifth Circuit. The Department filed its appellate brief on May 1, 2019,
which outlines the Department's position. On June 26, 2019, the court
ordered supplemental letter briefing, and the United States filed its
response on July 3, 2019. The court held argument on July 9, 2019, and
the panel has not yet issued a decision. Pursuant to longstanding
Department policy and practice, I cannot comment further on pending
litigation matters.
Question 20. Has DOJ analyzed any proposal from the administration
to ensure that it would stand up to legal challenge?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 19 above.
Question 21. Did DOJ (or other entities or persons in the
administration) provide any legal analysis of what protections people
with pre-existing conditions would have if the ACA were repealed and
the President fails to come through with his promised plan? If so, I
would request a copy of this legal analysis.
Answer. Please see my response to Question 19 above.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Christopher A. Coons
special counsel's report
Question 1. There are redactions contained in the Special Counsel's
report on Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election that
was produced to Congress and the public.
1a. Did the Special Counsel's Office approve all of the redactions
in Special Counsel Mueller's report?
1b. Who worked on each set of redactions?
Answer. Attorneys at the Department of Justice worked with members
of the Special Counsel's team to determine what material would be
redacted from the report.
Question 2. An April 18 letter from Assistant Attorney General
Stephen E. Boyd states that the Chairmen and Ranking Members of the
House and Senate Judiciary Committees and Members of the ``Gang of
Eight'' will be permitted to look at a version of the Special Counsel's
report with all redactions removed except for the grand jury material.
2a. Why did you decide to limit review to just those members of
Congress?
Answer. Under applicable law, the Department was under no
obligation to provide the Special Counsel's confidential report to the
public, or to any Members of Congress. Nevertheless, I determined, in
the interests of transparency and in light of the considerable public
attention to this matter, to release a public version of the Special
Counsel's report and to provide certain members of Congress and their
staff with a minimally redacted version. In addition, I agreed to
provide access to the less redacted version of Volume I to members of
the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, as well as access to the
less redacted version of Volume II to members of the House and Senate
Judiciary Committees.
2b. Are the procedures outlined in the April 18 letter pursuant to
any specific Justice Department policy?
Answer. The procedures regarding review of the report were
determined by Department leadership after thoughtful consideration of
the sensitivity of some of the information and the potential effects of
its release on ongoing matters.
Question 3. During your hearing before this subcommittee, you said
Special Counsel Mueller did not ask you to make a determination about
the possible obstruction-of-justice offense described in the Special
Counsel's report. However, you provided your own conclusion on
obstruction in your March 24 letter because that is ``generally how the
Department of Justice works.'' At your April 18 press conference, you
reiterated that ``because the Special Counsel did not make [a decision
about the obstruction-of-justice offense], we felt the Department had
to.''
The Special Counsel's report clearly states that a decision was
made ``not to apply an approach that could potentially result in a
judgment that the President committed crimes'' and, thus, the Special
Counsel ``conducted a thorough factual investigation in order to
preserve the evidence when memories were fresh and documentary
materials were available.''
3a. Can you direct me to any portion of the Special Counsel's
report that indicates that Special Counsel Mueller intended for you to
reach a conclusion on the obstruction-of justice offense?
Answer. On April 18, 2019, I released to the public and provided to
Congress a public version of the confidential report prepared by
Special Counsel Mueller. In addition, I have made a minimally redacted
version of the Special Counsel's report available to certain
congressional leaders and staff. The public report speaks for itself.
3b. What are the bases for your conclusion on the obstruction-of-
justice offense?
Answer. During my testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee
on May 1, 2019, I discussed the obstruction-of-justice issue and stated
that although Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein and I ``disagreed
with some of the Special Counsel's legal theories and felt that some of
the episodes examined did not amount to obstruction as a matter of law,
we accepted the Special Counsel's legal framework for purposes of our
analysis and evaluated the evidence as presented by the Special Counsel
in reaching our conclusion. We conclude that the evidence developed
during the Special Counsel's investigation is not sufficient to
establish that the President committed an obstruction-of-justice
offense.''
3c. Special Counsel Mueller's report repeatedly makes clear that,
after a thorough investigation, he and his team did not have the
confidence to say that the President clearly did not commit obstruction
of justice. What additional evidence did you rely on when you concluded
that the President did not obstruct justice?
Answer. The determination that the Department must make in any
criminal matter is whether a crime could be proven beyond a reasonable
doubt to a jury. In assessing that question, Deputy Attorney General
Rod Rosenstein and I relied on the evidence outlined in the Special
Counsel's report.
Question 4. At your April 18 press conference, you were asked
whether the OLC opinion on indicting a sitting President ``had anything
to do with'' the Special Counsel's decision not to make a determination
on the obstruction-of-justice offense. You responded that Special
Counsel Mueller told you that he was not taking the position that ``he
would have found a crime, but for the existence of the OLC opinion.''
Yet, in the Special Counsel's report, he lists the OLC opinion as the
first consideration that guided his obstruction-of-justice
investigation. Do you agree that the American people would have better
understood the Special Counsel's reasons for not making a traditional
prosecutorial judgment if you had included Special Counsel Mueller's
four considerations that guided the investigation in your March 24
letter?
Answer. As I made clear in my March 29, 2019 letter, my earlier
March 24, 2019 letter was not intended to summarize the Special
Counsel's report but did describe its principal conclusions. On April
18, 2019, I released to the public and provided to Congress the public
version of the confidential report prepared by Special Counsel Mueller.
In addition, I have made a minimally redacted version of the Special
Counsel's report available to certain congressional leaders and staff.
The public report speaks for itself.
Question 5. When I asked you during the subcommittee hearing last
week whether anyone outside the Justice Department, particularly anyone
in the White House, had seen all or portions of the Special Counsel's
report or had been briefed on the report, you declined to answer until
the report had been released.
5a. Please list every individual outside the Justice Department who
saw the report or was briefed on the report prior its release to the
public on April 18.
Answer. In my April 18, 2019, letter to the Chairs and Ranking
Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee and the House Judiciary
Committee, I described the process by which the Department prepared the
Special Counsel's report for public release and provided details as to
its review by individuals outside the Department prior to release. I
would refer to you to that description.
5b. On what date did each person receive the report?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 5(a) above and my April
18, 2019, letter to the Chairmen and Ranking Members of the Senate
Judiciary Committee and the House Judiciary Committee.
5c. What was the basis for disclosure of the report to each person?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 5(a) above and my April
18, 2019, letter to the Chairs and Ranking Members of the Senate
Judiciary Committee and the House Judiciary Committee.
Question 6. In your March 24 letter, you quoted a portion of the
Special Counsel's report that states ``while this report does not
conclude that the President committed a crime, it also does not
exonerate him.'' Yet, you did not include the sentences preceding that
quotation: ``[I]f we had confidence after a thorough investigation of
the facts that the President clearly did not commit obstruction of
justice, we would so state. Based on the facts and the applicable legal
standards, however, we are unable to reach that judgment.'' Why did you
choose not to include that quotation in your March 24 letter?
Answer. As required by 28 C.F.R. Sec. 600.9(a)(3), on March 22,
2019, I sent a letter to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Senate
Judiciary Committee and House Judiciary Committee notifying them that
Special Counsel Mueller had concluded his investigation of Russian
interference in the 2016 election and related matters and submitted to
me his ``confidential report explaining the prosecution or declination
decisions'' he reached, as required by 28 C.F.R. Sec. 600.8(c). On
March 24, 2019, I sent a subsequent letter to the Chairman and Ranking
Member of the Senate Judiciary Committee and House Judiciary Committee
advising them of the ``principal conclusions'' reached by the Special
Counsel and updating them on the status of the Department's review of
the report. My letter speaks for itself.
Question 7. During your remarks at your April 18 press conference,
you stated that ``the White House fully cooperated with the Special
Counsel's investigation.'' Appendix C of the Special Counsel's report
states that the investigators sought to interview the President ``for
more than a year,'' yet, the President was never interviewed. The
President instead submitted written responses, which were insufficient
``in several respects.'' The Special Counsel's Office again requested
to interview the President, and the President again declined. The
Special Counsel decided not to issue a subpoena for the President's
testimony only because of the substantial delay it would cause. Why do
you consider the President's refusal to provide oral testimony and his
inadequate written responses to be full cooperation?
Answer. The public report describes the steps that the White House
took to cooperate with the Special Counsel's investigation and speaks
for itself.
Question 8. In your prepared remarks at your April 18 press
conference, you said that you and the Deputy Attorney General
``disagreed with some of the Special Counsel's legal theories.'' What
are those disagreements?
Answer. Pursuant to longstanding Department policies and practice,
I will not comment further on these deliberative, pre-decisional
internal discussions.
2016 counterintelligence investigation into the trump campaign
Question 9. During the hearing, you testified that you are
reviewing the genesis of the 2016 counterintelligence investigation
into the Trump campaign.
9a. Who is involved in that review?
Answer. As the Department of Justice has previously announced, a
team led by U.S. Attorney John Durham is examining the origins of the
U.S. counterintelligence probe of the Trump 2016 presidential campaign.
9b. When do you expect the review to be completed?
Answer. Mr. Durham is working expeditiously, but I do not have an
anticipated deadline for the completion of his review.
9c. Have you discussed the review with President Trump or other
White House officials?
Answer. Pursuant to longstanding Department and Executive Branch
policies and practices, I am unable to comment on any White House
communications.
9d. Will you share the findings of your review with Congress?
Answer. As with the findings of Special Counsel Mueller's
investigation, I believe that there is a strong public interest in the
public and Congress learning about the results of Mr. Durham's work. I
am therefore committed to making public as much information as
possible, consistent with applicable laws and Department policies. Upon
completion of Mr. Durham's review, Congress will be appropriately
briefed.
9e. What is the factual basis for your concern that unauthorized
surveillance of the Trump campaign occurred?
Answer. Given that Mr. Durham's work is ongoing, I do not believe
it would be appropriate to comment on the details at this time. As
stated above, Congress will be appropriate briefed upon completion of
Mr. Durham's review.
drug trafficking
Question 10. The fiscal year 2020 funding request, like the fiscal
year 2019 request, transfers the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas
program from the Office of National Drug Control Policy to the Drug
Enforcement Administration. When ONDCP is already providing needed
assistance to combat the scourge of addiction, why do you recommend
this proposed change?
Answer. The administration believes that moving the High Intensity
Drug Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) program from ONDCP to DEA would allow
the program to be more closely integrated with DEA, the component
charged with enforcing the Nation's drug trafficking laws. The
administration anticipates the program will remain largely the same as
it is today, but will benefit from this close integration.
background checks for firearm purchases
Question 11. My home community of Wilmington, Delaware is working
to reduce gun violence, and I want to identify ways that the Federal
Government can help local law enforcement confront this challenge. I
have worked with Sen. Toomey and others to introduce the NICS Denial
Notification Act (S. 875), which requires the Federal Government to
notify State and local law enforcement when someone fails a background
check while trying to purchase a firearm. Do you agree that it would
help local law enforcement to know when a prohibited person tried to
buy a gun?
Answer. The sharing of investigative intelligence among law
enforcement agencies is helpful in preventing and prosecuting crime,
specifically with regards to a prohibited person attempting to purchase
a firearm. The Department would be happy to review your draft
legislation.
public safety partnership
Question 12. In 2018, the National Public Safety Partnership only
operated in five cities. Will the program be expanded in 2019 or 2020?
Answer. The National Public Safety Partnership (PSP) is a strategic
initiative geared at helping cities develop and implement programs and
procedures intended to reduce violent crime. It is a 3-year commitment
by the Department to provide resources to help cities diagnose where
crime is highest and to find, arrest, and prosecute violent criminals.
Several participating cities have already seen dramatic reductions in
violent crime over the past 2 years. As we continue to expand this
program annually to more cities across America, including planned
additions in fiscal year 2020, we are determined to replicate that
success.
In 2018, 15 PSP sites were operational. Five new cities were
selected as 2018 PSP sites, and the 10 PSP sites that were added in
2017 entered their second year of the partnership. To date, 31 cities
have participated in the program with the addition of 10 new sites in
fiscal year 2019 I announced last month including: Anniston, Alabama,
Oxford, Alabama, Anchorage, Alaska, Davenport, Iowa, Wichita, Kansas,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, Baltimore, Maryland, Cleveland, Ohio, Amarillo,
Texas, and Harris County, Texas.
first step act
Question 13. Though the President's fiscal year 2020 budget
dramatically underfunds the First Step Act, earlier this month, the
President said that his administration ``intends to fully fund and
implement'' the First Step Act.
13a. Have you discussed full funding for the First Step Act with
the President?
Answer. I am not in a position to disclose any pre-decisional
deliberations regarding the President's Budget.
13b. Will you commit to taking all necessary steps to fully
implement the First Step Act?
Answer. The Department has been and continues to diligently work to
fully implement the First Step Act.
13c. What is the Department's current progress on creating the risk
and needs assessment tool?
Answer. The Department published the First Step Act Risk and Needs
Assessment System on July 19, 2019, meeting a key requirement of the
First Step Act. At that time, the Department announced a 45-day public
comment period and encouraged experts, practitioners, advocates,
academics, and others to comment on the report so that the Department
could build the best and most fair tool possible. On September 10th and
11th, NIJ hosted two listening sessions in response to the release of
PATTERN. Stakeholders provided public comment on the risk and needs
assessment as well as DOJ's implementation of the First Step Act
(``FSA''). In response to the release of PATTERN, the 45-day public
comments period, and the listening sessions, NIJ received approximately
20 statements from external stakeholders about the FSA, and close to
175 emailed comments/statements.
13d. What actions, beyond implementing the First Step Act, will the
Department take under your leadership to increase fairness in our
criminal justice system as a whole and in prison sentencing
specifically?
Answer. Following the development of the new Risk and Needs
Assessment required under the First Step Act, the Department has
actively sought comments from experts, practitioners, advocates, and
academics. The Department will consider this feedback, along with
results from our internal evaluation efforts, in determining how to
continue to protect fairness in the criminal justice system.
legal services corporation
Question 14. For the third year in a row, President Trump's budget
request proposes to eliminate all Federal funding for the Legal
Services Corporation.
14a. Is Federal support for the Legal Services Corporation
important in order to achieve greater access to justice for Americans?
Answer. As you know, the Legal Services Corporation (LSC) is not
part of the Department of Justice. Nonetheless, the fiscal year 2020
President's Budget seeks $18 million for the LSC. The Budget seeks to
end the one-size-fits-all model of providing legal services through a
single Federal grant program, the LSC. This change will encourage non-
profit organizations, businesses, law firms, and religious institutions
to develop new models for providing legal aid, such as pro bono work,
law school clinics, and innovative technologies. This puts more control
in the hands of State and local governments that better understand the
needs of their communities.
14b. Do you support continued Federal funding for the Legal
Services Corporation?
Answer. Please see my response to Question 14(a) above.
14c. As head of the U.S. Department of Justice, what actions will
you take to ensure that low income Americans have greater access to
justice?
Answer. The Department is committed to helping the justice system
efficiently deliver outcomes that are fair and accessible to all,
irrespective of wealth and status. The Department of Justice works
internally, across Federal agencies, and with State, local, and Tribal
justice system stakeholders to improve justice delivery systems. The
Department's work to ensure justice for all is guided by three
principles: (1) Promoting Accessibility--eliminating barriers that
prevent people from understanding and exercising their rights; (2)
Ensuring Fairness--delivering fair and just outcomes for all parties,
including those facing financial and other disadvantages; and (3)
Increasing Efficiency--delivering fair and just outcomes effectively,
without waste or duplication.
As just one example of these efforts, in response to a public
safety crisis in rural Alaska, the Department recently authorized more
than $10 million in immediate funding to support police in Alaska
Native villages and additional resources to support child advocacy
centers in rural hubs, expanding wrap-around services, forensic
interviews, and medical exams for child victims. See https://
www.justice.gov/opa/pr/attorney-general-william-p-barr-announces-
emergency-funding-address-public-safety-crisis. In addition, the
Department coordinated a week of events recognizing World Elder Abuse
Awareness Day on June 15, which is dedicated to raising awareness about
the millions of older adults who experience elder abuse, neglect, and
financial exploitation. On October 18, the Department published the
Attorney General's annual report to Congress on its activities to
combat elder fraud and abuse, which highlights a record-breaking number
of enforcement actions in the United States and abroad, as well as
outreach efforts to protect seniors. See https://www.justice.gov/file/
1211066/download. The Department of Justice is committed to defending
the vulnerable and obtaining justice for those who have been targeted.
religious liberty task force
Question 15. In July 2018, then-Attorney General Sessions announced
the creation of a ``religious liberty task force'' to assist the
Justice Department with the implementation of the October 2017 Guidance
on Federal Law Protections for Religious Liberty.
15a. Does the ``religious liberty task force'' remain in existence?
Answer. Yes.
15b. If so, who are the members of the task force?
Answer. As Attorney General, I serve as chair of the Religious
Liberty Task Force. The Task Force membership also includes the
Principal Deputy Associate Attorney General, the Assistant Attorney
General for the Office of Legal Policy, and a representative from the
Office of the Deputy Attorney General. Further, the Task Force includes
the heads of the components named in the Attorney General's Memorandum
establishing the Task Force, joined by the U.S. Attorney for the
Northern District of Texas, the head of the Office of Justice Programs,
and two additional Department employees designated by the Attorney
General.
15c. What are the task force's key priorities?
Answer. The Task Force's key priority is to ensure the Department
implements the Attorney General's Memorandum ``Federal Law Protections
for Religious Liberty,'' 82 Fed. Reg. 49668 (October 26, 2017), by
ensuring that all Department components are upholding that guidance in
the cases they bring and defend, the arguments they make in court, the
policies and regulations they adopt, and the conduct of their
operations.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Moran. Subcommittee now stands in recess.
[Whereupon, at 12:01 p.m., Wednesday, April 10, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]
APPENDIX
ATTACHMENT 1
ATTACHMENT 2
ATTACHMENT 3
Congressional Request: Total Vacant & Filled Positions by Location
As of Pay Period 21 (ending on 10/26/2019)
KEY:
PHS: PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
AUSP: ADMINISTRATIVE UNITED STATES PENITENTIARY
FCI: FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION
FCC: FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL COMPLEX
FDC: FEDERAL DETENTION CENTER
FMC: FEDERAL MEDICAL CENTER
FPC: FEDERAL PRISON CAMP
MCC: METROPOLITAN CORRECTIONAL CENTER
MDC: METROPOLITAN DETENTION CENTER
USP: UNITED STATES PENITENTIARY
USMCFP: UNITED STATES MEDICAL CENTER FOR FEDERAL PRISONERS
CONGRESSIONAL REQUEST: TOTAL VACANT & FILLED POSITIONS BY LOCATION As of
Pay Period 21 (ending on 10/26/2019)
Note: Time frame of position becoming vacant is not available. Data
includes total vacant BOP positions to include S&E, B&F, FPI, Trust Fund
& PHS positions.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LOCATION
VACANT
FILLED
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FPC ALDERSON........................
11
147
FCI ALICEVILLE......................
34
274
FCC ALLENWOOD.......................
92
846
FCI ASHLAND.........................
14
254
USP ATLANTA.........................
52
427
USP ATWATER.........................
44
342
FCI BASTROP.........................
24
225
FCI BECKLEY.........................
31
315
FCI BENNETTSVILLE...................
16
278
FCI BERLIN..........................
36
240
FCI BIG SPRING......................
32
204
FCC BEAUMONT........................
84
795
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADMINISTRATION
99
257
DIVISION...........................
CENTRAL OFFICE--CORRECTIONAL
35
100
PROGRAMS DIVISION..................
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIRECTOR'S OFFICE...
1
7
CENTRAL OFFICE--FEDERAL PRISON
107
186
INDUSTRIES.........................
CENTRAL OFFICE--HUMAN RESOURCE
23
75
MANAGEMENT DIVISION................
CENTRAL OFFICE--HEALTH SERVICES
16
79
DIVISION...........................
CENTRAL OFFICE--INFORMATION POLICY
43
147
AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS DIVISION........
CENTRAL OFFICE--NATIONAL INSTITUTE
16
33
OF CORRECTIONS.....................
CENTRAL OFFICE--OFFICE OF GENERAL
35
123
COUNSEL............................
CENTRAL OFFICE--PROGRAM REVIEW
22
77
DIVISION...........................
CENTRAL OFFICE--REENTRY SERVICES
38
233
DIVISION...........................
MDC BROOKLYN........................
52
458
FPC BRYAN...........................
14
120
USP BIG SANDY.......................
33
379
FCC BUTNER..........................
132
1311
USP CANAAN..........................
36
387
MCC CHICAGO.........................
12
202
FCC COLEMAN.........................
117
1231
FMC CARSWELL........................
51
414
FCI CUMBERLAND......................
22
264
FCI DANBURY.........................
23
262
DENVER--MANAGEMENT SPECIALITY
6
30
TRAINING CENTER....................
FMC DEVENS..........................
73
464
FPC DULUTH..........................
8
98
FCI DUBLIN..........................
36
220
FCI EDGEFIELD.......................
41
303
FCI ELKTON..........................
26
339
FCI ENGLEWOOD.......................
36
248
FCI EL RENO.........................
36
292
FCI ESTILL..........................
22
257
FCI FAIRTON.........................
24
297
FCC FLORENCE........................
121
851
FCC FORREST CITY....................
31
549
FCI FORT DIX........................
65
558
FMC FORT WORTH......................
46
341
FCI GILMER..........................
27
275
GLYNCO--STAFF TRAINING ACADEMY......
11
44
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DESIGNATION &
23
264
SENTENCE COMPUTATION CENTER).......
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HUMAN RESOURCE
20
168
SERVICES CENTER)...................
FCI GREENVILLE......................
35
247
MDC GUAYNABO........................
31
254
FCC HAZELTON........................
38
790
FCI HERLONG.........................
53
241
FDC HONOLULU........................
22
188
FDC HOUSTON.........................
25
216
FCI JESUP...........................
33
313
FCI LA TUNA.........................
47
289
USP LEE.............................
11
386
USP LEWISBURG.......................
80
429
FMC LEXINGTON.......................
58
485
FCC LOMPOC..........................
69
424
FCI LORETTO.........................
10
213
MDC LOS ANGELES.....................
48
207
USP LEAVENWORTH.....................
29
317
FCI MANCHESTER......................
28
273
USP MARION..........................
18
285
FCI MCDOWELL........................
33
269
FCI MCKEAN..........................
11
265
USP MCCREARY........................
11
393
FCI MEMPHIS.........................
34
265
FCI MENDOTA.........................
67
217
FCI MIAMI...........................
40
247
FCI MILAN...........................
24
280
FDC MIAMI...........................
33
247
FCI MARIANNA........................
53
265
FPC MONTGOMERY......................
12
109
FCI MORGANTOWN......................
13
145
MID-ATLANTIC REGION.................
7
44
NORTH CENTRAL REGION................
5
63
NORTHEAST REGION....................
4
53
MCC NEW YORK........................
45
211
FCC OAKDALE.........................
23
462
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY...................
22
282
FCI OTISVILLE.......................
13
253
FCI OXFORD..........................
42
226
FCI PEKIN...........................
19
258
FPC PENSACOLA.......................
10
98
FCC PETERSBURG......................
53
534
FDC PHILADELPHIA....................
22
233
FCI PHOENIX.........................
33
277
FCC POLLOCK.........................
47
627
FCI RAY BROOK.......................
24
202
FMC ROCHESTER.......................
28
418
FCI SAFFORD.........................
22
181
FCI SCHUYLKILL......................
25
258
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION................
5
59
MCC SAN DIEGO.......................
33
207
FCI SEAGOVILLE......................
29
285
SOUTHEAST REGION....................
14
55
FDC SEATAC..........................
57
191
FCI SHERIDAN........................
47
294
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD..................
44
597
FCI SANDSTONE.......................
21
224
FCI TALLAHASSEE.....................
22
265
FCC TUCSON..........................
57
537
FCI TALLADEGA.......................
52
247
FCI TEXARKANA.......................
9
263
FCC TERRE HAUTE.....................
45
694
AUSP THOMSON........................
208
396
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND.................
30
259
FCI THREE RIVERS....................
24
233
FCC VICTORVILLE.....................
104
865
FCI WASECA..........................
21
197
FCI WILLIAMSBURG....................
22
278
WESTERN REGION......................
6
58
FPC YANKTON.........................
6
101
FCC YAZOO CITY......................
180
720
-----------------------------------
Overall Totals:...............
4495
36254
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: ASSR
ATTACHMENT 4
Congressional Request: Vacant & Filled Positions BOP-Wide by Location
As of Pay Period 21 (ending on 10/26/2019)
KEY:
PHS: PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
AUSP: ADMINISTRATIVE UNITED STATES PENITENTIARY
FCI: FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION
FCC: FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL COMPLEX
FDC: FEDERAL DETENTION CENTER
FMC: FEDERAL MEDICAL CENTER
FPC: FEDERAL PRISON CAMP
MCC: METROPOLITAN CORRECTIONAL CENTER
MDC: METROPOLITAN DETENTION CENTER
USP: UNITED STATES PENITENTIARY
USMCFP: UNITED STATES MEDICAL CENTER FOR FEDERAL PRISONERS
CONGRESSIONAL REQUEST: VACANT & FILLED POSITIONS BOP-WIDE BY LOCATIONPAs of Pay Period 21 (ending on 10/26/2019)
Note: Time frame of position becoming vacant is not available. Data includes total vacant BOP positions to
include S&E, B&F, FPI, Trust Fund & PHS positions.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LOCATION
Pay Plan-Series-Grade
POSITION
VACANT
FILLED
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FPC ALDERSON.........................
PHS....................
NURSE SPECIALIST..........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
26
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
5
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
11
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
6
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
3
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
3
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNICIAN............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0007-11.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
9
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
0
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0660-12.............
CHIEF PHARMACIST (L.......
1
0
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0671-12.............
REGNL HLTH SYS SPECLST....
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DNTL OFFCR..........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPERVISORY CONTRACT
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1640-11.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1667-11.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
1
0
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1701-11.............
SPECIAL EDUCATION TEACHER.
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
0
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
3
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTOMOTIVE WRKR FRMN......
0
1
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FPC ALDERSON.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
5
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
PHS....................
CH DNTL OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
PHS....................
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
21
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
9
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
55
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
8
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
18
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
2
9
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0188-07.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER....
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SERVICES
0
1
ASSISTANT.
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0318-05.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCL SPECLST...........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LEAVE CLERK........
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0610-07.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNCN........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC/HEALTH
0
1
TECHNICIAN.
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENTIST...........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GL-1712-09.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVRY CORRECTNL SYS
1
0
SPECLST.
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
6
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
1
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL&SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0101-09.............
CASE MGR..................
1
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0180-11.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0180-13.............
RESOLVE COORDINATOR.......
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
4
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPROVMT/INFECT PREV
0
1
& CONT COORD.
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0670-09.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGINEERING TECHNICIAN....
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
4
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
3
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-2210-09.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDER FRMN...............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
3
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV MECH FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
10
FCI ALICEVILLE.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
13
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
29
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
195
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
19
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
157
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
19
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
9
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST (INST).......
0
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
2
4
INTERN.
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
6
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0299-05.............
HR INTERN.................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SVC ASST.............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0303-07.............
INST HRG PROG ASST........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
8
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
3
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
12
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCL SPECLST...........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0610-10.............
PSYCH. REGISTERED NURSE...
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
9
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
7
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0699-05.............
HLTH SVC- INTERN..........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GL-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMERGENCY PREPARDNESS
0
1
OFFICER.
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
6
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-13.............
WITNESS SECUR UNIT MGR....
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
6
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
38
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPV CHAPLAIN.............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
20
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
11
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
MENTL HLTH TRTMNT SPEC....
0
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
MENTL HLTH TRTMNTSPEC.....
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
3
SPECLST.
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
3
COMPLEX.
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CL PSYCH.........
2
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
CHALLENGE PROG PSYCH......
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
STEP DOWN UNIT PROG COORD.
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0188-11.............
SUPVY RECR SPECLST (INST).
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0199-07.............
PSYCHLGY STUD TR..........
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0301-11.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR TR........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
6
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0391-12.............
TELECOMMUN SPECLST........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
2
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSCN ASST...............
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN'S ASST..........
0
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0603-12.............
PSYCH PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
2
CONTROL NURSE.
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0680-14.............
REGNL DNTL CONS...........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
5
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY......................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
1
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
1
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1101-12.............
INDL SPECLST..............
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1102-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1701-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
2
8
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
6
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
DENTAL OFFICER............
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
PROG PSYCH (TCU)..........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL MAST NURSE.......
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL PHARMACIST.......
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-3106-08.............
UPHOLSTERY WRKR FRMN......
1
0
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-4601-08.............
COMPLEX FACTORY FRMN......
8
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-4607-08.............
CRPNTRY WRKR FRMN.........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
6
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
16
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
3
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
4
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
24
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC ALLENWOOD........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
27
FCI ASHLAND..........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
8
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-06.............
SENIOR OFFICER............
0
7
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SENIOR OFFICER............
2
54
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
5
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
29
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
8
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
2
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
0
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0303-07.............
ADMV ASST.................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECIALIST......
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANALYST..............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT & PROPERTY
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
0
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
7
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADM.
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
1
0
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0501-12.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
1
0
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0680-00.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1101-13.............
PROC IMPRVMT SPECLST......
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
1
0
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI ASHLAND..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-4601-08.............
WDWRKG MACH OPERTR FRMN...
1
3
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
8
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
9
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCI ASHLAND..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
10
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR TR........
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
REG MAST HEALTH SVC SPEC..
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
NURSE--OTHER..............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF BASIC DENTAL........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF COMPLEX DENTA.......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
PHS....................
STAFF DENTAL HYGIENIST....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
18
106
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
19
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
6
65
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
13
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPEC....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
6
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0201-07.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFCR...........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0303-09.............
CUSTOMER SERVICE REP......
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
4
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
2
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0610-10.............
PSYCHIATRIC NURSE.........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-0895-09.............
INDL ENGRG TECHNCN........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
5
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0006-13.............
JAIL ADMR.................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
17
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN...............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
1
0
ADMR.
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPEC.
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
3
13
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECTY TRTMNT SPEC........
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
1
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECLTY PROG COORD........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0501-12.............
UNICOR BUS ADMR...........
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (PSYCH).......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE SPECLST.............
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0610-12.............
PSYCHIATRIC MID-LEVEL
0
1
PRACTITIONER.
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
1
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0669-12.............
MEDCL REC ADMR............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVRY ATTY ADVSR.........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
9
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1910-10.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-4102-08.............
PNTG WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
6
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-5350-08.............
PROD MACHINE MCH FRMN.....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
15
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
USP ATLANTA..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
17
USP ATWATER..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
11
100
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
3
76
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
8
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
5
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
1
SPECLST.
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
4
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
4
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
2
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCK & SECUR SPECLST......
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SVCS ASSIST..........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
0
5
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
3
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0640-09.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN
1
0
(Paramedic).
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0640-09.............
HLTH TECHNCN (Paramedic)..
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-0681-06.............
DNTL ASST.................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
2
5
USP ATWATER..........................
GL-2210-07.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMERGENCY PREPARENSS
0
1
OFFICER.
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
15
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
4
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
1
1
SPECLST.
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0180-13.............
RHU PSYCH.................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROGRAM COORD...
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREV & CONT
0
1
NURSE.
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASSISTANT HEALTH SYSTEM
0
1
ADMR.
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGINEERING TECH..........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER...................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER (Special Ed
0
1
Teacher).
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1712-11.............
TCHR......................
1
0
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU
1
0
(Computer Tech).
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU
0
1
(Construction Trade).
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
2
1
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
4
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GNRL FOREMAN..............
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTOMOTIVE WORKER SUPV....
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
1
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
1
USP ATWATER..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
12
FCI BASTROP..........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL NURSE CONSULT....
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL NURSE SENIOR.....
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
PHS....................
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE II
0
2
FCI BASTROP..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORR OFFCR................
0
7
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORR OFFCR................
0
6
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
36
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
4
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
27
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
4
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECREATION SPECIALIST.....
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0301-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
3
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0344-07.............
HLTH SVCS ASST............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL PROGRAM
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTRACT SPECIALIST.......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
4
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0180-11.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DAP COORDINATOR...........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0510-11.............
SUPVRY OPERTG ACCTNT......
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLININCAL DIRECTOR........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL NURSE.
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0671-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF, BASIC DENTAL.......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0856-10.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN (TR)......
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1101-13.............
INDUSTRIAL PROG MNGR......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1150-11.............
INDL SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1150-12.............
SUPVY INDUSTRIAL SPECLST..
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-3414-09.............
SHEET METAL WKR...........
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
2
5
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-5823-10.............
AUTMTV MECH FRMN..........
1
0
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
4
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCI BASTROP..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
11
FCI BECKLEY..........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
2
37
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
34
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
2
8
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
43
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
12
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
8
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFCR...........
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL PROGRAM
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0640-06.............
HLTH TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
8
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
2
10
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
8
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
4
SPECLST.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALITY TRTMNT PROG
1
0
COORD.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
3
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL NURSE.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
6
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-3106-08.............
UPHOLSTERY WRKR FRMN......
2
3
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
3
4
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
6
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-7305-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
2
FCI BECKLEY..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
13
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
PHS....................
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
PHS....................
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGI.......
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
PHS....................
STAFF DENTAL HYGIEN.......
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
4
81
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
35
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
4
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
7
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFICER.........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-1603-06.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0028-11.............
Environmental Compliance
0
1
Specialist.
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
4
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
GS-2210-12.............
SUPVY COMPR SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
10
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
2
FCI BENNETTSVILLE....................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
12
FCI BERLIN...........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
19
43
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
3
5
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
35
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LIEUTENANT................
1
3
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0030-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASSISTANT LOCKSMITH.......
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SERVICES ASST...
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING SAFETY TECHNCN..
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
0
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
1
0
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
4
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCIPLINE HEARING OFFICER
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LIEUTENANT................
0
8
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
PREV & CONT CONTROL.
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
0
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR, SPEC ED.............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
5
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPTR SPECLST............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDER SUPERVISOR.........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
3
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
FCI BERLIN...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
7
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
26
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
18
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORR SYS OFFCR............
0
7
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
25
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORR COUNSELOR............
2
5
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORR SUPERVISOR...........
1
2
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPEC....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0101-07.............
CORR TRMT SPEC............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECREATION SPECIALIST.....
0
7
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0201-07.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECIALIST.....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0301-10.............
SECURITY OFFICER..........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
1
0
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SPEC INVST SUPP TECH......
0
2
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL PROGRAM
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCOUNTING TECH...........
0
2
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0610-05.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
0
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
3
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0640-06.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN.........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HEALTH INFO TECH..........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
1
0
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT & PROPERTY
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTRACT SPEC.............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPV CORR SYS SPEC........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MANAGER..............
0
2
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0007-11.............
CORR SUPERVISOR...........
3
4
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRON & SAFETY COMP ADM.
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CORR TRMT SPEC............
2
6
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG TREATMENT SPEC.......
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFFAIRS COORD.....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COOR............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGIST.....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0180-13.............
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGY PROGRAMS.
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COOR......
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECREATION SUPERVISOR.....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPERVISOR.....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR....
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIANS ASST...........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
2
0
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SYS ADMN........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0671-11.............
HEALTH SYS SPEC...........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0680-13.............
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELECTRONIC TECHN..........
1
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACILITIES MANAGER........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER...................
0
4
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER (SPECIAL
1
0
EDUCATION).
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUCATION........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-1712-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
0
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPUTER SERVICES MANAGER.
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPUTER SPECIALIST.......
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELECTRICAL WRK FRM........
1
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRK FRM............
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MAINTENANCE WRK FRM.......
1
7
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-5306-09.............
AIR COND EQ MECH FRM......
1
2
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTO WORKER FRM...........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-6907-03.............
MATERIAL HNDLR FRM........
0
1
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-6907-04.............
MATERIAL HNDLR FRM........
2
6
FCI BIG SPRING.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
3
8
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
PHS....................
PHS.......................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0006-09.............
INTELL RES SPECLST........
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORDINATOR........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
23
261
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
21
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
10
93
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
26
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0018-09.............
ENVRN & SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
3
SPECLST.
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
14
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
5
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
4
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
4
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0303-08.............
ADMV ASST.................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
9
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
3
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
16
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LEAVE CLERK........
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
4
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-1667-09.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR (TR)..
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
3
SPECIALIST.
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGENT..
1
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
9
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMR.................
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
6
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
36
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR (TR).
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRN & SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
ADM.
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
33
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
3
14
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
3
SPECLST.
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
3
COMPLEX.
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
4
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0201-11.............
LEAD HUMAN RESOURCE
0
1
SPECLST.
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0510-11.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0671-12.............
HLTH SRVCS COORD..........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
7
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1101-11.............
FACTORY MANAGER TRAINEE...
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1101-14.............
PROG MGR..................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1102-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
2
15
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
2
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-2210-11.............
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
0
4
SPECLST.
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
GS-2210-13.............
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MGR
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
5
6
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-4102-08.............
PNTG WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
13
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
3
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
1
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
4
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
1
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WAREHOUSE WORKER FRMN.....
2
6
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
13
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCC BEAUMONT.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
30
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASST DIR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
ES-0006-00.............
SR. DEP ASST DIR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GL-0343-09.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-13.............
SITE SELECTION SPECLST....
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH, ADMV SUPRT SEC........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, ACQ BR................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, CAPACITY PLANNING
1
0
BRANCH.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, FACLTY MGMT...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, FLD ACQ OFF...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0006-15.............
SR. DEP ASST DIR..........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0301-13.............
FLD DVLP COORD............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0301-13.............
REGNL TRUST FUND ADMR.....
4
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0303-04.............
CLK.......................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0303-07.............
ADMV ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0318-07.............
SECY......................
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADM OFFCR.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0343-09.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0343-11.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
4
12
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0343-13.............
ENERGY PROG MGR...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0343-14.............
PROG ANLST................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0344-07.............
MGMT ASST.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0391-12.............
TELECOMMUN SPECLST........
3
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0391-13.............
LEAD TELECOMMUN SPECLST...
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0391-13.............
TELECOMMUN SPECLST........
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0399-04.............
CLER ST TR................
6
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0399-04.............
CLK.......................
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0399-04.............
SUPP CLK ST TR............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0399-05.............
CLER STUD TR..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0399-05.............
CLK.......................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-09.............
FNANCL PROG SPECLST.......
3
7
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-12.............
FNANCL PROG SPECLST.......
2
7
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-12.............
FNANCL SYST ADMIN.........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-12.............
TRUST FUND ANAL...........
7
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
DEP CH, DEPST FUND SEC....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
FINANCIAL PROGRAM
1
1
SPECIALIST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
FNANCL PROG SPECLST.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
3
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
SR FNANCL SPECLST.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
SR TRUST FUND ANAL........
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
SUPV FNANCL SPECLST.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
SUPVY FNANCL PROG SPECLST.
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-13.............
TRUST FUND SYS ANAL.......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
CH TRULINCS APPS & OPS....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
CH TRUST FUND OPERS.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
CH, DEPST FUND SYS........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
CH, FACIL RESOURCE MGMT
0
1
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
CH, INMATE TELEPH SYS SEC.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
CH, RELOCATION SVCS.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
CH, SVS DVLPMT & TRNG.....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
DEP CH, FINANCE BRANCH....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
DEP CH, TRUST FUND BRANCH
0
1
FIELD OPERATIONS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-14.............
DEP CH, TRUST FUND BRANCH
1
0
OPERATIONS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-15.............
CH OFFC OF FIN............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0501-15.............
CH, TRUST FUND BRANCH.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-12.............
FNANCL PROG SPECLST.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-12.............
OPERTG ACCTNT.............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-13.............
DEP CH, ACCTG SYS & POL...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-13.............
SUPV ACCTNT...............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-13.............
SUPVRY OPERTG ACCTNT......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-13.............
SYS ACCTNT................
3
16
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-14.............
CH FINANCIAL STATEMENTS...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-14.............
CH, ACCTG SYS & POL.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-14.............
CH, ACCTNG OPERATIONS.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0510-15.............
SYSTEM ACCOUNTANT.........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0525-08.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-12.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-13.............
SR BUDG ANLST.............
3
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-13.............
SUPVY BUDG ANAL...........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-14.............
SR BUDG ANAL..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-14.............
SR BUDG ANLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-14.............
SUPY BUDG ANAL............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-15.............
CH, BUDG DEVLPMT BRANCH...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0560-15.............
CH, BUDG EXECUTION........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0599-05.............
FNANCL MGMT INTERN........
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0808-13.............
ARCH......................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0808-13.............
PROJ MGR..................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0808-14.............
PROJ ADMR.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0809-11.............
CONST REPR................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0809-12.............
CONST REPR................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0810-13.............
CIVIL ENGR................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-0850-13.............
ELCTRL ENGR...............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1101-11.............
REGNL PROC & PROP SPECLST.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-12.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-13.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-13.............
CONTRCTG OFFCR............
12
69
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-13.............
CONTRCTG OFFFCR...........
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-13.............
SR CONTRCTG OFFCR.........
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-13.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
CH, B&F CONTRACTS.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
CH,CONST CONTRCTG.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
CH,PROCURMENT POLICY SEC..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
CONTRCTG OFFCR............
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
SEC CH, ACQUISTIONS BR....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
SEC CH, CTS...............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
SEC CH, PRIVATIZED
0
1
CORRECTIONS CONTRACTING.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1102-14.............
SEC CH, RESIDENTIAL RE
0
1
ENTRY.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1103-12.............
INDL PROP MGMT SPECLST....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1104-12.............
PROP DISPOS OFFCR.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1176-11.............
BLDG MGR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1176-14.............
CH, BLDG MGMT SEC.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGMT SPECLST........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1640-13.............
LIFE SAFETY PROG MGR......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1640-13.............
PHYS PLANT REVW PROG MGR..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1640-13.............
PREV MTNCE PROG MGR.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1640-13.............
UTIL PROG MGR.............
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1640-14.............
CH, FACLTY OPERATIONS.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1640-14.............
CH, FACLTY PROGS..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-1670-13.............
EQUIP SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2003-12.............
PROP MGMT SPECLST.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2003-12.............
SUPPLY MGMT SPEC..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2003-13.............
SUPPLY MGMT SPEC..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2003-14.............
CH, PROPERTY MGMT.........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2130-09.............
TRAFF MGMT SPECLST........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2130-12.............
TRAFF MGMT SPECLST........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
3
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-12.............
INF TECHNOLGY SPECLST.....
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SECUR SPECLST.......
1
10
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-13.............
IT SECURITY AND AUDIT
0
3
COMPLNC SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-13.............
SR ITSPEC.................
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH INF TECHNLGY SECUR &
0
1
AUD COMPLNC SE.
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH INF TECHNOLGY SEC......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH TRULINCS IT SEC........
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
WG-2805-11.............
ELCTRCN...................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
WG-4742-11.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR.....
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
WG-4749-10.............
GEN MTNCE MECH............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
WG-4749-10.............
GENERAL MTNCE MECH........
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
WG-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR.................
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--ADM..................
WG-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASST DIR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
ES-0006-00.............
SR. DEP ASST DIR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GL-0006-09.............
INTELL RES SPECLST
1
0
(CHICAGO).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GL-0006-09.............
INTELL RES SPECLST (MIAMI)
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GL-0006-09.............
INTELL RES SPECLST (SAN
0
1
DIEGO).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GL-0006-09.............
INTELL RES SPECLST
0
1
(SEATTLE).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GL-0343-09.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-11.............
CELLULAR FORENSICS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
CORR PROG SPEC............
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SYS SPECLST.....
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL ANALYST............
3
11
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR........
2
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR
0
1
(ATLANTA).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR
0
1
(CHICAGO).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR (EL
0
1
PASO).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR
0
1
(HOUSTON).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR (LOS
0
1
ANGELES).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR (MIAMI)
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR (NEW
0
1
YORK).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR (OAK.
0
1
CTY).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR
0
1
(PHILDELPHIA).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR
0
1
(PURERTO RICO).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR (SAN
0
1
ANYONIO).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
INTELL OPERS OFFCR (SAN
0
1
DIEGO).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR.....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
0
2
(BSC).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
1
0
(DRJ).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
1
0
(GPC).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
1
0
(MCA).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
0
1
(MVC).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
1
0
(NLK).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
1
0
(REE).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-12.............
SECURE OVERSIGHT MNTR
1
0
(RIV).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
ADMV REMEDY SPECLST.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
CH, ARMORY & LOCK TECHNLGY
0
1
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR
1
0
PRIVATIZATION MGMT.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
EMER MGMT SPECLST.........
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
FORENSICS ANAL............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
INSIGHT COORDINATOR.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
NATL CIM COORD............
0
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
NTL VIC NOTIF SYS COORD...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
PRIVATIZATION MGMT INTELL
1
0
ANAL.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SECURE INST MGR (MCA).....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
0
1
(BSC).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
0
1
(DAL).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
0
1
(DRJ).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
1
0
(GPC).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
0
1
(MVC).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
1
0
(NLK).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
0
1
(REE).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR SECURE INST MGR
0
1
(RIV).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SR INTELL ANAL............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SR INTELL ANAL (Crystal
1
0
City).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SUPVRY INTELL OFFCR.......
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
ASST ADMIN................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
ASST ADMR.................
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
ASST ADMR (PRIV BRANCH)...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
ASST ADMR (SUPRT AND
0
1
DVLPMT).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH POLICY DVLPMT &
0
1
PLANNING SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH UNIT MGMT SEC..........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH, COUNTER-TERRORISM UNIT
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH, DISCIPLINARY HEARING
0
1
OFFICER.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH, INTELL SEC............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH, INTELLIGENCE SIU......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CH, OFF OF EMER
0
1
PREPAREDNESS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CHIEF.....................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
GANG INTELL OFFCR.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
INTELL OFFCR (COUNTER-
1
0
TERRORISM).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
INTELL OFFCR (COUNTER-
0
1
TERRORISM) (FBI).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
PRIVATIZATION FLD ADMR....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-14.............
PRIVATIZATION FLD ADMR
0
1
(CCH).
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, CORRECTNL PROG BR...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, CORRECTNL SRVCS
0
1
BRANCH.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, INTEL/COUNTER-
0
1
TERRORISM.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, PRIVATIZATION MGMT BR.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0060-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0080-12.............
PHYSICAL SECURITY SPECLST.
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0180-14.............
SEX OFFENDER CERTIF REVW
1
2
PSYCH.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0180-15.............
ADMR, SEX OFFENDER CERTIF
0
1
REVW BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0303-08.............
ADMV ASST.................
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0303-08.............
ADMV ASST (LAT)...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0303-11.............
SECUR TECHNCN.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0318-08.............
SECY......................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0343-09.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
2
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL (DOJ ATF DC)....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0671-13.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0671-13.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST, PHS DSCC
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--CPD..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
ES-0006-00.............
DEP DIRECTOR..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
ES-0006-00.............
DIRECTOR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
GS-0301-12.............
EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT
1
0
SPECIALIST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
GS-0301-13.............
EXECUTIVE OFFICE
0
1
COORDINATOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
GS-0301-14.............
DEP CH OF STAFF...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
GS-0301-15.............
CHIEF OF STAFF............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
GS-0301-15.............
OMBUDSMAN.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--DIR..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASST DIR (SUPVISORY
0
1
INDUSTRIAL SPEC).
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
ES-0006-00.............
SPEC ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
ES-0006-00.............
SR. DEP ASST DIR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GM-1101-15.............
CH,STRATEGIC BUS DEVPMT/
1
0
MKTG BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0301-09.............
MGMT SPECLST..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0303-05.............
ADMV ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
1
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0343-12.............
WEB ADMR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT ANAL.................
3
10
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0343-14.............
MGMT & PROG ANALYS OFFCR..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0501-13.............
FIELD FNANCL ADMR.........
1
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0501-13.............
FIELD FNANCL ADMR (PENDING
1
0
ANNOUNCEMENT).
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0505-14.............
DEP CNTRLR................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0505-14.............
DEP CNTRLR (PENDING
1
0
ANNOUNCEMENT).
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0505-15.............
CNTRLR....................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0510-07.............
ACCT TRNEE................
4
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0510-12.............
OPERTG ACCTNT.............
3
6
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0510-13.............
SUPVRY OPERTG ACCTNT......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0510-13.............
SYS ACCTNT................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0511-13.............
AUDITOR...................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0525-08.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0599-05.............
ACCTG STUDENT TRAINEE.....
3
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0690-13.............
INDL HYGIENIST............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0809-13.............
CONST REPR................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-11.............
FACTORY MGR (TR)..........
7
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-12.............
INDL SPECLST..............
2
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-12.............
INDUS PROGRAM MGR.........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-12.............
PROG MGR..................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-12.............
PROJ MGR..................
0
11
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-12.............
RECYCLING SOURCES SPECLST.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-12.............
REGNL RECYCLING SOURCING
1
3
MGR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-13.............
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
0
1
SPECIALIST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-13.............
INDL SPECLST..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-13.............
INDUSTRIAL SPECLST........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-13.............
PROC IMPRVMT SPECLST......
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-13.............
PROG MGR..................
7
24
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-13.............
SUPVY PROJ MGR............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-13.............
TEXTLS MFG SPECLST........
3
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
CHIEF, CORP MKTG AND
1
0
CONSTITUENT REL.
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
DEP CH INTERAG SOLUTN &
0
1
PROCUR BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
EXEC CONS.................
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
INDL MGR..................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
PROG MGR..................
7
14
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
PROJ MGMT MGR.............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
PROJ MGR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-14.............
SUPVY PROJ MGR............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-15.............
GEN MGR...................
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-15.............
GENERAL MANAGER...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-15.............
GENERAL MGR...............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1101-15.............
PROG MGR..................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-11.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
6
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-12.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
6
15
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-13.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-13.............
CONTR SPECLST (PENDING
3
0
ANNOUNCEMENT).
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-13.............
SR CONTRCTG OFFCR.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-13.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-14.............
PROCUR CONTRCTG OFFCR.....
3
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1102-15.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1150-12.............
INDL SPECLST..............
3
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1150-12.............
INDL SPECLST (CAD/
0
1
DRAFTING).
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1150-13.............
INDL SPECLST (TEXTLS).....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1199-05.............
STUD TR...................
6
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1199-05.............
STUD TR (BUS & IND).......
3
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1712-13.............
CH OF TRNG, IND...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1910-09.............
QUAL ASSR TRNEE...........
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-1910-14.............
CORPORATE QUALITY
0
1
ASSURANCE MGR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-11.............
SYS ADM TRNEE.............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-12.............
ADP SYS ADMR..............
4
9
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
3
12
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-13.............
DATA BASE ADMR............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-13.............
REGNL SYS ADMR............
2
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-13.............
SUPVY COMPR SPECLST.......
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH ELCTRON COMM SEC.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, INF SYS MGMT SEC......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-14.............
DEP CH INFO SECUR OFFCR...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-14.............
FLD SUPRT SEC CH..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-14.............
SUPVY COMPR SPECLST.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
GS-2210-15.............
CH INFO OFFCR.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--FPI..................
WS-5301-07.............
SEW MACH FRMM TRNEE.......
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASST DIR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
ES-0006-00.............
SR DEP ASST DIR...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0006-12.............
CURRICULUM DEVELOPER......
1
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0006-14.............
DEP CH, LBR MGMT REL & SEC
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, LBR MGMT REL & EMP
0
1
SECUR BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP ASST DIR..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0180-13.............
SR PERS RES PSYCH.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-12.............
CLASSIFN SPECLST..........
2
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-12.............
EMP DVLPMT SPECLST........
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
3
13
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-12.............
STAFFING SPECLST..........
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-12.............
WORKFORCE PLANNING SPECLST
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
CLASSIFN & CMPNSN SPECLST.
1
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
DEP CH, CLASSIFN & CMPNSN
0
1
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
DEP CH, STAFFING & EMP REL
0
1
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
DEP CH, WORKFORCE SYS &
0
1
EVAL SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGMT
0
3
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
LBR MGMT REL SPECLST......
1
9
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
LEARNING SYS MGR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
SR EMP DVLPMT SPECLST.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
SR HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST.
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
SR HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-13.............
WORKFORCE PLANNING ADMR...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-14.............
CH, CLASSIFN & CMPNSN SEC.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-14.............
CH, STAFFING & EMP REL SEC
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-14.............
CH, WORKFORCE SYS & EVAL
0
1
SEC..
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-14.............
DEP CH, LEARNING & CAREER
0
1
DVLPMT BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-14.............
DEP PERS DIR..............
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-14.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-14.............
NATL RECRUIT COORD........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-15.............
CH, LEARNING & CAREER
0
1
DVLPMT BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0201-15.............
PERSONNEL DIR.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0260-13.............
EQUAL EMPLMNT SPECLST.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0299-04.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0299-05.............
HR STUD TRAINEE...........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
4
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0303-08.............
ADMIN ASST................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0303-09.............
ADMV ASST.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0303-09.............
ADMV SUPRT COORD..........
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0341-09.............
ADMV OFFCR................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0343-11.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0343-12.............
LMR LIASN SPECLST.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HRM..................
GS-0343-13.............
WKRC PLNG PROG ANAL.......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT (Co-
0
1
Step).
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
0
1
(National).
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
SR PROGRAM MANAGEME.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
CLINICAL SPECIALTY........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
CLINICAL SPECIALTY--CRW...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
SENIOR CLINICAL NUR--BUT..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
UTILIZ REV NURSE UR NURSE
0
1
CONS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
AREA/REGIONAL PHARM.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST-BO.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
CLINICAL SOCIAL WOR.......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
CREDENTIAL VERFCTN OFFCR..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
HEATH SYSTEM SPECIALIST...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
MEDCL DESIGANTOR/
0
2
UTILZATION REVIEWER ADMR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
MEDCL DESIGNATOR/
0
2
UTILIZATION REVW ADMR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
NATL LAB CONSLT...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
PROGRAM ANALYST...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT--BUT...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT--RCH...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT--SPG...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT PROG SPECLST.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG--RCH..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
CH, MEDCL DESIGNATIONS/
0
1
UTILIZ REVW.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
OCCUPATIONAL MEDICINE
0
1
PHYSICIAN.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
SENIOR PROGRAM MANA.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
TRNSTNAL CARE PHARMACIST..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
TRNSTNAL CARE SOC WRKR....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
SR. DEP ASST DIR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
SR SUPERVISORY PROG.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
WORKER'S COMP SPECIALIST..
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
WRKRS CMPNSN SPECLST......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
PHS....................
BRANCH CHIEF..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0018-14.............
CH OCCUPTL SAFETY COMPLNC
1
0
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0018-15.............
NATL SAFETY ADMR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0028-13.............
ENVRNMTL PROTCTN SPECLST..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0028-14.............
CH ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SEC...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0028-14.............
CH FIRE PROTECTION CHIEF..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0301-11.............
WORKER'S COMPENSATION
1
2
SPECIALIST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0301-11.............
WRKRS CMPNSN SPECLST......
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0301-12.............
WORKERS CMPNSN COORD......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0301-13.............
NAT DRUG FREE WORKPL COORD
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0303-06.............
MEDCL FISC ASST...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0303-07.............
ADMV ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0318-07.............
SECY......................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0340-14.............
CH, FINANCL MGMT SEC......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0343-11.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0343-12.............
PROG ANLST................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0343-12.............
RECRUIT SPECLST...........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0343-13.............
MEDICAL FISCAL CONSULTANT.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT ANAL CONTRACTING.....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0343-13.............
PROG ANLST................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL DIR...............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0602-15.............
CH, HLTH PROGS............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0602-15.............
CH, PSYCHIATRIST..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0602-15.............
REGNL MEDCL DIR...........
1
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0602-15.............
TELEPSYCHIATRIST..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE EXEC TRAINEE........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0610-13.............
CHIEF, NURSING PROG BOP...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0610-13.............
NATL EMP HEALTH COORD.....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0669-14.............
MEDCL REC ADMR............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0670-14.............
ASSISTANT NAT HEALTH SYS
0
1
ADMR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0670-15.............
NATIONAL HEALTH SYSTEMS
0
1
ADMINISTRATOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0670-15.............
NATL HLTH TECHNLGY ADMR...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0671-13.............
HLTH INFORMATICS SPECLST..
0
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0671-13.............
MEDCL DESIGNATOR/
1
0
UTILIZATION REVIEWER ADMR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0671-13.............
QUAL IMPRVMT PROG SPECLST.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0671-15.............
CH, QUAL MGMT.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0680-14.............
CLNCL SPECIALTY CONS......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-0680-15.............
NATIONAL CHIEF DENTIST....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-1667-13.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-1667-15.............
NATL FOOD SERVICE ADMR....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--HSD..................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASST DIR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
ES-0006-00.............
CH, OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFRS
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
ES-0006-00.............
SR. DEP ASST DIR..........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GL-0343-09.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GM-2210-13.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-14.............
CHIEF, COMMUN & ARCHV.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-15.............
(RESERVES) SR TECHNLGST...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, OFF OF LEGIS AFF......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, OFF OF SECUR TECHNLGY.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, PUBLIC INFORMATION
1
0
OFFICE.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP ASST DIR..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-15.............
DIR, OF RES & EVAL........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0006-15.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0101-12.............
SOC SCI RES ANAL..........
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0101-12.............
SOC SCI RES ANAL NTE 08/31/
0
1
19.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0101-13.............
SOC SCI RES ANAL..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0101-13.............
SOC SCI RES ANAL..........
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0101-14.............
SEX OFFENDER SOC SCI RES
0
1
ANAL.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0101-14.............
SOC SCI RES ANAL..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0101-15.............
SOC SCI RES ANAL..........
0
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0199-05.............
SOC SCI STUDENT TRAINEE...
5
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0301-11.............
SUPRT SRVCS SPECLST.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0301-13.............
CH, DOCMTS & DISTR MGMT...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0301-15.............
CH PIMB...................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0301-15.............
CHIEF, INF TECHNLGY PLNG
1
0
AND ADM.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0303-05.............
RES CLK...................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0308-14.............
CH INF MGMT SEC...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-09.............
ADMV SUPRT COORD..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-09.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-11.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-12.............
FORMS ANAL................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-13.............
COMPR SECUR PROG MGR......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
1
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0343-13.............
POLICY ANAL...............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0399-04.............
CLER STUD TR..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0399-05.............
CLER STUD TR..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-0399-05.............
CLERICAL STUDENT TRAINEE..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-1035-13.............
LEGIS AFF SPECLST.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-1035-14.............
LEGIS AFF SPECLST.........
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-1035-14.............
PUBLIC AFF SPECLST........
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-1083-11.............
COMMUN SPECLST............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-1410-13.............
BOP LIBRN.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-1411-08.............
LIB TECHNCN/ASST..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-1530-13.............
STATCN SOC SCI............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2201-14.............
CH, FIELD IT OPS SUPRT SEC
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
4
15
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST (CUST SUPPT)
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
COMP SPECLST..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
8
45
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
LEAD COMPR SPECLST........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
MGR, ADMIN SYS............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
PROJ MGR..................
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
REGNL COMPR SRVS COORD....
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
REGNL COMPR SVCS COORD....
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
SUPVY COMPR SPECLST.......
2
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-13.............
WEB DEVELOPER.............
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH ADMV SYS DVLPMT SEC....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, CENTRL OFF NETWORK ADM
0
1
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, COMPR SVC ADM & TNG
0
1
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, DISTRIBUTED SYS DVLMPT
0
1
SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, GPOC NETWORK ADMIN....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, HELP DESK SEC.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, INTERNET/INTRANET
0
1
DVLPMT SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, MAINFRAME SUPRT SECT..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, NATL INFRASTRUCTURE
1
0
SUPRT SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, NATL NETWORK COMMUN
0
1
SUPRT SEC.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, NATL NETWORK SUPRT SEC
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, SENTRY SYS DVLPMT SEC.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CH, TECHNCL DVLPMT........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CHIEF, INF SECUR PROGRAMS.
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
CHIEF, NETWORK ARCHITECT..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
PROJ MGR-APPLD TECHNLGY...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
SOFTWARE SYS DISASTER
0
1
RECOVERY SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-14.............
SUPV ITSPEC...............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-15.............
CH, COMPR SRVCS ADM & USER
0
1
SUPRT.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-15.............
CH, NATL NETWORK COMMUN BR
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-15.............
CH, NETWORK MGMT BR.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-15.............
CH, SYS & INFO RESOURCE
1
0
MGMT BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-15.............
CH, SYS DVLPMT BR.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-15.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2210-15.............
SUPV ITSPEC...............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--IPP..................
GS-2299-05.............
INFO TECH STUDENT TRAINEE.
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
PHS....................
SR PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
0
1
OFFICER CONSULTANT.
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
ES-0006-00.............
DIR, NIC..................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-13.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
4
9
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-13.............
CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST...
2
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, COMMUNITY SERVICES DIV
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, JAILS DIV.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, NATL ACADEMY OF
0
1
CORRECTIONS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, PRISONS DIV...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP DIR, NIC..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0301-09.............
DATABASE SPECIALIST.......
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0301-09.............
REGISTRAR.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0301-11.............
MGMT SUPPORT SPECLST......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0303-09.............
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT
2
0
COORDINATOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0303-09.............
ADMV SUPRT COORD..........
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0344-07.............
MGMT ASST.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL PROGRAM
1
1
SPECIALIST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-0505-15.............
PLNG BUDG & FIN OFFCR.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-1083-12.............
TECHNCL WRI EDIT..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-1702-07.............
TRNG TECHNCN..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-1750-13.............
INSTRUCTIONAL SYS SPECLST.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--NIC..................
SL-0006-00.............
SENIOR DEP DIR, NIC.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0399-05.............
STUDENT TRAINEE...........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
ES-0905-00.............
ASST DIR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
ES-0905-00.............
SR CNSL...................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
ES-0905-00.............
SR. DEPUTY GENERAL COUNSEL
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GL-0301-07.............
INVESTIGATIVE SUPRT
0
1
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GL-0301-09.............
INVESTIGATIVE SUPRT
0
1
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GM-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GM-0905-15.............
SPEC ASST.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GM-0905-15.............
SUPVY ATTY ADVSR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
SPEC AGT..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
ADMV REMEDY SPECLST
0
4
**Admin Remedy.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
ADMV REMEDY SPECLST
0
2
**Admin Remedy.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
ADMV REMEDY SPECLST
0
1
**Admin Remedy.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
CORR PROG SPECLST **Admin
0
1
Remedy.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
SPEC AGT..................
2
14
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
SPEC AGT..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-13.............
SPECL AGNT, INTERNAL
0
1
AFFRS--FIELD OFF.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-14.............
NATL INMATE APPEALS ADMR
0
1
**Admin Remedy.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-14.............
SUPVY SPEC AGT............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0006-15.............
CH, OFFICE OF INTERNAL
0
1
AFFRS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0201-12.............
EMPL REL SPECLST..........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0299-07.............
PARALEGAL STUD TR.........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0301-09.............
INVESTIGATIVE SUPRT
0
3
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0301-11.............
SR INVESTIGATIVE SUPRT
0
2
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0303-08.............
ADMV ASSISTANT............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0306-11.............
GOVT INFORM SPEC **FOIA...
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0306-12.............
FOIA/PA SPECLST **FOIA....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0306-12.............
FOIA/PA SPECLST **FOIA....
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0318-09.............
SECY......................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0322-04.............
CLK TYP...................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0341-12.............
LEG SRVCS SUPRT ADMR......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0343-13.............
SUPV. MGMT ANAL...........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0343-13.............
MANAGEMENT ANALYST........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0399-05.............
CLERICAL STUDENT TRAINEE..
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0399-05.............
STUDENT TRAINEE...........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0399-05.............
STUDENT TRAINEE **FOIA....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0904-12.............
HONORS ATTORNEY--LAW CLERK
0
1
(Philadelphia).
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR (HONORS ATTY)..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR (HONORS ATTY
1
0
Kansas City).
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-14.............
HONORS ATTORNEY--LAW CLERK
1
0
(Annapolis Junction).
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-14.............
HONORS ATTORNEY--LAW CLERK
1
0
(Philadelphia).
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-14.............
SR ATTY (HONORS ATTY).....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTORNEY ADVISOR **FOIA...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ASSOC GEN CNSL............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ASSOC GEN CNSL BR CH......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR................
6
33
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR **FOIA.........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR **FOIA.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR (Atlanta)......
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR (DC)...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR (Grand Prairie)
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ATTY ADVSR ***Shared
0
1
Position***.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
CHIEF, COMMERICAL LAW.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
ETHICS OFFICER............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
LEGAL EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
SR ATTY...................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
SR CNSL...................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
SR COUNSEL................
0
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPERVISORY ATTORNEY
0
3
ADVISOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPERVISORY ATTORNEY
0
1
ADVISOR **FOIA.
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPERVISORY ATTY ADVISOR..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST (Grand
0
5
Prairie).
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST (Grand Prairie)..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0986-09.............
LEGAL ASSISTANT**FOIA.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0999-07.............
SLIP......................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0999-07.............
STUD TR...................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0999-07.............
STUD TR**FOIA.............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-0999-09.............
SLIP......................
3
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--OGC..................
GS-1083-13.............
IAC PROGRAM COORDINATOR...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASST DIR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
ES-0006-00.............
SR DEP ASST DIR...........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-13.............
EVAL SPECIALIST...........
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-13.............
EVAL SPECLS...............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
2
11
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-13.............
EVAL SPECLST (Corr Svcs)..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-13.............
EVAL SPECLST (Food Svcs)..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-14.............
AFFIRMATIVE EMPLOYMENT
0
1
PROGRAMS OFFICER.
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CHIEF, ACA/PREA AUDIT
0
1
SECTION.
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CHIEF, EXTERNAL AUDITS,
0
1
PLANNING & ANALYSIS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-14.............
CORE SEC CH...............
1
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, EXTERNAL AUDTG BR...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, PROG REVW BR (OP)...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP ASST DIR..............
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0060-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0180-14.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0201-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0260-13.............
AFFIRMATIVE ACTN SPECLST..
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0260-13.............
SR EQ EMPLMT OPP SPECLST..
1
8
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0299-05.............
STUD TR...................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0303-05.............
CLK.......................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0318-08.............
SECY......................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-09.............
PROG ANLST................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-11.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-13.............
COMPR EVAL SPECLST........
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-13.............
MANAGEMENT ANALYST........
2
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT ANAL--EXTERNAL LIASN.
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-13.............
MGMT ANAL EXTERNAL UASN...
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0343-14.............
CONFLICT RESOLUTION &
0
1
ANALYSIS ADMINISTRATOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0361-09.............
AFFIRMATIVE ACTN ASST.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0501-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0602-15.............
PHYSCN--CONTR MONITORING
0
1
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0671-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0671-13.............
EVAL SPECLST (Health Svcs)
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPERVISORY ATTORNEY
0
3
ADVISOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-1640-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-1640-13.............
EVAL SPECLST (Announced--
0
1
Retirement).
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-1720-13.............
EVAL SPECLST..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--PRD..................
GS-1720-13.............
EVAL SPECLST (Blizzard, M)
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
PHS....................
HEALTH SYSTEM SPECIALIST..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
PHS....................
SENIOR PROG MGMT OFFICER..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
ES-0006-00.............
ASST DIR..................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
ES-0006-00.............
SR. DEP ASST DIR..........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GL-0006-11.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY
0
4
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-11.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY
2
20
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-11.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY
5
21
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-12.............
CONTR OVERSIGHT SPECLST...
4
31
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-12.............
RES REENTRY SPECLST.......
1
4
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-12.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY
2
4
MANAGER.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-12.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY
0
1
MANAGER.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-12.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY MGR...
2
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-13.............
ASST. SECTOR
0
3
ADMININISTRATOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-13.............
COMM/TRAIN DEV............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-13.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY MGR...
2
5
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR CORRECTNL PROG
0
1
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-13.............
SUPVY RES REENTRY SPECLST.
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-14.............
DEP ADMR, NATL REENTRY AFF
0
1
BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-14.............
NATNL POLICY & PRGM COORD.
2
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-14.............
SECTOR ADMIN..............
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, NATL REENTRY AFF BR.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, RESIDENTIAL REENTRY
0
1
MGMT BR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0006-15.............
ADMR, WOMEN & SPECIAL
0
1
POPULATIONS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0018-12.............
RES SAFETY SPECLST........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0018-12.............
RES SAFETY SPECLST........
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0060-13.............
CHAP SCV COORD............
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0060-14.............
ADMV PROG MGR.............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0060-14.............
ASST ADMR CHAPLAINCY SRVCS
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0060-14.............
FAITH BASED PROG COORD....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0060-15.............
CH CHAPLAINCY SRVCS.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-11.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY CASE
0
1
MGR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-11.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY
0
1
SPECLST.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-11.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY CASE
1
0
MGR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-12.............
COMM TRTMNT OVERSIGHT SPEC
1
28
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-12.............
PSYCHLGY TRTMNT SPECLST...
0
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-13.............
COMM PRGM TRTMNT SPEC.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-13.............
COMMUNITY TRTMNTCOORD.....
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-13.............
PSYCHLGY TRTMNT PROGS COOR
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-13.............
REGNL REENTRY AFF ADMR....
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-13.............
SUPVY COMMUNITY TRTMNT
0
6
COORD.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-14.............
CH, COMMUNITY TRTMNT SCVS.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-14.............
DISABILITIES PROG MGR.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0101-14.............
SOC SCI RES ANAL..........
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
BEHAVIOR MGMT PROG COORD..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
CH, DRUG TREATMENT
0
1
PROGRAMS.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
CH, PSYCHLGL EVAL SEC.....
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
CMP ASSMT PSYCH...........
1
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
DRUG TRTMNT PROGS TRNG
0
1
COORDINATOR.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
MENTAL HLTH TRTMNT COORD..
0
6
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
NATL EMP ASSTNC PROG COORD
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
NATL PREA COORDINATOR.....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
NTL SUICIDE COORD.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
PSYCH TRTMNT PRGM COORD...
0
6
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
PSYCH TRTMNT PRGM SUPVR...
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
SCHOOL PSYCH..............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
SEX OFF TRN COORD.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-14.............
SPECIALITY TRTMNT PROG
0
1
COORD.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0180-15.............
ADMR, PSYCHLGY SRVCS BR...
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0199-07.............
PSYCHLGY STUD TR..........
2
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0301-09.............
ADMV MGMT SPECLST.........
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0301-11.............
ADMIN SUPPORT COORD.......
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0301-13.............
RECR PROG MGR.............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0303-06.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY ASST..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0303-06.............
RESIDENTIAL REENTRY ASST..
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0303-07.............
ADMIN ASST................
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0303-07.............
COMM TRTMNT SVCES TECHNCN.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0303-09.............
ADMIN. SUPPORT............
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0303-09.............
WOMEN & SPECIAL
0
1
POOPULATIONS SUPPORT
COORD.
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0318-07.............
SECY......................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0318-08.............
SECY......................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER....
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0341-11.............
ADMV ASST.................
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0343-11.............
MANAGEMENT ANALYST........
2
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT & PROG ANAL..........
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0501-09.............
FNANCL SUPPRT COORD.......
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0501-09.............
MANAGEMENT ANALYST........
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0501-11.............
SUPVY FNANCL SUPPRT COORD.
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0501-11.............
SUPVY FNANCL SUPRT COORD..
1
0
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-0671-13.............
HEALTH SYSTEM SPECIALIST..
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-1701-13.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
3
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-1701-14.............
ASST EDUC ADMR............
0
2
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
GS-1701-15.............
EDUC ADMR.................
0
1
CENTRAL OFFICE--RSD..................
PHS....................
HEALTH SYSTEM SPECIALIST..
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
17
135
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
25
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
85
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
8
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCH TECH................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0199-04.............
EDUCATION INTERN..........
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0199-04.............
HUMAN RESOURCE INTERN.....
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
2
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SERVICE
0
1
ASSISTANT.
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
3
4
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY (DHO)................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
4
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
3
SPECIALIST.
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG OFFCR......
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
1
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
10
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN...............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CORRECTNL TRTMNT SPECLST..
1
10
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0101-11.............
RE-ENTRY AFFAIRS
0
1
COORDINATOR.
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
4
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0199-04.............
EDUCATION INTERN..........
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0299-04.............
HUMAN RESOURCE INTERN.....
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
4
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
PHS....................
HEALTH SYSTEMS SPECIALIST.
1
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
PHS....................
NURSE.....................
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
0
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
12
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
8
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
3
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
2
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
14
MDC BROOKLYN.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
13
FPC BRYAN............................
PHS....................
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
PHS....................
OTHER HEALTH SER..........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
3
18
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
3
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
7
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
3
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
6
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESCOURCE SPECIALIST
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPERVISOR.....
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASST......
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0303-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0303-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC REP...........
0
2
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
2
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0640-06.............
HLTH TECHNCN..............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-2010-09.............
PROCURMENT & PROPERTY
0
1
SPECLST.
FPC BRYAN............................
GL-2210-09.............
COMPUTER SPEC.............
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0007-11.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0180-13.............
CHIEF PSYCH PROG..........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER....
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND PROGRAM SPCSLT.
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF GENERAL DENTA.......
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODUCTION CONTROLLER.....
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1152-11.............
SUPVRY PRODN CNTRLR.......
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1640-11.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1667-11.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR SPEC ED..............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
0
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-6907-04.............
MATERIAL HANDLER
0
2
SUPERVISOR.
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-6907-04.............
WAREHOUSE WORKER FOREMAN..
0
1
FPC BRYAN............................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
4
USP BIG SANDY........................
ES-0006................
WARDEN....................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0006-09.............
INTELL RES SPECLST........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
13
135
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
65
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
9
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
6
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
4
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
5
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
4
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
11
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL PROTCTN SPECLST..
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
3
SPECLST.
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
3
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
10
USP BIG SANDY........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
11
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
Information Technology
0
1
Specialist.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
PSYCHOLOGIST..............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
SOCIAL WORKER.............
1
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
SOCIAL WORKER (SUPV)......
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
ASSISTANT HEALTH SERVICES
1
1
ADMIN.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
ASSISTANT HEALTH SERVICES
0
1
ADMINISTRATOR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL MASTC NURSE......
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
MEDICAL OFFICER
0
1
(Psychiatrist).
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
3
8
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT Sr.
0
1
Clinical.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
0
1
MANAGER.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
NURSE EDUCATOR............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
NURSE SPECLST (Wound Care)
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
ONCOLOGY NURSE............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
ONCOLOGY NURSE............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
OR NURSE..................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
OR NURSE..................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
2
19
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
NURSE MANAGER.............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
0
2
CONT NURSE.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
UTILIZ REV NURSE/NURSE
0
1
CONS.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
ASST DIRECTOR OF NURSING..
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER
0
1
(Psychiatric).
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER
1
1
(Pyschiatric).
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
DIRECTOR OF NURSING.......
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
DIETITIAN.................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIST....
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
PHYSICAL THERAPIST........
3
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF THERAPIST...........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIST......
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIST......
1
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
DEPUTY CHIEF CLINICAL
0
1
LABORATORY(M.C.).
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIST-BENCH
0
1
SUPERVISOR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF CLINICAL LAB (M.C.).
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
PHARMACY RESIDENT.........
2
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
12
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST.........
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
DEPUTY CHIEF PHARMACIST...
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL PHARMACY
0
1
CONSULTANT.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF HEALTH INFORMATION
0
1
ADMINISTRATOR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
DEPUTY CHIEF DENTAL
0
1
OFFICER.
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
24
270
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
24
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
184
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTIONAL COUNSELOR....
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
19
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0030-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0099-05.............
STUD INTERN BUSINESS &
2
0
INDUSTRY.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MANAGER..............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0181-07.............
COMMT & TRMNT TECHNCN.....
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHOLOGY TECHNCN........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
19
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0199-05.............
SOCIAL SCIENCE STUDENT
1
0
INTERN.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
8
INTERN.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
2
10
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ADMV SPECLST..............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
1
11
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0303-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC SPECLST.......
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0318-06.............
PSYCHOLOGY SECRETARY......
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECRETARY............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
12
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0510-07.............
ACCOUNTING TRAINEE........
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0510-09.............
FACTORY OPERTNL ACCTNT....
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
5
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
2
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0610-10.............
ONCOLOGY NURSE............
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0610-10.............
OPERTG RM STAFF NURSE.....
1
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
8
93
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0610-10.............
SPECIALTY CLINIC
1
0
COORDINATOR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0610-10.............
UTILIZ REV NURSE..........
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0621-05.............
NRSNG ASST................
2
5
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0622-06.............
MEDCL SUPP TECH (Cen Proc
0
2
Tech).
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0622-06.............
MEDCL SUPP TECHNCN........
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0633-09.............
PHYS THRPST...............
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0638-09.............
RECR THRPST...............
2
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0640-06.............
HLTH TECHNCN..............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
4
10
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIST......
1
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0649-07.............
SURGICAL TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0661-05.............
PHRMCY TECHNCN............
0
8
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0671-09.............
HEALTH SYS SPECIALIST.....
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0671-09.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST
0
1
(Credential Officer).
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0671-09.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST (Movement
1
0
Coord).
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
15
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0681-06.............
DENTAL ASSISTANT..........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0681-07.............
DENTAL ASSISTANT..........
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-0699-05.............
STUD INTERN...............
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT AND PROP
1
1
SPECLST.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPPORT TECH..........
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
GL-1910-09.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
3
SPECIALIST.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
1
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MANAGER..............
2
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
7
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
1
7
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-14.............
COMMT & TREATMENT PRG
0
1
ADMIN.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
41
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEPUTY CAPTAIN............
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEPUTY CAPTAIN............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVRNMNT OF CARE SPECLST..
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
8
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MANAGER..............
1
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
19
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT
0
7
SPECIALIST.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
2
COMPLEX.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGI.......
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGIST.....
0
5
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CARE LEVEL 3 PSYCHOLOGIST.
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CLNCL PSYCH/SPECIALTY
0
2
PROGRAM COORD.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
COMMT & TREATMENT CLIN
1
0
COORD.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
COMMT & TRMNT PSYCHOLOGIST
1
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
COMMT & TRMNT FORENSICS
0
5
PSYCH.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DEP CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST....
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT
0
1
COORDINATOR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSIC UNIT PSYCH.......
0
8
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
NEUROPSYCHOLOGIST.........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0185-11.............
COMMT & TRMNT SOCIAL
1
1
WORKER.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOCIAL WORKER.............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0185-12.............
REGIONAL MAST SOCIAL
0
2
WORKER.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECT SUPVR...........
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
1
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0303-08.............
RECYCLING SAFETY TECHNCN..
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0501-11.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0501-13.............
GENERAL BUS MGR (Unicor)..
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0510-11.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0510-11.............
FACTORY OPERTNL ACCTNT....
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CH, PSYCHIATRY............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
3
7
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (Psychiatrist)
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0602-15.............
ORTHOPEDIC SURGEON........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASST............
3
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
0
2
CONT NURSE.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE/DIR.
1
0
OF OR.
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0630-11.............
DIETITIAN.................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0671-11.............
HEALTH SYS SPEC (IOC-PIC).
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFICER..............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
9
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVRY CLC ATTY...........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1101-13.............
INDUSTRIAL PROGRAM MGR....
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1102-11.............
CONTRACT SPECIALIST.......
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1102-11.............
LEAD CONTR SPECLST........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1102-11.............
UNICOR CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1150-12.............
INDUSTRIAL SPECIALIST.....
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1601-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
2
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
11
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
7
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
2
5
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-4010-09.............
OPTICS FACTORY FRMN.......
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
3
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
6
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
17
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
4
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
9
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
1
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-6907-04.............
MATERIAL HANDLER SUPV.....
0
22
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
10
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPV............
0
1
FCC BUTNER...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
38
USP CANAAN...........................
PHS....................
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
9
11
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
11
115
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
11
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
76
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
6
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SVCS ASST..........
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
3
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-1658-09.............
LNDRY PLANT MGR...........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUCATION TECH............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
4
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
12
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMNR.
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGT COORD.......
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
9
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TREATMENT
0
5
SPECIALIST.
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
4
SPECLST.
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
1
0
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
1
0
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0602-15.............
REGIONAL PHYSICIAN........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DNTL OFFCR..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
1
0
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
3
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (SPEC ED)............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
USP CANAAN...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
14
MCC CHICAGO..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
PHS....................
AREA REGIONAL DENTA.......
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
3
53
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
9
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
30
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
4
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
8
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
1
0
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFFAIRS
0
1
COORDINATOR.
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
3
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0501-09.............
PROG SPECLST..............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUSINESS ADMR.............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0602-15.............
PSYCHTRC PHYSCN...........
1
0
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREV & CONT
0
1
NURSE.
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR EDUC/REC............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
4
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
3
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
0
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-6907-02.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
MCC CHICAGO..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
5
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
PRODN CNTRLR..............
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
SOCIAL WORKER 4212........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
OTHER HEALTH SERV--IOP/IDC
0
1
4222.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST 4267..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
PHYSICAL THERAPIST 4263...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
NURSE OTHER--NP 4122......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
NURSE OTHER--NP 4122......
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST 4243...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST TRNG POST
0
1
CoSTEP 4243.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST 4243.....
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR--Hosp
0
2
Admin 4192.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR-
0
1
Admin Non Psych 4023.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIEN 4268........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIEN 4268........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST 4268.....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN COP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN CLP................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD COP..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR CLP..............
14
121
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR COL..............
11
50
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR COM..............
14
58
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR COP..............
18
116
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR CLP...
0
8
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR COL...
0
7
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR COM...
0
9
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR COP...
0
7
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST CLP......
1
77
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST COL......
4
28
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST COM......
1
43
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST COP......
4
75
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR CLP.......
0
8
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR COL.......
0
12
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR COM.......
0
11
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR COP.......
0
9
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST CLP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST COL........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST COM........
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST COP........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0018-13.............
ENVIRON PROT SPEC CENTRAL
0
1
OFFICE.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0019-07.............
PROG ASST--SAFETY TECH CLP
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST CLP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST COL........
0
4
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST COP........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN CLP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN COP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST CLP..........
0
6
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST COL..........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST COM..........
1
6
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST COP..........
1
4
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
12
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH CLP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH COL........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH COM........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH COP........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH CLP.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST CLP.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST COL.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST COM.......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST CLP..
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST COL..
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
PROG TECH--REC TECH COL...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN CLP.....
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN COL.....
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN COM.....
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN COP.....
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR CLP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR COL.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR COM.........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR COP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY CLP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY COL........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY COM........
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY COP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CMC SECY MED..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY CLP..................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SIA SECY COP..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY CLP.............
2
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY COL.............
0
6
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY COM.............
1
4
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY COP.............
0
5
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY CLP...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY COL...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY COM...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY COP...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY COM........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY CLP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY COL.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY COM.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY COP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK CLP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK COP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
1
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
4
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE CLP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE COL......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE COM......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE COP......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN COM.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC CLP.............
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC COL.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC COM.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC COP.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN CLP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN COL......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN COM......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN COP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST COP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST CLP............
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST COL........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN CLP..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN COL..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN COM..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN COP..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR COM..................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR COP..................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORR SYSTEMS SPEC
0
1
COM.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORR SYSTEMS SPEC
0
1
COP.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR CLP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR COM......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR COP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR
0
1
CLP.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT CLP
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT COP
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR CLP..............
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR COL..............
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR COM..............
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR COP..............
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMR COM.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST COP.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN CLP..........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN COL..........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN COM..........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN COP..........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN COL................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN COM................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT CLP....................
2
14
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT COL....................
2
10
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT COM....................
0
13
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT COP....................
3
14
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN COMPLEX COL...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX COM...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-13.............
COMPLEX CAPTAIN CLP.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN COMPLEX CLP...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX COP...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY & OCC HEALTH TR CLP
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR COP............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVR PROTCTN SPEC COM.....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0060-11.............
CHAPLAIN TRAINEE..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN CLP..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN COL..............
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN COM..............
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN COP..............
2
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPV CHAPLAIN COL.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR CLP..............
0
9
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR COL..............
0
12
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR COM..............
0
15
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR COP..............
0
11
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPEC CLP
0
5
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPEC COL
0
6
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPEC COM
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPEC COP
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPEC TRTMNT PROG SPEC CLP.
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPEC TRTMNT PROG SPEC COM.
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPEC TRTMNT PROG SPEC COP.
0
4
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT CRD-COMPLEX
0
1
CLP.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT CRD-COMPLEX
0
1
COL.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT CRD-COMPLEX
0
1
COM.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT CRD-COMPLEX
0
1
COP.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX
0
1
COM.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCH--STAFF CLP.
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCH--STAFF COM.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCH--STAFF COP.
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCH- STAFF COL.
2
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CHALLENGE PROG PSYCH CLP..
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CHALLENGE PROG PSYCH COM..
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CHALLENGE PROG PSYCH COP..
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CLINICAL PSYCH--RHU COP...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGIST COP.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DEP CH, PSYCH CLP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD COL.
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD COM.
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-13.............
PSYCH--SPEC PRGM CORD COM.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH COP..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR COL.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR COM.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR COP.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR CLP............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR (TR)...
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0510-11.............
OPERTNL ACCTNT............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR--CLNCL DIR COM
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR--TELE PSYCH
0
1
COP.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR CLP...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR COL...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR COM...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR COP...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0602-15.............
REGIONAL PHYSICIAN........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
2
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER--NP
0
1
COM.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPR/INFECT PREV CLP.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPR/INFECT PREV COL.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPR/INFECT PREV COM.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0660-11.............
PHARMACY OFFICER -........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0660-11.............
PHARMACY OFFICER COM......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR COL..
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR COM.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0671-12.............
QUAL IMPRVMT PROG SPECLST.
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR CLP............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR COL............
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR COM............
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR CLP........
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0680-14.............
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN CLP.........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN CLP.......
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN COL.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN COM.......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN COP.......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVRY ATTY ADVSR.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR CLP.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR CLP...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR COL...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR COM...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR COP...
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR COL........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST CLP..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST COL..........
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR CLP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR COL........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR COM........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR COP........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR CLP..................
0
5
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR COL..................
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR COM..................
1
5
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR COP..................
0
5
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU COL....
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC CLP....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC COM....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC COP....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC COL.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1712-11.............
TCHR CLP..................
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU CLP....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU COL....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU COP....
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
1
0
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST CLP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST COL.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST COM.........
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST COP.........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR COM.......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN CLP......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN COL......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN COM......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN COP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN CLP..........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN CLP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN COL......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN COM......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN COP......
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4601-08.............
COMPLEX FACTORY FRMN......
6
8
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
3
CLP.
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4742-14.............
GEN FRMN COP..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN CLP.......
1
6
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN COL.......
0
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN COM.......
0
5
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN COP.......
0
6
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-09.............
MTNCE WRKR MRMN...........
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN CLP..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN COL..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN COM..............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN COL............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN CLP.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN COL.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN COM.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN COP.............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN CLP......
0
3
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN COL........
1
2
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
33
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN CLP.............
0
9
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN COL.............
1
9
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN COM.............
0
12
FCC COLEMAN..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN COP.............
0
8
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
INDEPENDENT CLINICA.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL MAST SOCIAL
0
1
WORKER.
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL SOCIAL WOR.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
ASST DIR OF NRSNG.........
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF, COMPLEX NURS.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
NURSE CONSULTANT IV.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
SENIOR STAFF DIETIT.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
SENIOR THERAPIST..........
0
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
THERAPY PROGRAM DIR.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF TECHNOLOGIST........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST.........
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
ASSISTANT CHIEF PHA.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST I.......
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT MGR..........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
4
23
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
3
48
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
9
45
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
8
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
6
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
7
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
6
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
7
36
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0610-10.............
UTILIZ REV NURSE..........
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
4
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0622-05.............
MEDCL SUPP TECHNCN........
1
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0631-09.............
OCCUPTL THRPST............
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0638-09.............
RECR THRPST...............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0640-08.............
HLTH TECHNCN..............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
1
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0647-08.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
2
TECHNLGST.
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0651-08.............
RESPIRATORY THRPST........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0661-05.............
PHRMCY TECHNCN............
1
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0679-04.............
MEDCL SUPRT ASST..........
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0006-13.............
ADMV UNIT MGR.............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
10
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0060-12.............
RELIGIOUS PROG COORD......
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
9
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
7
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
1
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
MENTAL HLTH UNIT PSYCH....
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CH, PSYCHIATRIST..........
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
3
7
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFCR.............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSCN ASST...............
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
6
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPROVMT/INFECT PREV
0
1
& CONT COORD.
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0680-14.............
REGNL DNTL CONS...........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECIALIST...........
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
0
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
7
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
3
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FMC CARSWELL.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
12
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
PHS....................
ASST HEALTH SRVC ADMIN....
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
PHS....................
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
5
58
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
41
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
0
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
5
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND PROG SPECLST...
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
3
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0610-11.............
QUALITY IMPROVE &
0
1
INFECTION CONTROL NURSE.
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-0681-06.............
DNTL ASST.................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
7
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CHIEF CORRECTNL SUPVR.....
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
8
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
1
0
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
0
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-4401-08.............
SILK SCREEN MKR & PRINTER
1
2
FRMN.
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI CUMBERLAND.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
10
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
4
71
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
5
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
26
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
4
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
6
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
1
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLIST............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-1105-09.............
PURCHSG AGT...............
1
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
8
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
1
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
6
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
1
2
SPECLST.
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MANAGEMENT COORD.....
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
3
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
1
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE...
1
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1150-12.............
INDL SPECLST..............
1
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1601-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (SPECIAL EDUCATION)..
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
PHS....................
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
PHS....................
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
PHS....................
HEALTH SYSTEMS ADMIN......
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-2854-08.............
ELCTRL EQUIP WRKR FRMN....
2
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDER FRMN...............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-4102-08.............
PNTG WRKR FRMN............
1
0
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
8
FCI DANBURY..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
13
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
0
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GL-0318-08.............
DIRECTOR's SECY...........
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GL-2010-09.............
PROCUREMENT & PROPERTY
0
1
SPECLST.
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0006-12.............
TRNG SPECLST..............
0
5
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0006-13.............
TRNG PROGS MGR............
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP DIR, MGMT & SPECLTY
0
1
TRNG CENTER.
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0006-15.............
DIR, MGMT & SPECLTY TRNG
0
1
CENTR.
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0028-13.............
ENVRNMTL PROTCTN SPECLST..
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0341-09.............
ADMV OFFCR................
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0501-12.............
TRNG SPECLST..............
0
2
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-1071-12.............
AUDIO/VIS PRODN OFFCR.....
2
2
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-1420-12.............
ARCHIVIST.................
1
0
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-1702-08.............
TRNG TECHNCN..............
0
3
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-1712-12.............
TRNG SPECLST..............
1
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-1750-12.............
INSTRUCTIONAL SYS SPECLST.
0
4
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-2210-11.............
IT SPECIALIST (DATAMGT)...
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPUTER SERVICES MANAGER.
0
1
MSTC--DENVER.........................
GS-2210-13.............
INSTR TECH MGR............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
WARDEN....................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
SOCIAL WORKER.............
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
MASTER SOCIAL WORKER......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
3
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
NURSE MANAGER.............
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
1
3
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
UTILIZ REV NURSE..........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
INFECTION PREV & CONT
0
1
NURSE.
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
STAFF THERAPIST...........
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF THERAPIST...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
STAFF TECHNOLOGIST........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
ASST CH PHARMACIST........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST.........
0
3
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
ASST HSA..................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG PERF
1
0
IMPR.
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
DON QUALITY MANAGER CHIEF.
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
PHS....................
DENTIST...................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
33
84
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
9
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
85
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
4
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
3
INTERN.
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
5
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0201-09.............
MEDCL RECRUITER...........
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0301-09.............
HOSP ADMISSIONS OFFCR.....
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFCR...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
3
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL ANAL............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECIALIST......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
2
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
37
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0610-10.............
WOUND CARE SPEC...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0622-05.............
MEDCL SUPP TECHNCN........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0631-09.............
OCCUPTL THRPST............
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0638-09.............
RECR THRPST...............
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0640-08.............
HSKPNG TECHNCN............
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIST......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0647-07.............
X-RAY TECHNLGST...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
6
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0699-04.............
STUDENT INTERN............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-1658-09.............
LNDRY PLANT SPECLST.......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
5
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENRMNTL PROTCTN SPECIALIST
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
0
4
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-11.............
PSYCHLGY POSTDOCTORAL (TR)
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CARE LEVEL III PSYCH......
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-13.............
MENTAL HLTH UNIT PSYCH....
1
4
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
0
5
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER....
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CH, PSYCHIATRIST..........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
6
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0602-15.............
PSYCHIATRIST..............
1
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER--PA
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0610-10.............
UTILIZATION REVIEW NURSE..
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREV & CONT
0
1
NURSE.
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER--NP
1
4
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
3
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0610-12.............
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF
0
1
NURSING.
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0610-13.............
DIRECTOR OF NURSING.......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0630-11.............
CLNCL DIETITIAN...........
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0644-12.............
LAB SUPVR.................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0669-12.............
MEDCL REC ADMR............
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASSISTANT HLTH SRVCS ADMR.
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
5
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
1
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
1
0
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
7
FMC DEVENS...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
14
FPC DULUTH...........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-05.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-06.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
4
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
8
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
2
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
6
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
2
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
6
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0525-06.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREVENTION &
0
1
CONTROL NURSE.
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0007-11.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
3
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0610-A..............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
2
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0670-11.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DENTIST.............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-1640-11.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-1667-11.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SUPV OF EDUC..............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPUTER SERVICES MANAGER.
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-4749-08.............
LANDSCAPE FRMN............
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
3
FPC DULUTH...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
5
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
16
37
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
27
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
2
0
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SERVCS ASST.....
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0303-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC REP...........
0
5
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
4
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT & PROP SPECLST
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-1603-08.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-2030-09.............
DISTR SPECLST (UNICOR)....
2
0
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GL-2210-09.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
8
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
4
3
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST........
1
0
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
1
0
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
2
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
CENTRAL PHARMACY FILLING..
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER NP.
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRATITITIONER NP
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMNT/INFECTION
1
0
CONT COORD.
FCI DUBLIN...........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI DUBLIN...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
13
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
PHS....................
SRCOSTEP-PHARMACIST.......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL NURSE............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
PHS....................
AREA/REGIONAL PHARM.......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST I.......
1
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
PHS....................
CHIEF GENERAL DENTA.......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
17
63
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
6
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
42
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
11
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
6
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
4
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFCR...........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
3
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0640-06.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN.........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0675-07.............
MEDCL REC TECH............
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEM
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
12
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
13
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
4
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0180-13.............
CLINICAL PSYCH............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0334-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0334-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
2
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVRY ATTY ADVSR.........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
7
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
3
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1799-05.............
STUD TR...................
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
2
5
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
6
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
7
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-6907-03.............
MTRLS HNDLR SUPVR.........
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-6907-04.............
MTRLS HNDLR...............
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-6907-04.............
MTRLS HNDLR SUPVR.........
1
5
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCI EDGEFIELD........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
10
FCI ELKTON...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
PHS....................
HEALTH SERVICES
1
0
ADMINSTRATOR.
FCI ELKTON...........................
PHS....................
NURSE.....................
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
PHS....................
QA/IC COORDINATOR.........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
84
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
9
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
9
43
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
8
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
4
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
6
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
16
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
6
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
1
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
6
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0335-09.............
COMPR ASST................
1
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECLST.........
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
3
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GL-2210-09.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
8
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
1
0
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
6
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPROVMT/INFECT PREV
1
0
& CONT COORD.
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1101-12.............
DATA SRVCS FACTORY MGR....
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
0
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
7
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
1
0
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-5306-09.............
AIR COND EQUIP MECH FRMN..
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
3
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-7305-05.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
2
FCI ELKTON...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
1
12
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
12
42
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
43
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
2
3
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
6
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASSISTANT LOCKSMITH.......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0802-09.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-0895-09.............
INDL ENGRG TECHNCN........
1
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0006-13.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
9
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
2
4
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
3
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0501-12.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0690-12.............
INDL HYGIENST.............
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1101-13.............
PROG MGR..................
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
2
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1712-11.............
TRNG INSTRU...............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
0
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-6907-04.............
MTRLS HNDLR...............
1
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
4
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-7305-04.............
LAUNDRY MACH OPR FRM......
0
1
FCI ENGLEWOOD........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL NURSE............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
JUNIOR STAFF NURSE........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
1
0
CONTRL NURSE.
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
SR SUPERVISORY PROGRAM
0
1
MANAGEMENT OFFC.
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S-M.H./
0
1
M.H.C.).
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
AREA/REGIONAL PHARM.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF GEN DENTAL UN.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
6
60
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
6
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
48
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
6
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
2
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
3
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-0895-09.............
INDL ENGRG TECHNCN........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-1712-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
2
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
8
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
4
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0199-07.............
PSYCHLGY STUD TR..........
1
0
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERATIONAL
0
1
ACCOUNTANT.
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0510-11.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
2
0
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1101-13.............
MTLS FACTORY MGR..........
1
0
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1150-12.............
INDL SPECLST (MTLS).......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1601-12.............
FARM MGR..................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-3416-10.............
TOOLMKR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-3801-08.............
MTL WRKR SUPVR............
1
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-3801-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-3806-08.............
SHEET MTL WRKR FRMN.......
1
7
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-3869-08.............
MTL FORMING MACH OPERTR
0
1
FRMN.
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-4749-09.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-5001-07.............
DAIRY FARMER FRMN.........
2
3
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-5002-07.............
FARMER FRMN...............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-5350-09.............
PRODN MCHNRY RPRER FRMN...
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-6907-04.............
MATERIAL HNDLR SUPVR......
0
2
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
6
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-6907-06.............
MATERIAL HNDLR SUPVR......
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCI EL RENO..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
10
FCI ESTILL...........................
PHS....................
ADMIN.....................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI ESTILL...........................
PHS....................
DNTL OFFCR................
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
ES-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
5
56
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
35
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
7
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT VICE...................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT VICE...................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT VICE...................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
8
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY DEGENHARDT......
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCOUNTANT................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0645-08.............
MEDCL TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTRACT SPEC.............
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
7
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT VICE...................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT VICE...................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT VICE...................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLNC ADMR.
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE
1
0
SPEC.
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECREATION SUPERVISOR.....
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0501-09.............
FIN PROG SPEC.............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0510-11.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SYS ADMN........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0680-13.............
GEN DENTAL OFFICER........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
4
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
GS-802-11..............
ENGINEERING TECHN.........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN LUDWICK...
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
0
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-6907-03.............
MATERIAL HNDLR FRM........
0
1
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI ESTILL...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI FAIRTON..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
PHS....................
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST...............
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
4
62
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
9
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
40
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
7
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
4
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0303-09.............
DISTR SRVCS REPR..........
1
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECRETARY.................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0510-11.............
FACTORY OPERTNL ACCNT.....
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
2
7
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0640-06.............
HLTH TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0675-07.............
MEDCL REC TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
3
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GL-1910-09.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPEC..........
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0006-13.............
WITNESS SECUR UNIT MGR....
1
0
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
9
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT (SIS)..................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMNR.
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECLST.
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CARE LEVEL 3 PSYCHOLOGIST.
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDGET & ACCTG OFFICER....
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (GEN PRAC)....
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0670-11.............
SUPVY ASST HLTH SYS ADMR..
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SYS ADMR.............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0671-11.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MANAGER...........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (SPECIAL EDUCATION)..
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
3
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
8
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI FAIRTON..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
14
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECT PREV &
0
1
CONTROL COORD.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE
0
1
(PSYCHIATRIC).
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST II......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST II......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF HEALTH RECORD ADMIN.
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
21
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
44
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
53
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
188
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
13
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
12
152
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
18
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
4
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHOLOGY TECHNICIAN.....
1
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
17
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
9
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
4
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
1
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS TELEPH MNTR...........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY (DHO)................
2
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
8
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
5
4
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE (PSYCH)..
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HEALTH INFO TECH..........
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0681-06.............
DENTAL ASSISTANT..........
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
4
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
18
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
5
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMR.................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-13.............
CONT UNIT MGR.............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
7
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
8
43
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN (COMPLEX).....
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN (COMPLEX).....
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR (TR).
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
5
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
2
15
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
10
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
1
0
SPECLST.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
1
1
COMPLEX.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
1
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADX UNIT PSYCH............
1
5
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DEP CH, PSYCH.............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-13.............
RESTRICTIVE HOUSING PSYCH.
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD--
0
1
RESOLVE.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD--
0
1
STAGES.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
1
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0501-11.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0501-13.............
FIELD FNANCL ADMR.........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CHIEF PSYCHIATRIST........
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
2
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
2
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL NURSE.
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLNCL NURSE.........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
8
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
2
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1040-12.............
LANG SPECLST..............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
8
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
4
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
5
FCC FLORENCE.........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
6
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
14
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
6
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
3
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
16
FCC FLORENCE.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
3
24
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
3
58
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
4
95
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
15
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
46
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
17
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
3
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
11
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
3
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
4
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
3
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
5
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
13
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
13
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
3
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-11.............
INVESTIGATIVE SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-12.............
EPO.......................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
5
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
4
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0006-15.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
14
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL PROTCTN SPECLST..
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
20
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
11
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
2
COMPLEX.
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
1
0
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0342-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0501-09.............
FIN PROG SPEC.............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0501-12.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0510-11.............
FACTORY OPERTNL ACCTNT....
1
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
2
0
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
4
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
0
3
CONT NURSE.
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
4
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPV CONTR SPECLST........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
0
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
10
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
1
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
5
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-4601-08.............
WDWRKG MACH OPERTR FRMN...
0
8
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
6
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
9
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-4749-09.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
5
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
21
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC FORREST CITY.....................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
24
FCI FORT DIX.........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI FORT DIX.........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST.........
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF COMPLEX DENTAL......
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
16
41
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
75
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
3
15
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
77
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
22
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
7
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
9
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
5
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0299-05.............
STUDENT TRAINEE (HR)......
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
1
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECH....
2
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
3
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
11
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
7
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACILITIES ASST...........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
6
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
13
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0007-12.............
ASST CAPTAIN..............
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE MGR.....
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0028-13.............
ENVRNMTL PROTCTN SPECLST..
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
25
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
9
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
1
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0501-11.............
SUPV FIN PROG SPEC........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0510-11.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0602-15.............
PSYCHIATRIC PHYSICIAN.....
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
2
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0660-12.............
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
5
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
1
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
10
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
1
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
2
3
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
2
14
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
2
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
4
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
17
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI FORT DIX.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
34
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORDINATOR........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
10
9
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
14
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
46
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
10
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
29
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
2
7
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECIALIST.........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
5
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0180-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
5
INTERN.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHOLOGY TECH...........
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
2
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCOUNTANT................
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0610-10.............
NURSE CONSULTANT IV
0
1
(SPCLTY CLNC COORD).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0610-10.............
NURSE CONSULTANT(UTILIZ
0
1
REV NURSE).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
4
16
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE (WND CARE
1
0
SPLST).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
3
4
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0622-05.............
MEDCL SUPP TECHNCN........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0631-09.............
OCCUPTL THRPST............
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0640-08.............
HOUSEKEEPING TECHNICIAN...
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIST......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0661-05.............
PHARMACY TECHNICIAN.......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDICAL RECORDS
0
1
ADMINISTRATION SPECIALIST.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0006-12.............
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
0
1
OFFICER.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
8
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
11
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
2
SPECLST.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-13.............
CARE LVL 3 PSYCH..........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-13.............
CLNCL PSY (SPC PRG COOR-
0
1
STEP DOWN).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
1
4
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0301-11.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMIN (TRAINEE)
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR (TR).............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
6
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (PSYCHIATRIST)
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (TELE-
0
1
PSYCHIATRY).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0602-15.............
REGIONAL PHYSICIAN........
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER
0
1
(NURSE PRACTITIONER).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER
1
0
(PHYSCN ASST).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER
0
2
(NURSE PRACTITIONER).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0610-12.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER (NP-
1
0
PSYCHIATRIC ).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0680-14.............
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGINEERING TECH..........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1710-11.............
EDUCATION SPECIALIST......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-201-11..............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER
0
1
TRAINEE.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
ADV PRACTICE N (NURSE
1
0
PRACTITIONER).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N (MID-
1
0
LEVEL PRACTITIONER ).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF, COMPLEX NURS (Dir.
0
1
of Nursing).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
NURSE OFFICER--CO STEP....
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MGT OFFICER/QUAL
0
1
MGR.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
SENIOR CLINICAL NUR (RN/
0
1
IOP).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE (REGISTERED
0
1
NURSE).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE (RN) SRCOSTEP.
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF CLINICAL LAB........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
DIETITIAN.................
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
HOSPITAL ADMIN (ASST HSA).
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
SENIOR CLINICAL SOC.......
1
0
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
OTHER HEALTH SRVC (STAFF
1
0
TECHN).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
OTHER HEALTH SRVC (STAFF
0
1
TECHN)--CO-STEP.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
0
1
(OFFICER) QI/IPC NURSE.
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST (CHIEF)........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST (CO-STEP)......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST (DEPUTY).......
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
STAFF THERAPIST (CO-STEP).
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
THERAPIST.................
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER
0
1
(PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT- CO
STEP).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER
0
1
(PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT).
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-6907-04.............
MATERIAL HNDLR SUPVR......
0
3
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
4
FMC FORT WORTH.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI GILMER...........................
PHS....................
AHSA......................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
PHS....................
CLNCL NURSE...............
1
0
FCI GILMER...........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPROVMT/INFECT PREV
0
1
& CONT COORD.
FCI GILMER...........................
PHS....................
STAFF DENTAL HYGIENIST....
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
15
66
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
6
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
38
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORT SPECLST.............
1
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
3
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0303-07.............
FACILITIES ASSISTANT......
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0101-13.............
DAP COORDINATOR...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFFPSYCH................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/NURSE SPEC...
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0660-12.............
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1150-12.............
SUPVY SOCIAL SCIENCE
1
0
RESEARCH ANLST.
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1152-11.............
SUPVRY PRODN CNTRLR.......
1
0
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACILITY MANAGER..........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN (VT).........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SN TCHR...................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-3806-08.............
SHEET MTL WRKR FRMN.......
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-4102-08.............
PAINTER WRKR FRMN.........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-4607-08.............
CARPENTRY SUPERVISOR......
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
2
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
11
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI GILMER...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
11
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0006-12.............
FIREARMS INSTRU...........
3
13
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0006-12.............
TRAINING INSTRUCTOR.......
6
15
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0006-13.............
SUPVRY FIREARMS INSTRU....
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0006-13.............
SUPVRY TRNG INSTRU........
1
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0006-14.............
DEPUTY DIRECTOR...........
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0006-15.............
DIR, STAFF TRNG ACADEMY...
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0301-12.............
CPR PROG COORD............
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0303-07.............
TRNG SUPRT COORD..........
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0303-09.............
ADMV SUPRT COORD..........
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0318-06.............
SECY......................
1
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0905-15.............
ASST GEN CNSL.............
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0905-15.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-0905-15.............
SR COUNSEL................
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
GLYNCO STA--ATLANTA..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GL-0303-06.............
ADMV ASST.................
2
12
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GL-0303-09.............
ADMV SUPRT COORD..........
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GL-0304-04.............
INFO RECEPTIONIST.........
1
0
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GL-0963-09.............
INMATE CLASSIFN
17
90
COMPUTATION TECHNCN.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-11.............
CLASSIFN/COMPUTATION
0
95
SPECLST.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-12.............
DESIGNATOR................
0
8
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-12.............
TRNG SPECLST..............
0
3
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-13.............
ASST PRISONER TRANSP COORD
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-13.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
7
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-13.............
DSCC OPERS MGR............
0
19
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-13.............
SR DESIGNATOR.............
0
9
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-13.............
SR INTELL DESIGNATOR......
2
2
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-14.............
COORD, PRISONER TRANSP....
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-14.............
SEC CH....................
0
4
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0006-15.............
CH, DSCC..................
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0343-12.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
10
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (DSCC).............
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GL-0080-09.............
SECUR SPECLST.............
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
2
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
10
43
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GL-0303-07.............
ADMV SRVCS ASST...........
2
2
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GL-0303-07.............
SECUR ASST................
3
3
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GL-0303-08.............
ADMV ASST.................
0
3
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GL-0303-09.............
ADMV SUPRT COORD..........
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0006-13.............
DEP CH, SECUR & BACKGROUND
0
2
INVEST SEC.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0006-14.............
CH, SECUR & BACKGROUND
0
1
INVEST SEC.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0006-15.............
CH, HUMAN RESOURCE SRVCS
0
1
BR.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0080-12.............
SECUR SPECLST.............
1
18
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-11.............
QUAL CONT SPECLST.........
0
14
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-12.............
EMP BENEFITS SPECLST......
2
13
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGMT
0
5
SPECLST.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST,
1
38
BOP-CAREERS.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-12.............
SUPVRY HUMAN RESOURCE
0
4
SPECLST.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-13.............
DEP CH, CONSLDTD BNFTS
0
1
UNIT.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-13.............
DEP CH, CONSLDTD PROCSNG
0
2
UNIT.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-13.............
DEP CH, CONSOLIDATED
0
3
STAFFING UNIT.
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-13.............
SR HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST
0
5
GRAND PRAIRIE, TX (HRSC).............
GS-0201-14.............
SEC CH, HUMAN RESOURCE
0
4
SRVCS CENTR.
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
PHS....................
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGI.......
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
13
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
8
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
13
30
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
2
4
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
3
37
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
6
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
3
4
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0669-07.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
8
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0185-11.............
SOCIAL WRKR...............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DNTL OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1102-11.............
UNICOR CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1150-12.............
PRODN CONT MGR............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
5
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
7
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI GREENVILLE.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
11
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
PHS....................
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
1
20
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
1
3
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
12
66
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-000708..............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
7
29
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
5
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
0
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST. LOCKSMITH...........
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECRETARY.......
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
0
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACILITIES ASSISTANT......
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
1
SPECIALIST.
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADM.
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDGET & ACCT OFFICER.....
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
1
0
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
3
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
2
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
MDC GUAYNABO.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
9
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM--AHSA.
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
2
CONTRL COORD.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
PHS....................
ENVIR HEALTH SPEC V.......
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFICR..........
6
266
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
15
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
3
117
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
20
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
2
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
5
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
12
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
6
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
4
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
14
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0318-07.............
SECURE FEMALE FACIL ADMV
1
0
SECY.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
10
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
6
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-0856-10.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN (TR)......
1
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
8
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALISTRRECTNL SYS
OFFCR.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
1
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
7
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-13.............
SECURE FEMALE UNIT MGR....
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
30
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN--COMPLEX......
1
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN--COMPLEX..........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
24
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
6
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
4
SPECLST.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD--
0
1
COMPLEX.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
1
COMPLEX.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD--COMPLEX..
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
4
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
RESTRICTIVE HOUSING PSYCH.
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD R&R..
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGINEERING TECH..........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
6
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
1
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1667-09.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR
1
0
(Trainee).
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
4
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
8
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
5
FCC HAZELTON.........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
5
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
10
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
10
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
1
0
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
2
3
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
2
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
19
FCC HAZELTON.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
28
FCI HERLONG..........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI HERLONG..........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
0
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
27
24
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
19
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
6
41
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
5
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
7
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
3
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY
0
1
SPECLST.
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
2
0
FCI HERLONG..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
1
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
2
0
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
1
0
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
3
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCH............
1
0
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMIN SECRETARY......
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSIAN ASST..............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
1
0
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
1
0
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
4
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (SPEC ED)............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
9
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
FCI HERLONG..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
12
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST........
1
0
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG
0
1
(NURSE).
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG (OTHER
0
1
HEALTH SER IOP).
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM.......
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM.......
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE
1
0
(NP).
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE
0
1
(NP).
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF, BASIC DENTAL.......
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
12
7
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
33
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
39
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0199-07.............
PSYCHLGY STUD TR..........
1
0
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
3
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
0
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMP ADMIN.
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
4
FDC HONOLULU.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
7
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
JUNIOR STAFF NURSE........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
0
3
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
2
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
SENIOR STAFF NURSE........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
REGNL QUAL IMPRVMT COORD..
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF GEN DENTAL UN.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
12
55
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
10
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
37
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
1
0
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SVC ASST.............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCL SPECLST...........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR TRAINEE..........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0681-06.............
DNTL ASST.................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROP & PROC SPECLST.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SVCS ASST............
1
0
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
9
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0007-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGENT..
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
3
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
3
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
1
0
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPER FRMN..
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
0
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-6907-03.............
MATERIALS HANDLER
0
1
SUPERVISOR.
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FDC HOUSTON..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
6
FCI JESUP............................
PHS....................
NURSE.....................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (L.......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
PHS....................
DENTIST...................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0007-06.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
10
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
2
77
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
40
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
5
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
1
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0303-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC REP...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
4
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME AND LEAVE CLERK......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
6
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCURE AND PROPERTY SPEC.
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-1658-08.............
ASST LNDRY PLANT MGR......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
9
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
9
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
3
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0299-04.............
STUD TR...................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0510-11.............
OPERTG ACCTNT.............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1101-13.............
PROG MGR..................
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1102-11.............
UNICOR CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1150-12.............
INDL SPECLST (TEXTLS).....
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1150-12.............
PRODN CONT MGR............
1
0
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
7
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
2
6
FCI JESUP............................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
5
FCI JESUP............................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI JESUP............................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
WS-5301-09.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI JESUP............................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
1
FCI JESUP............................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
10
FCI JESUP............................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI JESUP............................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
13
FCI LA TUNA..........................
PHS....................
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
19
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
8
42
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
10
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
10
32
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
2
5
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
8
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0301-09.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
8
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECIALIST......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0610-10.............
QUAL IMPROVMT/INFECT PREV
0
1
& CONT COORD.
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
4
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-1102-11.............
SUPVISORY CONTR SPECLST...
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0006-13.............
SUPT OF IND...............
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
12
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
8
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0510-09.............
ACCOUNTANT................
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCNT......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1150-11.............
INDL SPECLST..............
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1152-11.............
SUPVY PRODN CNTRLR........
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-3806-08.............
SHEETMETAL WRKR SUPV......
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
0
1
FRMN.
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
3
6
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI LA TUNA..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
14
USP LEE..............................
GL-0007-05.............
CORR OFFCR................
1
26
USP LEE..............................
GL-0007-05.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
6
USP LEE..............................
GL-0007-07.............
CORR OFFCR................
0
3
USP LEE..............................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
5
102
USP LEE..............................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
9
USP LEE..............................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
72
USP LEE..............................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
USP LEE..............................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
4
USP LEE..............................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
USP LEE..............................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0188-07.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
USP LEE..............................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
USP LEE..............................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECRETARY.......
1
0
USP LEE..............................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
USP LEE..............................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
USP LEE..............................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
USP LEE..............................
GL-0640-06.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN.........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-0681-06.............
DNTL ASST.................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GL-2210-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECIALIST.....
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST CAMP ADMIN......
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
USP LEE..............................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
USP LEE..............................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
USP LEE..............................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
11
USP LEE..............................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
USP LEE..............................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
4
SPECLST.
USP LEE..............................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
1
0
USP LEE..............................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
USP LEE..............................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
2
USP LEE..............................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
USP LEE..............................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
USP LEE..............................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECIALIST...........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-1710-09.............
TCHR......................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
USP LEE..............................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
USP LEE..............................
GS-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
5
USP LEE..............................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP LEE..............................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
USP LEE..............................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
USP LEE..............................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
USP LEE..............................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
USP LEE..............................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USP LEE..............................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP LEE..............................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
USP LEE..............................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
USP LEWISBURG........................
PHS....................
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTIST, FEDE.......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
PHS....................
CLNCL PSYCH...............
1
0
USP LEWISBURG........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGENIST...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
0
USP LEWISBURG........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
PHS....................
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
52
118
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
83
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
11
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY/RECYCLING SPECLST..
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
6
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0188-11.............
RECR SUPERVISOR...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
4
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
5
0
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0610-10.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
0
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNCN........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
3
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROC PROPERTY SPECLST.....
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-1603-09.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
3
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
7
11
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN...............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
1
0
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
11
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
8
SPECLST.
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0180-13.............
RESTRICTIVE HOUSING PSYCH.
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCK & SECUR SPECIALIST...
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0306-11.............
FOIA/PA SPECLST...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASSISTANT HEALTH SERVICES
0
1
ADMINISTRATOR.
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGINEERING TECHNCN.......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
3
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
2
0
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-3414-09.............
MACH TOOL OPERTR FRMN.....
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
10
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-5306-09.............
AIR COND EQUIP MECH FRMN..
0
3
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
9
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
4
USP LEWISBURG........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
16
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
ASST DIRECTOR OF NURSING..
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIST....
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
SOCIAL WORKER.............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER--NP
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER--PA
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY LAB
0
1
TECHNOLOGIST.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
INFECTIOUS PREVTN &
0
1
CONTROL NURSE.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
UTILIZATION REVIEW NURSE..
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
NURSE MANAGER.............
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
Quality Improvement and
0
1
Infection Contol Nurse.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
CHIEF, COMPLEX NURSE......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
STAFF DIETITIAN...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
SENIOR THERAPIST..........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
CHIEF THERAPIST...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
SENIOR THERAPIST..........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST.........
0
3
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (M.C.)...
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT MGR..........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
REGNL DNTL CONS...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
11
5
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
9
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
90
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
3
44
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
8
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
8
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
5
INTERN.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
5
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-07.............
ADMV SUPRT ASST...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-08.............
HSKPNG TECHNCN............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0303-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC REP...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
5
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
3
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0525-08.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
13
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0610-10.............
NURSE SPECLST Specialty
0
1
Clinic Coord.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
3
25
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0610-11.............
UTILIZATION REVIEW NURSE..
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0622-06.............
MEDCL SUPP TECHNCN........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
5
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0681-06.............
DENTAL ASSISTANT..........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT & PROPERTY
0
1
SPEC.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-1102-09.............
UNICOR CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GL-1910-09.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GP-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR--Tele Psych...
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
4
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
6
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVIRONMENT OF CARE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECLST.
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
8
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
8
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LEVEL PSYCH.
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-13.............
PSICHOLOGIST (RESOLVE)....
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0199-07.............
PSYCHLGY STUD TR..........
2
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0301-12.............
CUSTMR SRVCS SUPVR........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0303-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC REP...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0391-11.............
TELECOMMUN SPECLST........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0501-12.............
UNICOR ASST BUS MGR.......
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0510-11.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
1
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0510-12.............
SUPVRY OPERTG ACCTNT......
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0510-13.............
CENTRL ACCTS ADMR.........
1
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
3
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0602-15.............
REGIONAL PHYSICIAN--MAST..
1
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER--PA
0
4
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER--NP
1
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE SPECLST.............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0630-11.............
DIETITIAN.................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0660-11.............
PHARMACIST................
2
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0669-11.............
MEDCL REC ADMR............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0671-11.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0680-14.............
REGIONAL DENTAL CONSULTANT
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELECTRONICS TECHNICIAN....
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1101-13.............
CUSTMR SRVCS ADMR.........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1101-13.............
ELCTRON FACTORY MGR.......
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1150-11.............
INDL SPECLST..............
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1150-12.............
SUPP CHAIN MGR............
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
0
6
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1199-04.............
UNICOR STUD TR............
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
6
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR Special Education....
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-2210-12.............
ADP SYS ADMR..............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-2854-08.............
ELCTRL EQUIP WRKR FRMN....
4
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-4102-08.............
PNTG WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
7
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-6907-04.............
MATERIALS HDLR FRMN.......
0
3
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-7002-05.............
PKR FRMN..................
0
1
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
2
FMC LEXINGTON........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
15
FCC LOMPOC...........................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECT PREV &
1
0
CONT COORD.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
21
82
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
12
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
3
67
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
15
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
3
SPECIALIST.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0018-11.............
Environmental & Safety
1
0
Compliance Admr (Trainee).
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
5
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
4
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SVCS ASSISTANT.....
1
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0501-12.............
BUDGET & ACCOUNTING
0
1
OFFICER.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERATIONAL
1
0
ACCOUTANT.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0640-06.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN
0
3
(MEDICATION TECH).
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0640-09.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN
2
5
(Paramedic).
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HEALTH INFORMATION TECH
0
3
(MEDICAL RECORDS TECH).
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0856-10.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN (TR)......
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-1101-09.............
Procurement and Property
0
1
Specialist.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-1667-09.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR (TR)..
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
5
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
5
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
4
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
18
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMR.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0028-11.............
Environmental Compliance
0
1
Specialist.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
16
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
6
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
1
COMPLEX.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0188-11.............
ASSISTANT RECR SUPVR......
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0301-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0510-11.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0610-11.............
Nurse Practitioner........
2
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SYS ADMR.............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
2
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0680-14.............
CHIEF COMPLEX DENTA.......
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPERVISORY CONTRACT
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1601-13.............
FARM MGR..................
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SERVICE ADMIN........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
4
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
2
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
6
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-4102-08.............
PNTG WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-4401-08.............
SILK SCREEN MKR & PRINTER
3
0
FRMN.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
4
9
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-5001-07.............
DAIRY FARMER FRMN.........
2
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-5002-07.............
FARMER FRMN...............
1
3
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
2
0
FRMN.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-5408-09.............
WASTEWATER TRTMNT PLANT
1
0
OPERTR FRMN.
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
11
FCC LOMPOC...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
22
FCI LORETTO..........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
PHS....................
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0007-05.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
5
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0007-06.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
4
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
45
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
29
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY & OCCUPATIONAL
1
0
HEALTH SPECIALIST.
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMIN SECRETARY......
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
1
0
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDCL TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
4
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRON & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADM.
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUDENT
1
0
TRAINEE.
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-2210-11.............
INFO TECH SPEC............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
3
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
0
2
FRMN.
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FCI LORETTO..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
10
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
PHS....................
HEALTH SYSTEMS SPECIALIST.
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
PHS....................
COMPR SECUR SPECLST.......
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
1
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-07.............
SENIOR OFFICER............
33
22
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
12
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-08.............
SOS.......................
1
34
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
9
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
5
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0007-09.............
LIEUTENANT................
2
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
3
INTERN.
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFICER.........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECRETARY.......
1
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
4
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SVCS ASST............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-1658-08.............
LNDRY PLANT MGR...........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNICIAN............
0
4
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0006-12.............
SIA.......................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0007-11.............
LIEUTENANT................
0
9
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFFAIRS
0
1
COORDINATOR.
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
3
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
0
1
COORDINATOR.
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-1701-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
2
3
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
MDC LOS ANGELES......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
8
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
0
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
PHS....................
CHIEF GENERAL DENTA.......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
PHS....................
STAFF DENTAL HYGIEN.......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0006-09.............
RELIGIOUS PROG COORD......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
11
83
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
45
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
5
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
1
0
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLIST...........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
0
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
3
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-0802-09.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GL-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPV CORRECTNL SYS........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
9
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN(LCP).............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
8
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0180-13.............
CLNCL PSYCH (ADVANCED CARE
0
1
LVL PSYCH).
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0306-11.............
FOIA/PA SPECLST...........
2
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SYS ADMINSTRATOR
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0671-12.............
REGNL QUAL IMPRVMT COORD..
1
0
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0905-15.............
FOIA SUPVRY ATTORNEY/
0
1
ADVISOR.
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1702-07.............
EDU TECH..................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (SLN)................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
7
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-5803-08.............
AUTOMOTIVE WORKER FOREMAN.
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
7
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
2
USP LEAVENWORTH......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
13
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
15
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
2
59
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
2
5
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
3
34
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPEC...............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SERVICES ASSISTANT...
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCOUNTING TECH...........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME AND LEAVE CLERK......
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
4
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GL-1910-09.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
8
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
6
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
2
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OP ACCTNT..........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPV CONTR SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1150-12.............
PRODN CONT MGR............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
5
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-2210-11.............
INFO TECH SPECLST.........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
5
4
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR WRKR FKMN.........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR WRKR FRMN.........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
10
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSR WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI MANCHESTER.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
11
USP MARION...........................
PHS....................
HEALTH RECORD ADMIN.......
0
1
USP MARION...........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
USP MARION...........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
2
19
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
4
49
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
0
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
38
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
USP MARION...........................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
0
USP MARION...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
8
USP MARION...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
USP MARION...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
USP MARION...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
USP MARION...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
USP MARION...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0006-11.............
INTELL RES SPECLST........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USP MARION...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
USP MARION...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
USP MARION...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
USP MARION...........................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
8
USP MARION...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY AND OCCUPATIONAL
1
0
HEALTH MGR.
USP MARION...........................
GS-0018-13.............
OCCUPTL SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
SPECLST.
USP MARION...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
USP MARION...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
USP MARION...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
0
3
USP MARION...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
0
2
USP MARION...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
USP MARION...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL NURSE.
USP MARION...........................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1101-13.............
ELCTRON FACTORY MGR.......
1
0
USP MARION...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1150-11.............
INDL SPECLST (ELCTRON)....
1
0
USP MARION...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
USP MARION...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP MARION...........................
WS-2854-08.............
ELCTRL EQUIP WRKR FRMN....
0
5
USP MARION...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPETR FRMN...............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP MARION...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
USP MARION...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
USP MARION...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
USP MARION...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
USP MARION...........................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
0
2
FRMN.
USP MARION...........................
WS-5409-08.............
WATER TRTMNT PLANT FRMN...
0
2
USP MARION...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USP MARION...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP MARION...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
USP MARION...........................
WS-7002-05.............
PKR FRMN..................
1
0
USP MARION...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
18
62
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
47
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPEC....
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
5
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER....
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
4
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0510-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME LV CLRK..............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
3
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0671-11.............
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT/
0
1
INFECTION CONTROL.
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GL-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVR & SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
ADMIN.
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVR COMPLIANCE SPEC......
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPV CHAPLAIN.............
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
9
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0180-12.............
PSYCH.....................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
2
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DNTL OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPV CONTR SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPECIAL EDUCATION TCHR....
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
6
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-4607-08.............
CARPENTRY WORKER FOREMAN..
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
3
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-5003-07.............
GARDENER FOREMAN..........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
0
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
FCI MCDOWELL.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
13
FCI MCKEAN...........................
PHS....................
NURSE SPECIALIST..........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
31
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
23
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFICR......
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
40
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
2
4
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
1
0
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
9
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0301-10.............
SUPERVISORY LOCKSMITH.....
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVS ASST.......
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
1
0
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANALST...............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
4
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
3
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0006-11.............
CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST...
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMINISTRATOR........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
6
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPV CHAPLAIN.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
9
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
3
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1701-11.............
ED SPEC...................
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
2
0
FCI MCKEAN...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
3
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
9
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-4749-14.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-6907-04.............
MTRLS HNDLR SUPVR.........
0
5
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
4
FCI MCKEAN...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
14
USP MCCREARY.........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
3
22
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
128
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
62
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
3
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
4
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0335-09.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0560-07.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
6
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
5
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
11
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
9
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
4
SPECLST.
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
1
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
1
0
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0318-06.............
SECRETARY.................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE SPECIALIST..........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
1
0
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
USP MCCREARY.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
11
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
PHS....................
ASST. HSA.................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
PHS....................
DENTAL ASSISTANT..........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST (B651).........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
9
79
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
3
OFFICER.
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
4
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
26
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
4
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECRETARY.................
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
4
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
3
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE (B713)...
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0671-09.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPV CORRECTNL SYS SPEC...
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
8
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0060-13.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
6
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0303-09.............
DISTR SRVCS REPR..........
0
4
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCNT......
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSCN ASST...............
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HEALTH SERVICES
1
0
ADMINISTRATOR.
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT/
0
1
INFECTION CONTROL
COORDINATOR.
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF GENERAL DENTA.......
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0856-10.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN (TR)......
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1667-11.............
FOOD SRVC SPEC............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1710-12.............
TCHR SUPVR................
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
0
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI MEMPHIS..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI MENDOTA..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
32
42
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
12
31
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
2
5
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
6
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
3
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
3
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0510-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0544-05.............
T&A CLERK.................
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
4
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0620-07.............
LPN.......................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCIPLINE HEARING OFFICER
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
8
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMNR.
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREV & CONT
0
1
NURSE.
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DNTL OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
1
0
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
4
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
9
FCI MENDOTA..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
13
FCI MIAMI............................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
17
32
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
5
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
38
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
5
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH SUPERVISOR......
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
3
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
3
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
3
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GL-2010-09.............
Procurement Property
0
1
Specialist.
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMR.................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
6
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN TRAINEE..........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPERVISORY CHAPLAIN......
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0101-09.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
3
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0101-11.............
Spanish RDAP--DTS.........
3
4
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0180-13.............
RDAP--CAP COORD...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0180-13.............
Spanish RDAP--DAP-COORD...
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0180-13.............
Spanish RDAP- DAP-COORD...
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0501-12.............
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR....
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0510-11.............
ACCTNT (COST ACCT)........
1
0
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCNT......
2
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0510-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (PSYCHIATRIST)
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
0
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSIST..........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
1
0
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
2
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1150-12.............
SUPVY INDUSTRIAL SPECLST..
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECIALIST...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
0
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
7
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI MIAMI............................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
11
FCI MILAN............................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG.......
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM.......
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
PHS....................
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
0
FCI MILAN............................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S.......
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
3
62
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
45
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
3
2
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCH TECH................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
2
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
2
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
4
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0006-13.............
SUPT OF IND...............
1
0
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
6
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
1
0
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0510-11.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
3
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
0
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
WS-3416-10.............
TOOLMKR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-3801-08.............
MTL WRKR FRMN.............
2
0
FCI MILAN............................
WS-3806-08.............
SHEET MTL WRKR FRMN.......
1
4
FCI MILAN............................
WS-3869-08.............
MTL FORMING MACH OPERTR
1
1
FRMN.
FCI MILAN............................
WS-4102-08.............
PNTG WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI MILAN............................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
10
FCI MILAN............................
WS-4749-09.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
WS-5306-09.............
AIR COND EQUIP MECH FRMN..
0
2
FCI MILAN............................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
9
FCI MILAN............................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
0
FCI MILAN............................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI MILAN............................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FDC MIAMI............................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
1
1
FDC MIAMI............................
PHS....................
CHIEF GENERAL DENTA.......
1
0
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
3
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
9
44
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFICR..........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
15
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
57
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
6
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH SUPERVISOR......
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
4
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFICER.........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0318-06.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
1
0
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-1101-09.............
PROPCUR & PROP SPECLST....
1
0
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-1667-09.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR (TR)..
1
0
FDC MIAMI............................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
9
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0101-07.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
5
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
0
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0180-11.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
3
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (TELE-PSYCH)..
1
0
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREV & CONT
1
0
NURSE.
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
2
0
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0660-12.............
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
3
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-4749-14.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
1
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-6907-03.............
MTRLS HNDLR...............
0
1
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FDC MIAMI............................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
7
FCI MARIANNA.........................
PHS....................
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
PHS....................
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL MASTER DENTAL
0
1
CONSULTANT.
FCI MARIANNA.........................
PHS....................
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
12
68
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
6
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
30
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
2
9
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
7
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0199-07.............
PSYCHLGY STUD TR..........
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
6
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
3
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
3
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMINISTRATOR........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0006-13.............
WITNESS SECUR UNIT MGR....
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
9
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
0
3
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0501-12.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
1
0
CONT NURSE.
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0660-12.............
CHIEF PHARMACIST (M.......
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
3
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
2
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODUCTION CONTROLLER.....
1
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
5
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-2210-09.............
COMP ASST.................
1
0
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFITTER................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
4
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
3
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
7
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
2
FCI MARIANNA.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
12
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
PHS....................
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
0
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
0
1
ADVANCED.
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
PHS....................
HEALTH SERVICES
0
1
ADMINISTRATOR.
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
PHS....................
CLNCL NURSE...............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF, BASIC DENTAL UNIT
0
1
SOLO.
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0007-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECRETARY.......
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
9
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
2
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
9
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
5
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
2
6
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
1
0
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
1
0
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
3
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GM-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0007-11.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
8
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
2
0
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0301-11.............
VOCATIONAL TRAINING
0
1
INSTRUCTOR.
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0671-11.............
INFECTION PREV. CONTROL
0
1
NURSE.
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1640-11.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1658-11.............
LNDRY & DRY CLNG PLANT MGR
1
0
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1667-11.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
4
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
WS-7305-05.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
1
2
FPC MONTGOMERY.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
4
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
PHS....................
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
PHS....................
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
2
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
4
22
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR. OFFCR.................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
4
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
15
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0199-07.............
STUD TR...................
2
0
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
1
0
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0301-08.............
WARDEN'S SECRETARY........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0303-09.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
3
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
3
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
8
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
1
0
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
2
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
FCI MORGANTOWN.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
7
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
ES-0006-00.............
REGNL DIR.................
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
1
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST...
0
2
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SYS SPECLST.....
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG ADMR...........
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST.
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTRNL SRVCS
0
1
ADMR.
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0006-15.............
SR DEP REGNL DIR..........
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0018-13.............
REGNL ENVRNMNTL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLNC ADMR.
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0060-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL PROGS ADMR
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0201-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
1
0
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0201-12.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
1
2
SPECLST.
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0201-13.............
SR REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
1
SPECLST.
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0201-14.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE ADMR.
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0260-12.............
REGNL AFFIRMATIVE EMPLMT
0
1
ADMR.
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0318-07.............
REGNL SECY................
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0341-11.............
SUPVY ADMV OFFCR..........
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0391-12.............
REGNL TELECOMMUN SPECLST..
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0501-09.............
REGNL FNANCL SPECLST......
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0501-13.............
SENIOR FINANCIAL
0
1
SPECIALIST.
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0505-14.............
REGNL COMPTLR.............
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0510-12.............
REGNL ACCTNT..............
2
0
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0560-12.............
REGIONAL BUDGET ANALYST...
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0670-14.............
REGNL HLTH SRVCS ADMR.....
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0671-11.............
REG HEALTH SYS SPEC.......
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0802-12.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0808-13.............
ARCH......................
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0830-13.............
MECHCL ENGR...............
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0905-15.............
DEP REGNL CNSL............
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0905-15.............
REGNL CNSL................
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
1
0
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
2
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-1102-12.............
REGNL CONTR SPECLST.......
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGMT SPECLST........
1
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-1640-14.............
REGNL FACIL ADMR..........
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-1667-13.............
REGNL FOOD SRVC ADMR......
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-1710-13.............
REGNL EDUC ADMR...........
0
1
MID-ATLANTIC REGION..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
ES-0006-00.............
REGNL DIR.................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GL-0318-07.............
REGNL SECY................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST...
0
2
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SYS SPECLST.....
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
7
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG ADMR...........
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST
1
0
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL PROGS ADMR
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL SRVCS ADMR
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-15.............
SR. DEP REGIONAL DIR......
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0060-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-11.............
REGNL RECRUIT SPECLST.....
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-12.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
3
SPECLST.
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-13.............
SENIOR REGNL HUMAN
0
1
RESOURCE SPECLST.
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-14.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE ADMR.
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0260-12.............
REGNL AFFIRMATIVE ACTN
0
1
ADMR.
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
1
0
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0306-11.............
FOIA/PRIVACY ACT SPECLST..
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0318-07.............
REGNL SECY................
1
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0341-11.............
SUPVY ADMV OFFCR..........
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0391-12.............
REGNL TELECOMMUN SPECLST..
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0501-09.............
REGNL FNANCL SPECLST......
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0501-13.............
SENIOR FINANCIAL
0
1
SPECIALIST.
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0505-14.............
REGNL COMPTLR.............
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0510-12.............
REGNL ACCTNT..............
0
2
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0560-12.............
REGIONAL BUDGET ANALYST...
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0670-14.............
REGNL HLTH SRVCS ADMR.....
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0671-11.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0802-12.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0808-13.............
ARCH......................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0830-13.............
MECHCL ENGR...............
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
3
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
2
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
DEP REGNL CNSL............
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
REGNL CNSL................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
SR ATTY...................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
SR ATTY (LBR).............
1
0
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
SR COUNSEL................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
2
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1102-12.............
REGNL CONTR SPECLST.......
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1603-08.............
FACILITIES ASSISTANT......
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGMT SPECLST........
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1640-14.............
REGNL FACIL ADMR..........
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1667-13.............
REGNL FOOD SRVC ADMR......
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1710-13.............
REGIONAL EDUCATION
0
1
ADMINISTRATOR.
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
NORTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-2299-05.............
INFO TECH STUD TR.........
1
0
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
ES-0006-00.............
REGNL DIR.................
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
2
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST...
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SYS SPECLST.....
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-13.............
CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST...
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG ADMR...........
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL PROGS ADMR
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL SRVCS ADMR
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP REGNL DIR.............
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0018-13.............
REGNL ENVRNMNTL SAFETY &
0
1
COMPLNC ADMR.
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR (TR)...
1
0
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
0
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-12.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
3
SPECLST.
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-13.............
SR REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
1
SPECLST.
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-14.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE ADMR.
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0260-12.............
REGNL AFFIRMATIVE EMPLMT
0
1
ADMR.
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0299-05.............
STUDENT TRAINEE (HUMAN
1
0
RESOURCE).
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0318-07.............
REGNL SECY................
0
2
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0341-11.............
SUPVY ADMV OFFCR..........
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0391-12.............
REGNL TELECOMMUN SPECLST..
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0399-05.............
CLER STUD TR..............
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0399-05.............
CLER STUD TR..............
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0501-09.............
REGNL FNANCL SPECLST......
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0501-13.............
SENIOR FINANCIAL
0
1
SPECIALIST.
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0505-14.............
REGNL COMPTLR.............
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0510-12.............
REGNL ACCTNT..............
0
2
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0560-12.............
REGIONAL BUDGET ANALYST...
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0670-14.............
REGNL HLTH SRVCS ADMR.....
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0671-11.............
HLTH SRVCS SPECLST........
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0802-12.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0808-13.............
ARCH......................
1
0
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
3
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0905-15.............
DEP REGNL CNSL............
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0905-15.............
REGNL CNSL................
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
3
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
2
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1102-12.............
REGNL CONTRACT SPEC.......
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGMT SPECLST........
0
3
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1640-14.............
REGNL FACIL ADMR..........
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1667-13.............
REGNL FOOD SRVC ADMR......
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1710-13.............
REGNL EDUC ADMR...........
0
1
NORTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
PHS....................
FORENSICS UNIT
0
2
PSYCHOLOGIST.
MCC NEW YORK.........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
PHS....................
INFECTION PREV & CONT
1
0
NURSE.
MCC NEW YORK.........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL DENTAL OFFICER...
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
PHS....................
TELEPSYCHIARTY COORD......
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
13
47
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
2
10
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
7
48
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
3
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE OFFCR.
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECIALIST......
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDGET ANALYST............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
1
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GL-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0006-13.............
WITNESS SECUR UNIT MGR....
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
8
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN...............
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0101-11.............
RE-ENTRY COORD............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCES OFFCR.....
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0680-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGNR TECHNCN.............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY......................
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
3
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
0
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-7305-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
MCC NEW YORK.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
6
FCC OAKDALE..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
1
36
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
92
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
12
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
66
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
1
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
8
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
1
SPECLST.
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0199-07.............
PSYCHLGY STUD TR..........
1
0
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECIALIST.
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
1
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECIALIST......
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
8
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
3
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0681-06.............
DENTAL ASSISTASNT.........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
5
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GL-6010-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0006-11.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
1
0
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
4
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMR/EXEC ASST.......
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
4
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
18
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
1
0
ADMR (TR).
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMNT SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
1
0
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
13
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALT TRTMNT PROG
0
1
SPECLST.
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
1
COMPLEX.
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0180-13.............
REINTEGRTN HOUSING UNIT
0
1
PSYCH.
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0303-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CH MEDCL OFFCR............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER(NP)
1
5
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
0
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0680-14.............
CHIEF DNTL OFFCR..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
3
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MANAGER...........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
0
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
4
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1701-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
4
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1710-12.............
TCHR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
3
FCC OAKDALE..........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
14
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
13
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC OAKDALE..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
24
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
ASST HEALTH SERVICES ADMIN
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
INFECTIOUS DISEASE
0
1
COORDINATOR.
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
MEDICAL RECORDS ADMIN.....
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
0
1
COORDINATOR.
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
SENIOR NURSE MANAGE.......
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
19
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
3
14
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
1
49
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
3
35
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
38
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDGET ANALYST............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0610-09.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
4
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0647-08.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
4
SPECIALIST.
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0006-13.............
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
9
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY & OCCUPTL HLTH MGR.
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0180-11.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR (TR)...
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (Psychiatry)..
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0660-11.............
PHARMACIST................
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0680-13.............
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR GEN............
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FTC OKLAHOMA CITY....................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
10
FCI OTISVILLE........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCI OTISVILLE........................
PHS....................
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
PHS....................
CHIEF BASIC DENTAL........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
17
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
52
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
5
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
34
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
1
0
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
6
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SVCS ASST..........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
3
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
0
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
3
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVRY CORRECTNL SYS
0
1
SPECLST.
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0006-13.............
WITNESS SECUR UNIT MGR....
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
9
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
8
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBING WRKR SUPERVISOR...
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
1
1
FRMN.
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FCI OTISVILLE........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
13
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
14
55
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
8
35
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
6
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0007-09.............
Lieutenant................
0
3
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
6
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANALYST..............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0610-10.............
NURSE.....................
1
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNICIAN...........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0007-11.............
Lieutenant................
0
9
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0007-12.............
Captain...................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0180-13.............
CHIEF OF PSYCHOLOGY.......
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0181-07.............
PSYCHOLOGY TECH...........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCE PRACTICE NURSE....
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE.....................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
2
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0680-13.............
DENTIST...................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPECIAL EDUCATION TCHR....
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI OXFORD...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
0
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
0
1
FRMN.
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-5802-08.............
AUTOMOTIVE WORKER FOREMAN.
0
1
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
7
FCI OXFORD...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
5
7
FCI PEKIN............................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
2
62
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
6
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
38
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
2
8
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
6
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPT SEC..................
1
0
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
3
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
1
0
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0681-06.............
DNTL ASST.................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTRACT SPEC.............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
0
SPECIALIST.
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
8
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
ADMIN.
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0018-13.............
OCCUPTL SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
SPECLST.
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
8
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
3
SPECLST.
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
1
0
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0501-11.............
FACTORY OPERTNL ACCTNT....
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST. HEALTH SERVICES
0
1
ADMNSTR.
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0680-13.............
DENTAL OFFCR..............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
3
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
2
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (ASE)................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
1
2
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-6907-04.............
MTRLS HNDLR...............
0
1
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI PEKIN............................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FPC PENSACOLA........................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
0
1
OFFICER.
FPC PENSACOLA........................
PHS....................
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
1
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST I.......
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0007-05.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
3
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
8
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
2
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
9
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
3
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
6
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECREATION SPECLST........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCK & SECUR SPECLST......
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GL-1799-05.............
EDUC INTERN...............
1
0
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0007-11.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
3
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFFAIRS
0
1
COORDINATOR.
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
1
0
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0670-11.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF, BASIC DENTAL.......
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MANAGER...........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-1640-11.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-1667-11.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-1710-11.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
2
FPC PENSACOLA........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
4
FPC PENSACOLA........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
3
FPC PENSACOLA........................
WS-7305-05.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FPC PENSACOLA........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST.........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
PHS....................
CENTRL PROCNG TECHNCN.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
PHS....................
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR TR........
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
8
124
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
14
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
5
84
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
20
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORT SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
9
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
3
INTERN.
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
6
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC REPR..........
2
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0303-09.............
DISTR SRVCS REPR..........
0
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
11
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
2
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-1658-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GL-2210-09.............
COMPUTER SPEC.............
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
18
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN-DEPUTY............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
3
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
12
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
7
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
2
COMPLEX.
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDGET AND ACCOUNTING
0
1
OFFICER.
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0602-14.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
3
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0610-11.............
Infection Prevention and
0
2
Control Nurse.
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0660-11.............
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMIN..........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGINEERING TECH..........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1101-13.............
PROG MGR..................
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1152-11.............
SUPVRY PRODN CNTRLR.......
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMIN...........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
7
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-3603-09.............
MASONRY WRKR FRMN.........
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFITTER FRM............
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4402-09.............
BIND MACH OPERTR FRMN.....
1
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4414-09.............
PRE PRESS OPERTR FRMN.....
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4417-09.............
OFFST PRESS OPERTR FRMN...
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
3
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
9
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4749-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
1
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
4
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
9
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
5
FCC PETERSBURG.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
20
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
10
59
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
13
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
44
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
5
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
3
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNCN........
1
0
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
1
0
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
1
0
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SVC ASST.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-1658-09.............
LNDRY PLANT MGR...........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
3
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0180-13.............
MNTL HLTH PSYCH...........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
0
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMNT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-4102-08.............
PNTG WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
3
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
4
FDC PHILADELPHIA.....................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
8
FCI PHOENIX..........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CO........................
3
61
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
1
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
5
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
37
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
2
5
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
4
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
1
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR (TR)...
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
3
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCOUNTANT................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0640-09.............
HLTH TECH--Paramedic......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0640-09.............
HLTH TECH--Paramedic......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INFO TECH............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
3
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-13.............
WITNESS SECUR UNIT MGR....
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
5
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
3
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
3
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMIN.................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE COST ACCTNT........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0856-10.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN TRAINEE...
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0896-13.............
ELECTRON INDL ENGR........
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-0905-15.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1101-11.............
ASST ELECTRON FACTORY MGR.
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1101-13.............
ELCTRON FACTORY MGR.......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1102-09.............
UNICOR CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1150-11.............
INDL SPECLST (ELCTRON)....
2
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER (SLN).............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER...................
1
4
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL MAST NURSE.......
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
QA NURSE..................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL IOP..............
1
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN'S ASSISTANT.....
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-2854-08.............
ELCTRL EQUIP WRKR FRMN....
3
0
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-2854-08.............
ELCTRL EQUIP WRKR FRMN....
0
4
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
0
1
FRMN.
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-6709-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN (S&E)......
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN (S&E)......
0
2
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
3
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN (S&E)......
1
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-6907-05.............
WAREHOUSE WORKR FOREMAN...
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-7002-06.............
PACKING FOREMAN...........
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
1
FCI PHOENIX..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCC POLLOCK..........................
PHS....................
SR SUPERVISORY PROG.......
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPROVMT/INFECT PREV
0
1
& CONT COORD.
FCC POLLOCK..........................
PHS....................
PHARMACY OFFICER..........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
PHS....................
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
PHS....................
STAFF DENTAL HYGIEN.......
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
1
SPECIALIST.
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
5
205
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
16
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
109
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
13
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
8
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
6
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
6
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
3
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
1
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
1
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
8
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
3
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
1
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
1
11
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0006-12.............
DHO.......................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
6
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
4
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
9
18
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY & OCCUPTL HLTH MGR.
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
2
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
2
18
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
4
SPECLST.
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
1
COMPLEX.
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCNT......
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
5
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
4
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN (TR)......
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
4
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
8
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
3
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
3
3
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
10
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
1
0
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
4
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
3
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
14
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC POLLOCK..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
23
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
50
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
5
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
7
33
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
3
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
3
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
1
0
SPECIALIST.
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
3
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SERVICES ASSISTANT...
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-0681-06.............
DNTL ASST.................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-1603-06.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
5
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COM. ADMIN..
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0180-13.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SERVICES
0
1
ASSISTANT.
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0671-11.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
2
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDING WRKR FRMN.........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCI RAY BROOK........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
8
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
CLNCL NURSE SPECIALIST
0
1
(WOUND CARE).
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
CLNCL NURSE SPECIALIST
0
1
(WOUND CARE).
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
HEALTH SVC ADMIN..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
LABORATORY MANAGER........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIST....
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
PHYS THRPST...............
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
PSYCHOLOGIST..............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
QUALITY ASSURANCE MANAGER.
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY CLINICAL NURSE
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
SUPV PHYSICAL THERAPIST...
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
PHS....................
UTILIZ REV NURSE..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
3
12
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
12
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
36
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
3
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
43
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0030-07.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
0
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
3
INTERN.
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0303-06.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVC ASST............
0
5
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0318-05.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0501-09.............
FIN PROG SPEC.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0525-06.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-05.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
0
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-07.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-09.............
PSYCHIATRIC NURSE.........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-09.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
3
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLINICAL SPECIALTY........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-10.............
PSYCHIATRIC NURSE.........
1
20
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
45
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0610-10.............
UTILIZ REV NURSE..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
2
7
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0621-05.............
NRSNG ASST................
2
10
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0622-05.............
MEDCL SUPP TECHNCN........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0638-09.............
RECR THRPST...............
1
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0640-05.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN.........
1
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0640-06.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN.........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0640-06.............
HLTH TECHNCN..............
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0640-07.............
HSKPNG TECHNCN............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0640-08.............
HSKPNG TECHNCN............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
0
6
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0651-08.............
RESPIRATORY THRPST........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0671-07.............
QUAL IMPRVMT SPECLST......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0681-07.............
DENTAL ASST...............
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
9
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVRNMNT OF CARE SPECLST..
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
1
0
ADMR.
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
1
0
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LVL PSYCH...
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
2
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0185-12.............
SOC WRKR--REGIONAL........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0185-12.............
SUPVRY SOC WRKR...........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0188-11.............
SUPVY RECREATION
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0260-12.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0602-15.............
CH, PSYCHIATRIST..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0602-15.............
PSYCHIATRIC PHYSICIAN.....
1
3
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE...
1
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUALITY IMPRMT & INFECTION
0
2
CONTROL NURSE.
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
1
6
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0610-12.............
DIR OF NRSNG, ASSISTANT
0
1
DON.
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0610-13.............
DIR OF NRSNG..............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0630-11.............
CLNCL DIETITIAN...........
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0644-11.............
SUPVY MED TECHNLGST.......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0669-11.............
MEDCL REC ADMR............
1
0
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0905-15.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
1
0
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-1715-11.............
VOCTNL REHAB SPECLST......
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
3
FMC ROCHESTER........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FMC ROCHESTER........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
13
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
9
33
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
5
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
25
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
5
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY & COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0303-07.............
ADMN ASST.................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
0
4
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0681-06.............
DENTAL ASSISTANT..........
1
0
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SRVC SPEC...........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
6
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONM SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
ADMN.
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVY CHAPLAIN............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
5
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
3
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0101-11.............
RENTRY AFF COORD..........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0101-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
0
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
1
0
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER....
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0318-06.............
SECRETARY.................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIANS ASSISTANT......
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTIONER..........
1
0
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0671-11.............
HEALTH SYSTEMS SPECIALIST.
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0680-13.............
DENTAL OFFICER............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1102-09.............
CONTRACT SPECLST..........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPECIAL EDUCATION TEACHER.
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
1
4
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACHINE REPAIRER
1
0
SUPV.
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
1
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
4
FCI SAFFORD..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
8
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (L.......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
PHS....................
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
18
45
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
6
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
41
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
5
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
7
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
1
4
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY (CAPTAIN'S)..........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME AND LEAVE CLERK......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0610-10.............
CLNCL NURSE...............
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
3
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-1701-09.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0006-09.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0101-09.............
CASE MGR..................
1
0
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
9
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0671-11.............
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT/
0
1
INFECTION PREVENTION AND
CONTROL COORDINATOR.
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF, DENTAL OFFICER.....
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1152-11.............
PRODN CNTRLR..............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
6
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
3
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLUMBING WORKER FOREMAN...
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
4
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNC WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-5306-09.............
AIR COND EQUIP MECH FRMN..
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
3
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
4
FCI SCHUYLKILL.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
11
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG.......
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
PHS....................
REGNL HLTH SRVCS ADMR.....
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
ES-0006-00.............
REGNL DIR.................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
2
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST...
1
0
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST...
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG COORD..........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR CORRECTNL SRVCS
0
1
SPECLST.
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL PROGS ADMR
1
0
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL SRVCS ADMR
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP REGNL DIR.............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0018-13.............
REGNL ENVRNMNTL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLNC ADMR.
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0060-12.............
CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST...
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-11.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
1
SPECLST.
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-12.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
3
SPECLST.
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-13.............
SR REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
1
SPECLST.
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0201-14.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE ADMR.
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0260-12.............
REGNL AFFIRMATIVE EMPLMT
0
1
ADMR.
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0305-05.............
MAIL & FILE CLK...........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0306-11.............
GOVERNMENT INFO SPECLST...
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0318-07.............
REGNL SECY................
1
0
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0341-11.............
SUPVY ADMV OFFCR..........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0344-07.............
MGMT ASST.................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0391-11.............
TELECOMMUN SPECLST........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0391-12.............
REGNL TELECOMMUN SPECLST..
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0501-13.............
SENIOR FNANCL SPECLST.....
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0505-14.............
REGNL COMPTLR.............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0510-12.............
REGNL ACCTNT..............
1
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0560-12.............
REGIONAL BUDGET ANALYST...
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0802-12.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0808-13.............
ARCH......................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0830-13.............
MECHCL ENGR...............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
3
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
DEP REGNL CNSL............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0905-15.............
REGNL CNSL................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
1
2
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1101-11.............
REGNL PROC & PROP SPECLST.
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1603-08.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGMT SPECLST........
0
3
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1640-14.............
REGNL FACIL ADMR..........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1667-13.............
REGNL FOOD SRVC ADMR......
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-1710-13.............
REGNL EDUC ADMR...........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
WS-2805-09.............
ELEC WRKR FRMN............
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
WS-4206-08.............
PLUMBING WRKR FRMN........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
SOUTH CENTRAL REGION.................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
0
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
CLINICAL NURSE............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
DENTRAL OFFICER...........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
1
0
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL DENTAL OFFICER...
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0007-05.............
SR OFFCR..................
5
12
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
13
30
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
20
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
39
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
5
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0018-09.............
Safety Compliance
0
1
Specialist.
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0301-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
1
0
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-1658-08.............
LNDRY PLANT MGR...........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNICIAN............
0
3
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
2
SPECIALIST.
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
0
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
7
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0018-12.............
Environ & Safety Comp Adm.
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
0
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0603-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
1
1
CONTRL COORD.
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER...................
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
1
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
3
MCC SAN DIEGO........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
7
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGENIST...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
NURSE SPECIALIST IOP......
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
PHS....................
SOMP PSYCHOLOGIST.........
0
2
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0007-05.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
6
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0007-06.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
8
64
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
9
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
37
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0303-06.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
6
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
2
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
7
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
8
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
1
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0180-11.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1701-12.............
SUPVR EDUC/REC............
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-4206-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
1
0
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
1
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI SEAGOVILLE.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
14
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
PHS....................
REGNL HEALTH SVC ADMIN....
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
ES-0006-00.............
REGNL DIR.................
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GL-0963-09.............
LEG INSTRMTS EXAMNR.......
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
2
2
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTIONAL SERVICES
0
2
SPECIALIST.
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
2
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SYST SPECLST....
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
5
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG ADMR...........
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-13.............
SENIOR CORRECTNL SRVCS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST.
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL PROGS ADMR
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL SRVCS ADMR
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0006-15.............
DEP REGNL DIR.............
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0018-13.............
REGNL ENVRNMNTL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLNC ADMR.
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR (TR)...
1
0
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-11.............
REGNL RECRUIT SPECLST.....
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-12.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
3
SPECLST.
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-13.............
SR REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
1
0
SPECLST.
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0201-14.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE ADMR.
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0260-12.............
REGNL AFFIRMATIVE EMPLMT
0
1
ADMR.
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
1
0
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0318-07.............
REGIONAL SECRETARY........
1
2
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0341-11.............
SUPVY ADMV OFFCR..........
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0391-12.............
REGNL TELECOMMUN SPECLST..
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL PRG SPECIALIST..
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0501-13.............
SENIOR FINANCIAL
0
1
SPECIALIST.
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0505-14.............
REGNL COMPTLR.............
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0510-12.............
REGNL ACCTNT..............
0
2
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0560-12.............
BUDG ANAL.................
1
0
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0671-11.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0808-13.............
ARCHITECT.................
1
0
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0830-13.............
MECHCL ENGR...............
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
1
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
1
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0905-15.............
DEP REGNL CNSL............
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0905-15.............
REGNL CNSL................
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
1
4
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
1
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1101-11.............
REGNL PROC & PROP SPECLST.
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGMT SPECLST........
0
3
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1640-14.............
REGNL FACIL ADMR..........
1
0
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1667-13.............
REGNL FOOD SRVC ADMR......
0
1
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-1710-13.............
REGNL EDUC ADMR...........
1
0
SOUTHEAST REGION.....................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
PHS....................
STAFF NURSE...............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
1
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL NURSE.
FDC SEATAC...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
PHS....................
HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATOR....
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
PHS....................
NAT DENTAL CLINICAL.......
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
30
29
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
11
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
5
41
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPEC...............
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN SECY..............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0318-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFICER.........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0640-05.............
MEDICATION TECHNCN........
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SERVICES ASSISTANT...
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
1
SPECIALIST.
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
5
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVY CLC ATTY............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-1101-12.............
INDL PROGRAM MANAGER......
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER...................
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR SUPVR.........
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
2
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-4749-14.............
MTNCE WRKR SUPERVISOR.....
0
1
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
0
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
6
FDC SEATAC...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
7
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF, BASIC DENTAL.......
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG AHSA..
1
0
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
JUNIOR STAFF NURSE........
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
PSYCHTRC MID-LEVEL
1
0
PRACTITIONER.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
INFECTION PREV & CONT
1
0
NURSE.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAG NURSE-
0
1
IOP.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
PHARMACY OFFICER..........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
PHARMACY OFFICER -........
1
0
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
2
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
17
44
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
9
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
3
45
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
9
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
3
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0018-09.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY SPECLST.
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0101-09.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
9
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
5
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL PROGRAM SPEC....
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
1
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUGET ANALYST.............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
4
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
1
0
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT & PROPERTY
0
1
SPEC.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
1
0
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0006-13.............
SUPERINTENDANT OF
1
0
INDUSTRIES.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
11
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR (TR).
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
10
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0180-11.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
3
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0180-13.............
CLINICAL PSYCH-CARE LEVEL
0
1
3.
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
3
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0342-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPERVISOR.....
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
6
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (SPEC ED)............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-2854-08.............
ELCTRL EQUIP WRKR FRMN....
2
3
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTILSYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN.
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
8
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSR WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSR WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCI SHERIDAN.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
14
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
SENIOR CLINICAL SCIENTIST
0
1
OFFICER.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OFFICER
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
0
1
ADVANCED.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
JUNIOR STAFF NURSE........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
APRN-Nurse Practiti.......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE
0
1
III.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
SENIOR THERAPIST..........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
CHIEF THERAPIST...........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
DEPUTY CHIEF THERAPIST....
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
HEALTH SYSTEMS
0
1
ADMINISTRATOR.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
OCCUPTL THRPST............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
PHYS THRPST...............
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
STAFF TECHNOLOGIST........
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
ASSISTANT CHIEF PHARMACIST
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (M.C.)...
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
MAST REGNL CHIEF
0
1
PHARMACIST.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
5
113
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0007-08.............
INMATE SYS OFFCR..........
0
7
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
73
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY TRAINEE............
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0180-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
1
3
INTERN.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0180-12.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0188-09.............
RECREATION SPECLST........
0
5
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0199-07.............
SOC WRKR STUDENT TRAINEE..
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
6
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASST......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASST......
0
5
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0318-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECIALIST......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0610-10.............
DIALYSIS STAFF NURSE......
5
14
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
3
69
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0620-07.............
DIALYSIS LPN..............
1
8
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
14
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0621-05.............
NRSNG ASST................
2
5
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0622-05.............
MEDCL SUPP TECHNCN........
0
3
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0638-09.............
RECR THRPST...............
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0640-08.............
HSKPNG TECHNCN............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
1
8
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0647-08.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0647-09.............
RDLGY SUPVR...............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0649-07.............
SURGICAL TECHNCN..........
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0651-08.............
RESPIRATORY THRPST........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0661-05.............
PHRMCY TECHNCN............
0
4
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0673-09.............
HSPTL HSKPNG OFFCR........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
7
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0681-06.............
DNTL ASST.................
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GL-2299-00.............
COMPR STUD TRAINEE........
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
3
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
12
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVRNMNT OF CARE SPECLST..
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
8
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
3
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0180-11.............
PSYCHOLOGIST (POSTDOC
1
0
TRAINEE).
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0180-12.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
1
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0180-13.............
FORENSICS UNIT PSYCH......
1
4
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
5
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0185-12.............
SUPVY SOC WRKR............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0201-11.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGT........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0301-00.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0501-11.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0602-15.............
ASSISTANT CLINICAL
1
0
DIRECTOR.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0602-15.............
CH, PSYCHIATRY............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (GP)..........
3
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (PSYCH).......
1
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0602-15.............
REGIONAL PHYSICIAN........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
1
5
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0603-12.............
PSYCHTRC MID-LEVEL
0
1
PRACTITIONER.
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0610-10.............
NURSE SPCLIST (WOUND CARE)
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
2
4
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE SPCLST..............
0
5
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
12
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0610-12.............
ASST DIR OF NRSNG.........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0610-13.............
DIRECTOR OF NURSING.......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0630-11.............
CLNCL DIETITIAN...........
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0644-11.............
LAB BENCH SUPVR...........
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0644-12.............
LAB SRVCS MGR.............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0667-12.............
ORTHOTIST/PROSTHTST.......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0671-12.............
QUAL IMPRVMT MGR..........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
6
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
1
0
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-0679-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-3703-09.............
WELD WRKR FRMN............
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
7
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
7
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
USMCFP SPRINGFIELD...................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCI SANDSTONE........................
PHS....................
SR SUPERVISORY PROG.......
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
5
5
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
12
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
34
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
4
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
4
30
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0018-09.............
Environmental and Safety
0
1
Compliance SPECLST.
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0030-07.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0101-07.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
0
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
4
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0675-07.............
MEDCL REC TECHNCN.........
1
0
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-0682-09.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GL-1702-06.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0006-13.............
WITNESS SECUR UNIT MGR....
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
4
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0018-12.............
Environmental and Safety
0
1
Compliance Administrator.
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0101-09.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0180-12.............
CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGI.......
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
1
0
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0318-06.............
SECRETARY.................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0610-09.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
1
0
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREV & CONT
0
1
NURSE.
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0680-13.............
Chief Dentist.............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1101-11.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
0
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR (SLN)................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1712-11.............
TRNG INSTRU...............
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1712-11.............
TRNG INSTRU (BLD TRDS)....
1
0
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBR FRMN................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4402-08.............
BIND MACH OPERTR FRMN.....
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4402-09.............
PLATEMAKER FRMN...........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4417-09.............
OFFST PRESS OPERTR FRMN...
1
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-4907-04.............
MATRIAL HNDLR SUPV........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-5306-09.............
AIR COND EQUIP MECH FRMN..
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-5409-08.............
WATER TRTMNT PLANT FRMN...
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
5
FCI SANDSTONE........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
10
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
PHS....................
RESOLVE COORDINATOR.......
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
PHS....................
STAFF PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
0
2
OFFICER.
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM
0
1
MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST (S-M.H./
0
1
M.H.C.).
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0007-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
57
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
8
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
40
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
7
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
5
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0199-07.............
STUD TR...................
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
5
INTERN.
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0299-05.............
HUMAN RESOURCE STUD TR....
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0301-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC SPECLST.......
0
5
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
1
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-0682 -08............
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GL-2210-09.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
2
10
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0007-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
4
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0301-09.............
CUSTMR SRVC SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (PSYCHIATRIST)
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
1
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1101-12.............
FAC MGR...................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
1
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
3
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
3
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1799-05.............
EDUCATION INTERN..........
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
0
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
8
FCI TALLAHASSEE......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
10
FCC TUCSON...........................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORDINATOR........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
12
169
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
14
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
7
98
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
12
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
9
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
5
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH SUPV............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
4
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMIN SECRETARY......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
1
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
4
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
3
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
1
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
2
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
2
0
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-0986-08.............
LEGAL ASSISTANT...........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
1
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
8
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
0
SPECIALIST.
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
3
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
0
4
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
6
20
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0018-11.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
1
0
COMPLIANCE ADMIN TRAINEE.
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
2
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
9
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0101-11.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG SPECLST.
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
1
2
SPECLST.
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
1
COMPLEX.
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LEVEL PSYCH.
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
RESTRICTIVE HOUSING PSYCH.
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG COORD...
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SEX OFFENDER PROG PSYCH...
2
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDGET AND ACCT OFF.......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
2
0
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0610-11.............
INFECTION PREVENTION &
0
2
CONTROL NURSE.
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPERVISORY CLINICAL NURSE
1
0
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0671-12.............
REGNL QUAL IMPRVMT COORD..
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0680-14.............
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
4
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVY CONTR SPECLST.......
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
5
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
PHS....................
PHYSICAL THERAPIST........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
3
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
3
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
10
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
3
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
9
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
2
FCC TUCSON...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
16
FCI TALLADEGA........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
9
52
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
5
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
5
35
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
8
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
4
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPECLST.
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
4
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
3
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
4
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
6
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0510-07.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0510-11.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0525-05.............
ACCNT TECHN...............
0
2
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
2
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0675-06.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-1102-07.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
0
SPECIALIST.
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN (OPERATIONS).
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN (PROGRAMS)...
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
3
9
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMSTR.
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE
1
0
SPECLST.
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
7
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
2
2
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR (TR).............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.......
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
1
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0856-10.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1101-13.............
OERATIONS MANAGER.........
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC PROG SPECLST.........
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
3
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1712-09.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU
0
1
(MASONRY).
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU
0
1
(CARPENTRY).
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU
0
1
(COMPUTER).
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU (HVAC).
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU
0
1
(WELDER).
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
5
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-4601-08.............
WOOD WRKG MACH OP FRM.....
2
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
1
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
1
0
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
8
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCI TALLADEGA........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
11
FCI TEXARKANA........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
PHS....................
NURSE SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
PHS....................
REGIONAL QUALITY MA.......
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE II
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0007-05.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
11
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0007-06.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
5
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
33
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
31
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
5
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSIST....
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECH............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING FACTORY TECHNCN.
1
6
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
1
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
4
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-0681-06.............
DENTAL ASSISTANT..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GL-2010-09.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SP.
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
9
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
7
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
5
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0303-07.............
Religious Services
0
1
Assistant.
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0510-11.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0510-11.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDICAL OFFICER...........
1
0
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0602-15.............
REGIONAL PHYSICIAN........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0603-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELECTRONIC TECH...........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MANAGER.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-3106-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
0
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-5003-07.............
GRDNR FRMN................
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
FCI TEXARKANA........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
PHS....................
CLC ATTY..................
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
PHS....................
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
PHS....................
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
1
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST DIRECTOR.......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
10
22
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
5
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0007-07.............
SENIOR OFFICER............
0
166
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
15
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
130
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
15
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY SPECLST............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
9
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0101-11.............
SPEC TRT PRG SPEC
0
1
CHALLENGE.
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
4
INTERN.
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
4
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCES SPECLST...
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
4
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
3
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
7
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
3
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDGET ANALYST............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
13
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
5
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0644-09.............
MEDCL TECHNLGST...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
3
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
4
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
3
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GL-2210-11.............
IT SPECLST................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-11.............
INTELL RES SPECLST........
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
4
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMR.................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-13.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
4
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
6
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
20
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0018-13.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL PROTCTN SPECLST..
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
2
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0060-12.............
LCP CHAPLAIN..............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
14
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
5
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0101-11.............
SPEC TRT PRG SPEC
0
2
CHALLENGE.
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
1
COMPLEX.
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-12.............
CLNCL PSYCH...............
2
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-13.............
CARE LVL 3 PSYCH..........
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-13.............
RESTRICTIVE HOUSING
0
1
PSYCHLGY.
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-13.............
STAGES PROGRAM COORD......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0303-11.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0343-09.............
MGMT ANAL.................
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0501-12.............
ASST UNICOR BUS MGR.......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0510-11.............
FACTORY OPERATIONAL ACCT..
2
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0599-05.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
2
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
1
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
2
CONTRL COORD.
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0680-14.............
AREA REGIONAL DENTA.......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0856-09.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
3
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1101-13.............
BUS CENTR MGR.............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1101-14.............
PROG MGR..................
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1102-11.............
UNICOR CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1150-12.............
PRODN CONT MGR............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1640-13.............
FACILITIES MANAGER........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
3
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
8
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-2210-11.............
IT SPECLST................
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
GS-2210-13.............
SUPVY IT SPECLST..........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-2604-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
5
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
0
9
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
1
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-3809-08.............
MBL EQUIP MTL FRMN........
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
5
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
6
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-5301-07.............
SEWING MACH REP TRAINEE...
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-5301-09.............
TEXTL MCHNRY RPRER FRMN...
1
0
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
4
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN (BUS
1
3
CENTER).
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
14
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-6907-05.............
MATERIAL HANDLER SUPV.....
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCC TERRE HAUTE......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
24
AUSP THOMSON.........................
PHS....................
STAFF DENTAL OFFICE.......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0007-07.............
SENIOR OFFICER............
129
111
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORECTIONAL SYSTEMS OFC...
0
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS OFC..
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS OFC..
0
4
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0007-08.............
SENIOR OFFICER SPECIALIST.
12
62
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTIONAL COUNSELOR....
4
4
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE SPEC....
0
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
2
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECREATION SPECIALIST.....
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECIALIST.
0
6
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECIALIST.....
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0303-07.............
HEALTH SERVICES ASSISTANT.
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
6
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFFICER.........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
2
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECRETARY.......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0318-06.............
DHO SECRETARY.............
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECRETARY.................
1
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN'S
1
0
SECRETARY.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMINSTRTR SECRETARY.
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECRETARY........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0501-09.............
FINANCIAL SPECIALIST......
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCOUNTANT................
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCOUNTING TECHNICIAN.....
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME AND ATTENDANCE CLERK.
0
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
3
8
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0647-07.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0675-07.............
HEALTH INFORMATION
0
2
TECHNICIAN.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-0682-08.............
DENTAL HYGIENIST/CO.......
0
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUREMENT & PROP
0
1
SPECIALIST.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTRACT SPECIALIST.......
2
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACILITIES ASSISTANT......
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SERVICE ASST.........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYS
0
1
SPEC.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
0
1
OFFICER.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
0
1
OFFICER.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
1
4
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOCIATE WARDEN..........
0
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0007-11.............
LIEUTENANT................
10
20
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0007-12.............
DEPUTY CAPTAIN............
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN...................
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COM ADMR
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
2
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPERVISORY CHAPLAIN......
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
ASST CASE MGMT COORD......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MANAGER..............
2
8
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
2
5
SPECLST.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MANAGEMENT
0
1
COORDINATOR.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCHOLOGIST........
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
RESTRICTIVE HOUSING PSYCH.
1
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0180-14.............
CHIEF PSYCHOLOGIST........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0188-12.............
SUPERVISOR OF RECREATION..
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE
0
1
MANAGER.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER....
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPV......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPERVISOR.....
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0501-13.............
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR....
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (CLINICAL
1
0
DIRECTOR).
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR (GENERAL
1
0
PRACTICE).
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0603-11.............
PHYSICIAN ASST............
2
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0610-11.............
IOPC NURSE................
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0610-11.............
NURSE PRACTITIONER........
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0660-11.............
STAFF PHARMACIST..........
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0660-12.............
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HEALTH SERVICES ADMIN
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
1
0
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0680-14.............
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGINEERING TECHNICIAN....
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELECTRONICS TECHNICIAN....
0
5
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTORNEY..................
1
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPERVISORY CONTRACT
0
1
SPECIALIST.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1640-13.............
FACILITIES MANAGER........
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1667-12.............
ASSISTANT FOOD SERVICE
0
1
ADMIN.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SERVICE ADMINISTRATOR
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1710-11.............
TEACHER...................
0
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPERVISOR OF EDUCATION...
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPUTER SERVICES
3
2
SPECIALIST.
AUSP THOMSON.........................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPUTER SERVICES MANAGER.
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELECTRICAL WORKER FOREMAN.
1
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDER WRKR FOREMAN.......
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FOREMAN.......
0
4
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
3
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-4749-08.............
MAINTENANCE WRKR FOREMAN..
1
10
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-4749-14.............
GENERAL FOREMAN...........
1
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FOREMAN..............
0
4
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTOMOTIVE WRKR FOREMAN...
0
2
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-6907-03.............
MATERIAL HANDLER FOREMAN..
0
1
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-6907-04.............
MATERIAL HANDLER FOREMAN..
2
12
AUSP THOMSON.........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK SUPERVISOR...........
1
17
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
SOCIAL WORKER.............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
POST CoStep RN............
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
ADV PRACT REG NURSE.......
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL NURSE.
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
PHYS THRPST...............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST II.......
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
SENIOR PHARMACIST.........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM.......
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
PHS....................
DENTAL CHIEF..............
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
2
19
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
1
46
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
5
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
32
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
6
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
4
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0180-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
3
INTERN.
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0180-09.............
PSYCHOLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
1
INTERN.
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0303-07.............
ADMV ASST.................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0303-07.............
PSYCHOLGY TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0303-09.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
3
3
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
1
5
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
0
3
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0647-08.............
DIAGNSTC RADIOLOGIC
0
1
TECHNLGST.
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS TECHNCN...............
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GL-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
7
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMP ADM.
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
2
5
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
7
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0180-13.............
CARE LVL 3 PSYCH..........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR TRAINEE
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0602-15.............
PSYCHTRC PHYSCN...........
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVY CONTR SPECLST.......
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1102-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
2
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-4206-08.............
PLUMBING WKR FRM..........
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
6
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
0
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-6907-04.............
Material Handler Foreman..
0
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
2
FCI TERMINAL ISLAND..................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
9
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
PHS....................
ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE...
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
ES-0006-00.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
9
50
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
7
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
0
36
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
10
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0007-09.............
RELIGIOUS SERVICES
0
1
COUNSELOR.
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCH TECH................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
1
5
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL ROOM OFCR............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
4
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL PRG SPECLST........
0
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
3
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGENIST.............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROPERTY SPECLST.
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SAT CAMP........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
2
0
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
9
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVIR. & SAFETY CMPLNC.
0
1
MGR.
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
10
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
1
0
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0180-13.............
CHIEF PSYCH...............
1
0
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
1
0
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
1
0
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCED PRACTICE N.......
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
5
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVC MGR............
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
1
5
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-5408-08.............
WASTEWATER PLANT OPERTR
0
1
FRMN.
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
2
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
7
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCI THREE RIVERS.....................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
12
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
PHS....................
CLNCL PRACTICAL NURSE.....
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
PHS....................
SOCIAL WORKER.............
1
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
PHS....................
PHYSICAL THERAPIST........
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
PHS....................
PHARMACIST................
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORD..............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
25
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
12
249
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
29
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
25
107
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
29
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
1
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLIANCE
0
3
SPECIALIST.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
12
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
8
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0199-09.............
PSYCHLGY PREDOCTORAL
0
3
INTERN.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
9
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
4
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
1
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SVCS ASSISTANT..
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS TELEPH MNTR...........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
1
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
2
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0318-06.............
DHO SECY..................
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
8
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL PROG SPECLST.......
0
5
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
1
4
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
2
4
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0640-05.............
PHLEBOTOMIST..............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0640-09.............
PARAMEDIC.................
3
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0661-05.............
PHRMCY TECHNCN............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
1
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
2
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1658-10.............
LNDRY PLANT SPECLST.......
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
3
9
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
2
SPECIALIST.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-12.............
EMER PREPAREDNESS OFFCR...
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
2
8
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
3
4
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
1
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
38
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0007-12.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0007-13.............
DEP CAPTAIN-COMPLEX.......
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
0
1
SPEC.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
5
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
1
26
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0101-11.............
SPECIALTY TRTMNT PROG
0
4
SPECLST.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
1
2
COMPLEX.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
2
5
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0180-13.............
DEP CH, PSYCH.............
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0180-13.............
INTERNSHIP PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER
1
0
(TRAINEE).
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER....
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0260-13.............
EEO CNSLR.................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR TRAINEE..........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0510-11.............
COST ACCTNT...............
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
3
4
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0610-11.............
CLNCL PRACTICAL NURSE.....
1
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
1
1
CONTRL NURSE.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0670-12.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0670-13.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
6
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1101-11.............
ASST FACTORY MGR..........
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1101-13.............
INDUSTRIAL OPERATIONS
1
0
MANAGER.
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPV CONTR SPECLST........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
2
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
1
8
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
1
4
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
5
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
7
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-3414-09.............
MACH TOOL OPERTR FRMN.....
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-3414-11.............
MCHNST FRMN...............
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-4102-08.............
PAINTER WRKR SUPVR........
0
1
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
6
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
7
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
11
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
1
2
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
7
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
7
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
3
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
2
16
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR SUPVR...........
1
0
FCC VICTORVILLE......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
1
32
FCI WASECA...........................
PHS....................
CHIEF GENERAL DENTAL
1
0
OFFICER.
FCI WASECA...........................
PHS....................
NURSE SPECLST/INFECTION
0
1
PREVENTION.
FCI WASECA...........................
PHS....................
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0007-05.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
7
9
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0007-06.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
9
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
23
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
4
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
21
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
4
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY & OCCUPTL HLTH SPEC
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0030-07.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
2
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
3
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0303-06.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVS ASST.......
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
2
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0304-04.............
INFORMATION RECEPTIONIST..
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0525-05.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
4
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0640-09.............
EMERG MEDCL TECHNCN.......
0
2
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
8
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0018-12.............
SAFETY & OCCUPTL HLTH MGR.
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
6
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
4
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0180-13.............
ADVANCED CARE LEVEL
0
1
PSYCHOLOGIST.
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0180-13.............
SPECIALTY PROG COORD......
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0185-11.............
SOC WRKR..................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0301-12.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0501-12.............
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR....
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0602-13.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0602-15.............
PSYCHIATRIC PHYSICIAN.....
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0610-11.............
ADVANCE PRACTICE NURSE....
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0670-11.............
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0670-12.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1102-09.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
1
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-1910-11.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
1
4
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-4204-09.............
PIPEFTR FRMN..............
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
4
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
1
0
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
7
FCI WASECA...........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
9
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
PHS....................
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
PHS....................
INFECTION PREV. & CONTROL
0
1
NURSE.
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
PHS....................
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
PHS....................
ASST HLTH SRVCS ADMR......
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
PHS....................
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
PHS....................
STAFF DENTAL HYGIEN.......
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
4
62
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
1
7
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
53
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
9
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
0
3
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
0
3
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
4
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
4
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0303-08.............
RECYCLING TECHNICIAN......
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
3
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0603-11.............
PHYSCN ASST...............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
5
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GL-1802-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
3
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
3
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELLITE OPERS
1
0
ADMR.
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
9
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0007-12.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0018-12.............
ENVRNMTL & SAFETY COMPLNC
0
1
ADMR.
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0060-12.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
5
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0188-11.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0201-12.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0299-05.............
PATHWAY INTERN............
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0671-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL COORD.
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0680-13.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0802-11.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1102-11.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1667-11.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1667-12.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
3
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1710-12.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-1799-05.............
PATHWAY INTERN............
1
0
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
1
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
5
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
5
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
2
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
1
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
9
FCI WILLIAMSBURG.....................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
4
9
WESTERN REGION.......................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM.......
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
ES-0006-00.............
REGNL DIR.................
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SUPRT COORD........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GL-0671-11.............
HLTH SYS SPECLST..........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GM-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL PROG SPECLST....
0
3
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST...
0
2
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-12.............
CORRECTNL SYS SPECLST.....
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-12.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT
0
1
OVERSIGHT SPECLST.
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-13.............
DISCPL HRG ADMR...........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL PROGS SPECLST
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-13.............
SR CORRECTNL SRVCS SPECLST
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-14.............
EXEC ASST.................
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL PROGS ADMR
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-14.............
REGNL CORRECTNL SRVCS ADMR
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0006-15.............
SR DEP REGNL DIR..........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0018-13.............
REGNL ENVRNMNTL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLNC ADMR.
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0101-12.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT
2
2
OVERSIGHT SPECLST.
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0101-13.............
TRANSITIONAL DRUG ABUSE
0
1
TRTMNT COORD.
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR (TR)...
1
0
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0201-11.............
REGNL RECRUIT SPECLST.....
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0201-12.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
4
SPECLST.
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0201-13.............
SR REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE
0
1
SPECLST.
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0201-14.............
REGNL HUMAN RESOURCE ADMR.
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0260-12.............
REGNL AFFIRMATIVE ACTN
1
0
ADMR.
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0306-11.............
FOIA/PA SPECLST...........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0318-07.............
REGNL SECY................
1
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0341-11.............
SUPVY ADMV OFFCR..........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0391-12.............
REGNL TELECOMMUN SPECLST..
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0501-13.............
SR REGNL FNANCL SPECLST...
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0505-14.............
REGNL COMPTLR.............
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0510-12.............
REGNL ACCTNT..............
0
2
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0560-12.............
REGIONAL BUDGET ANALYST...
0
2
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0802-12.............
ENGRG TECHNCN.............
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0808-13.............
ARCHITECT.................
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0819-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEER....
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0905-14.............
CLC ATTY..................
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0905-14.............
SR CLC ATTY...............
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0905-15.............
DEP REGNL CNSL............
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0905-15.............
REGNL CNSL................
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0950-11.............
PARALEGAL SPECLST.........
0
2
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-0986-08.............
LEG ASST..................
1
0
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-1640-12.............
FACIL MGT SPECLST.........
0
3
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-1640-14.............
REGNL FACIL ADMR..........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-1667-13.............
REGNL FOOD SRVC ADMR......
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-1710-13.............
REGNL EDUC ADMR...........
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-2010-11.............
INVENT MGMT SPECLST.......
0
1
WESTERN REGION.......................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
PHS....................
CHIEF PHARMACIST..........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
0
7
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0007-07.............
SR OFFCR..................
0
6
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
0
3
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
1
8
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
0
2
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0007-09.............
LT........................
1
4
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
0
2
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0301-09.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
0
2
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0501-07.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
0
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
1
0
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-1603-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
0
1
SPECIALIST.
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
2
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0007-11.............
CAPTAIN...................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0018-11.............
SAFETY MGR................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
3
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
1
6
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0101-12.............
CASE MGMT COORD...........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0180-13.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
0
2
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0201-11.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECIALIST.....
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0301-11.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0501-11.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0602-15.............
CLNCL DIR.................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0603-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
0
1
CONTRL NURSE.
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0670-11.............
HLTH SRVCS ADMR...........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0680-13.............
CHIEF DENTAL OFFICER......
1
0
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-0856-11.............
ELECTRONICS TECHNICIAN....
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-1640-11.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-1667-11.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-1710-11.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
GS-2210-12.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-4206/08.............
PLUMBING WORKER FRMN......
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FOREMAN........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
1
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
0
3
FPC YANKTON..........................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
0
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
PHS....................
ASSISTANT HSA.............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
PHS....................
DENTAL HYGIENIST..........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
PHS....................
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
PHS....................
REGISTERED NURSE..........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
PHS....................
SUPERVISORY PROGRAM.......
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
PHS....................
CLINICAL DIRECTOR.........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
ES-0006-00.............
COMPLEX WARDEN............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0006-09.............
MENTOR COORDINATOR........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0007-07.............
CORRECTNL OFFCR...........
101
165
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0007-08.............
CORRECTNL SYS OFFCR.......
3
18
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0007-08.............
SR OFFCR SPECLST..........
2
109
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0007-09.............
CORRECTNL CNSLR...........
1
28
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0007-11.............
LT........................
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0018-09.............
SAFETY COMPLNC SPECLST....
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0030-09.............
SPORTS SPECLST............
1
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
11
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0181-07.............
PSYCHLGY TECHNCN..........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0188-09.............
RECR SPECLST..............
2
13
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0201-07.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
6
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0301-09.............
ASST LOCKSMITH............
1
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0301-09.............
TRUST FUND SPECLST........
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0301-10.............
LOCKSMITH.................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0303-07.............
FOOD SRVC ASST............
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0303-07.............
HLTH SRVCS ASST...........
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0303-07.............
RELIGIOUS SRVCS ASST......
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0303-08.............
SIS SUPRT TECHNCN.........
1
8
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0303-08.............
TOOL RM OFFCR.............
1
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0303-09.............
DISTR SRVCS REPR..........
1
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0304-04.............
INF RECPTNST..............
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0318-06.............
CAPTAIN'S SECY............
2
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0318-06.............
DHO SECY..................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0318-06.............
SECY......................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0318-06.............
UNIT SECY.................
2
17
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0318-07.............
ASSOC WARDEN'S SECY.......
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0318-07.............
CAMP ADMR SECY............
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0318-08.............
WARDEN'S SECY.............
1
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0501-09.............
FNANCL SPECLST............
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0510-09.............
ACCTNT....................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0510-09.............
UNICOR ACCTNT.............
2
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0525-07.............
ACCTG TECHNCN.............
1
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0544-05.............
TIME & LV CLK.............
1
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0560-09.............
BUDG ANAL.................
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0610-10.............
REGISTERED NURSE..........
5
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0620-07.............
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE..
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0640-06.............
MEDICATION TECHNICIAN.....
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0640-09.............
HEALTH TECHNICIAN (EMT)...
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0640-09.............
HLTH TECHNCN (EMT)........
2
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0669-09.............
MEDCL REC ADM SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0675-07.............
HLTH INF TECHNCN..........
0
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0682-08.............
DNTL HYGIENIST............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-0895-09.............
INDL ENGRG TECHNCN........
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-1101-09.............
PROCUR & PROP SPECLST.....
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-1102-09.............
CONTR SPECLST.............
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-1603-07.............
FACIL ASST................
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-1702-07.............
EDUC TECHNCN..............
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GL-1910-09.............
QUAL ASSRNC SPECLST.......
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-11.............
SUPVY CORRECTIONAL SYSTEMS
1
1
SPECIALIST.
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-12.............
DISCPL HRG OFFCR..........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-12.............
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
0
1
OFCR.
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-12.............
SPEC INVESTIGATIVE AGT....
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-12.............
UNIT MGR..................
0
8
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-13.............
CAMP ADMINISTRATOR........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-13.............
CORRECTNL PROGS OFFCR.....
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-13.............
EXEC ASST/SATELITE OPERS
0
1
ADMR.
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-14.............
ASSOC WARDEN..............
1
5
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0006-15.............
WARDEN....................
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0007-11.............
LT........................
4
31
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0007-12.............
DEPUTY CAPTAIN............
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0007-13.............
CAPTAIN-COMPLEX...........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0007-13.............
DEPUTY CAPTAIN............
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0018-13.............
ENVIRONMENTAL & SAFETY
0
1
COMPLIANCE ADMR.
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0028-11.............
ENVRNMTL COMPLNC SPECLST..
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0060-12.............
CHAPLAIN..................
1
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0060-13.............
SUPVRY CHAPLAIN...........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0101-11.............
CASE MGR..................
0
18
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0101-11.............
DRUG ABUSE TRTMNT SPECLST.
0
8
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0101-11.............
REENTRY AFF COORD.........
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0101-12.............
DEP CASE MGMT COORD-
0
3
COMPLEX.
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0101-13.............
CASE MGMT COORD-COMPLEX...
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0180-12.............
STAFF PSYCH...............
4
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0180-13.............
DRUG ABUSE PROG COORD.....
1
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0180-14.............
CH PSYCH..................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0188-11.............
ASST RECR SUPVR...........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0188-12.............
RECR SUPVR................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0201-09.............
HUMAN RESOURCE SPECLST....
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0201-12.............
ASST HUMAN RESOURCE MGR...
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0201-13.............
HUMAN RESOURCE MGR........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0301-11.............
ASST TRUST FUND SUPVR.....
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0301-13.............
TRUST FUND SUPVR..........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUDG & ACCTG OFFCR........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0501-12.............
BUS ADMR..................
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0501-12.............
UNICOR ASST BUS MGR.......
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0501-13.............
BUS ADMR..................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0501-13.............
UNICOR BUS MGR............
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0510-11.............
REMOTE OPERTNL ACCTNT.....
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0602-15.............
MEDCL OFFCR...............
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0607-12.............
ASSISTANT HSA.............
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0610-11.............
MID-LEVEL PRACTITIONER....
0
6
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT & INFECTION
0
1
CONT NURSE.
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0610-11.............
QUAL IMPRVMT/INFECTION
1
0
CONTRL NURSE.
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0610-11.............
SUPVY CLINICAL NURSE......
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0660-11.............
PHARMACIST................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0660-12.............
CH PHARMACIST.............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0680-13.............
DNTL OFFCR................
1
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0680-14.............
CH, DNTL OFFCR............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0801-11.............
ENGINEERING TECH..........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0856-11.............
ELCTRON TECHNCN...........
1
5
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0905-14.............
ATTY ADVSR................
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-0905-15.............
SUPVRY ATTY ADVSR.........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1101-12.............
FACTORY MGR...............
1
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1102-12.............
SUPVRY CONTR SPECLST......
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1640-13.............
FACIL MGR.................
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1667-12.............
ASST FOOD SRVC ADMR.......
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1667-13.............
FOOD SRVC ADMR............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1701-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1710-11.............
EDUC SPECLST..............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1710-11.............
SPEC EDUC TCHR............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1710-11.............
TCHR......................
0
13
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1710-12.............
ASST SUPVR OF EDUC........
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1710-13.............
SUPVR OF EDUC.............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1712-11.............
VOCTNL TRNG INSTRU........
0
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-1910-12.............
QUAL ASSRNC MGR...........
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-2210-11.............
COMPR SPECLST.............
0
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
GS-2210-13.............
COMPR SRVCS MGR...........
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-2805-09.............
ELCTRL WRKR FRMN..........
4
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-3105-07.............
FABRIC WRKR FRMN..........
7
7
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-3703-08.............
WELDER FRMN...............
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-4206-08.............
PLMBNG WRKR FRMN..........
0
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-4742-07.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-4742-08.............
UTIL SYS RPRER OPERTR FRMN
0
12
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-4749-08.............
MTNCE WRKR FRMN...........
0
12
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-4749-14.............
GEN FRMN..................
0
3
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-5301-08.............
SEWING MACH RPRER FRMN....
4
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-5306-09.............
HVAC FRMN.................
0
4
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-5823-08.............
AUTMTV WRKR FRMN..........
0
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-6907-03.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
2
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-6907-04.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
22
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-6907-05.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-6907-06.............
WHSE WRKR FRMN............
1
0
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-7305-04.............
LNDRY MACH OPERTR FRMN....
0
1
FCC YAZOO CITY.......................
WS-7404-08.............
COOK FRMN.................
2
25
---------------------
Overall Totals:..................
.......................
..........................
4495
36254
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: ASSR