- CREATING A CLIMATE RESILIENT AMERICA
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
CREATING A CLIMATE RESILIENT AMERICA
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CLIMATE CRISIS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
MAY 23, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-4
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-407
WASHINGTON : 2019
SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CLIMATE CRISIS
One Hundred Sixteenth Congress
KATHY CASTOR, Florida, Chair
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Ranking Member
JULIA BROWNLEY, California
MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
JARED HUFFMAN, California
GARY PALMER, Alabama
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
BUDDY CARTER, Georgia
MIKE LEVIN, California
CAROL MILLER, West Virginia
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
----------
Ana Unruh Cohen, Majority Staff Director
Marty Hall, Minority Staff Director
climatecrisis.house.gov
C O N T E N T S
----------
Statements of Members of Congress
Page
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and Chair, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Prepared Statement...........................................
3
Hon. Garrett Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Select Committee on the
Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................
3
Hon. Robert Scott, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Virginia, prepared statement, submitted for the record by Ms.
Castor.........................................................
56
Witnesses
Noah Diffenbaugh, Kara J Foundation Professor and Kimmelman
Family Senior Fellow, Stanford Woods Institute for the
Environment
Oral Statement...............................................
6
Prepared Statement...........................................
7
Rachel Cleetus, Policy Director, Climate and Energy Program,
Union of Concerned Scientists
Oral Statement...............................................
11
Prepared Statement...........................................
13
Hon. Keith Hodges, Virginia State Delegate, 98th District of
Virginia
Oral Statement...............................................
26
Prepared Statement...........................................
28
Matthew Russell, Executive Director, Iowa Interfaith Power and
Light
Oral Statement...............................................
29
Prepared Statement...........................................
31
Submissions for the Record
Speech by Sarah Braden, Avoiding the storm: Climate change and
the financial system, submitted for the record by Mr. Casten...
52
Report, Unprecedented climate events: Historical changes,
aspirational targets, and national commitments, submitted for
the record by Mr. Lujan........................................
55
Article from The Hill, ``Paris Agreement goals could save
trillions in avoided climate damages,'' submitted for the
record by Mr. Lujan............................................
55
Appendix
Question for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor for Noah
Diffenbaugh....................................................
57
Question for the Record from Hon. Suzanne Bonamici for Noah
Diffenbaugh....................................................
59
Questions for the Record from Hon. Mike Levin for Noah
Diffenbaugh....................................................
61
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor for Rachel
Cleetus........................................................
63
Question for the Record from Hon. Suzanne Bonamici for Rachel
Cleetus........................................................
66
CREATING A CLIMATE RESILIENT AMERICA
----------
THURSDAY, MAY 23, 2019
House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:03 a.m., in Room
2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Kathy Castor
[chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Castor, Lujan, Brownley, Huffman,
McEachin, Levin, Casten, Neguse, Graves, Griffith, Palmer,
Carter, and Miller.
Ms. Castor. The committee will come to order.
And welcome to the May 23, 2019, committee meeting for the
House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis. Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
committee at any time. And I invite everyone to follow the
witness testimony or read it at climatecrisis.house.gov. That
is our website. There are some very impressive graphics
contained in witness testimony and I encourage you all to
review it. Again, that is climatecrisis.house.gov.
Today, we are going to examine the largest consequences and
costs of climate change and set the table for how communities'
ecosystems and the food system can be more resilient in the
face of a changing climate.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Our last hearing focused on drawing down carbon pollution
while building up the American economy. Today, we are examining
another component of climate action, preparing for the
consequences of the climate crisis, consequences that are here
already and what is to come.
We need to create a climate resilient America. Floodwaters,
extreme heat, wildfires, they do not care if we live in a red
district or a blue district. In my home State of Florida,
Republicans and Democrats at the local level are working
together to protect the places that we know and love. And we
can do the same thing here in Washington, D.C.
The climate crisis isn't somebody else's problem; it is
everybody's problem. There are more than 300,000 coastal homes
worth a total value of almost $120 billion that are expected to
face chronic flooding in the next 30 years. When the seas rise,
so does the cost to American families on our coast. When brutal
heat waves hit our communities, people get sick and
agricultural crops and animals suffer.
If we fail to take action, the cost of extreme heat and
poor air quality from the climate crisis could add up to $167
billion a year. And we could lose another $155 billion a year
simply from days when it is too hot for people to work outside,
according to the National Climate Assessment.
And then there are the disasters. The number of billion
dollar weather disasters in the United States has more than
doubled in recent years. In 2017, we set a record with more
than $300 billion worth of damage. And 2018 was close behind
with nearly $100 billion. Many of these disasters are worse
because of the climate crisis, including wildfires, dramatic
swings in rainfall, and coastal storm surge.
When these disasters happen, we have a moral obligation to
help. It is frustrating that so many Americans in Puerto Rico
and Florida and across the country are still waiting for help
in the aftermath of disasters. Because solving the climate
crisis also requires a commitment to climate justice, that
means correcting the injustices that leave so many people,
especially people of color, vulnerable to flooding, heat waves,
and wildfires.
These are daunting problems, but the good news is we have
solutions. We can protect our communities from the climate
crisis, while we cut the carbon pollution that is causing the
climate to change in the first place. For instance, energy
efficiency and smarter grids help keep power flowing and air-
conditioning moving during dangerous heat waves. That saves
life. And when we restore wetlands on our coast, those trees
and plants can absorb the devastating power of coastal storms.
And they absorb something else as they grow: carbon.
And increasingly, farmers are adjusting their practices to
increase soil health, which makes farms more resilient to the
impacts of extreme weather, and increases carbon stored in the
soil. As we continue our work, we are looking forward to
solutions to the climate crisis that provide multiple benefits:
that reduce carbon pollution, that protect communities, and
produce good jobs.
The costs of the climate crisis are already adding up, and
it is time that we invest in climate solutions instead. But it
is more than just dollars. It is about leaving our children a
cleaner, safer, and healthier world. The millions of young
people who are joining climate strikes tomorrow, Fridays for
the Future, never lived in a normal climate, and they know it.
That is why they are demanding climate action now, because we
need to start baking the climate crisis into every decision we
make, on energy, on transportation, on agriculture and
infrastructure.
The climate crisis is here, and we need to act like it.
This is personal. This is happening to our neighbors, this is
happening to all of us. When disasters happen, we should put
the politics of the day aside, come together, and solve
problems. Our expert witnesses will recommend policies to do
so, because we need to come together and take climate action
now. We are all in this together.
At this time, I yield 5 minutes to the Ranking Member
Graves for an opening statement.
[The statement of Ms. Castor follows:]
Opening Statement (As Prepared for Delivery)
Rep. Kathy Castor (D-FL)
U.S. House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
Creating a Climate Resilient America
May 23, 2019
Good morning. Our last hearing focused on drawing down carbon
pollution while building up the American economy. Today we are
examining another important component of climate action: preparing for
the consequences of the climate crisis--consequences that are here
already and what is to come. We need to create a climate resilient
America. Floodwaters, extreme heat, wildfires: they do not care if we
live in a red district or a blue district. In Florida, Republicans and
Democrats at the local level are working together to protect the places
we know and love. We can do the same in Washington, DC.
The climate crisis isn't somebody else's problem. It's everyone's
problem.
There are more than 300,000 coastal homes worth a total value of
almost $120 billion that are expected to face chronic flooding in the
next 30 years. When the seas rise, so does the cost to American
families on our coasts.
When brutal heat waves hit our communities, people get sick and
agricultural crops and animals suffer. If we fail to take action, the
cost of extreme heat and poor air quality from the climate crisis could
add up to $167 billion a year. And we could lose another $155 billion a
year simply from days when it is too hot for people to work outside,
according to the National Climate Assessment.
And then there are the disasters. The number of billion-dollar
weather disasters in the United States has more than doubled in recent
years. 2017 set a record with more than $300 billion worth of damage.
2018 was close behind with nearly $100 billion. Many of these disasters
are worse because of the climate crisis, including wildfires, dramatic
swings in rainfall, and coastal storm surge.
When these disasters happen, we have a moral obligation to help.
It's frustrating that so many Americans in Puerto Rico, Florida and
across the country are still waiting for help in the aftermath of
disasters. Because solving the climate crisis also requires a
commitment to climate justice. That means correcting the injustices
that leave so many people, especially people of color, vulnerable to
flooding, heat waves and wildfires.
These are daunting problems, but the good news is we have
solutions. We can protect our communities from the climate crisis,
while we cut the carbon pollution that is causing the climate to change
in the first place.
For instance, energy efficiency and a smarter grid helps keeps
power flowing and air conditioning going during dangerous heat waves.
That saves lives.
And when we restore wetlands on our coast, those trees and plants
can absorb the devastating power of coastal storms. And they absorb
something else as they grow: carbon.
And increasingly farmers are adjusting their practices to increase
soil health which makes farms more resilient to the impacts of extreme
weather and increases carbon stored in the soil.
As we continue our work, we are looking for solutions to the
climate crisis that provide multiple benefits--that reduce carbon
pollution, that protect communities and create good jobs. The costs of
the climate crisis are already adding up. It's time to invest in
climate solutions.
But it more than just dollars. It's about leaving our children a
cleaner, safer and healthier world.
The millions of young people who are joining climate strikes
tomorrow have never lived in a normal climate--and they know it. That's
why they're demanding climate action now, because we need to start
baking the climate crisis into every decision we make--on energy, on
transportation, on agriculture, on infrastructure.
The climate crisis is here. And we need to act like it. This is
personal. This is happening to our neighbors. This is happening to us.
When disasters happen, we should put the politics of the day aside,
come together, and solve problems. Our expert witnesses will recommend
policies to do so, because we need to come together to take climate
action now. We are all in this together.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I want to thank all the witnesses for taking the time
to be here today and for the appropriation of your testimony.
I asked the chair to focus on this topic first, and there
is a very good reason for that. As we heard during the last
hearing, when Congressman Palmer asked a question of some of
our witnesses, he basically said, what happens if we cut all
emissions from the United States today? Are we still going to
see this momentum continue moving forward in terms of
temperature changes and seas rising? And the answer was yes.
And I am doing this from memory, so there is an excellent
chance I am going to get this somewhat wrong. But I think you
then went on to ask, what happens if all countries cut
emissions? Would we see a stopping of this sea rise increase
and temperature changes? And I think the answer was no.
What that means is that there is effectively nothing we can
do right now, based on our current understanding of science and
technology. There is nothing we can do to stop this momentum of
temperatures changing and seas rising in the immediate term.
And I want to distinguish that, in the immediate term. I am not
saying long term; in the immediate term.
So if things are changing, if we are--if we have this
momentum built up and we have seas rising and we have
temperatures changing. And as the chair just covered, we are
seeing these disasters occurring, and they are occurring for a
few reasons in terms of the cost. They are occurring because of
development. They are occurring because in the coastal
counties, parishes, and boroughs that the chair and I represent
and others, while that only represents 10 percent of the land
area of the United States, it is where 40 percent of our
population lives, and it is growing. More people want to live
on the water where we are having these greater vulnerabilities
with sea rise storms and other challenges.
This is an area where we absolutely need to focus, and
there is zero reason why this should even be a remotely
partisan issue. And that is why we did work and, I think, were
able to make unprecedented advances in the last Congress in
helping to move toward an adaptation or mitigation type
strategy.
Number one, we actually incentivized parishes, counties,
and States to be proactive, to lean forward. And they will get
a reduced cost share on disasters. Number two, between some of
the funds through the Corps of Engineers and through HUD--and I
want to make note, HUD, who can't think their way out of a wet
paper bag to get this money out on the street--we have provided
record levels of funding for flood mitigation, again, through
the Corps of Engineers and through HUD. And I am going to beat
HUD again. We appropriated this money in February of last year,
and they still haven't even figured out how to write the
Federal Register guidance on how the States can access these
dollars. It is inexcusable.
We were able to come in and look at this $100 billion of
backlog of water resource projects to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, enabled to carry out some expedited features to move
those projects forward faster. We were able to define a
resiliency standard within the Disaster Recovery and Reform Act
last year, whereby we are not building back to how things were;
we are building for the future, providing additional
flexibility of this 428 authority in the aftermath of
disasters.
We have more flexibility in how you build back. A lot of
advancements last year and many others but some really
important progress.
Now, the other thing that is really important, because I
want to emphasize once again, I am not saying that just if we
adapt, we just stop and say, okay, we are done. We do need to
make sure that we expand the access and portfolio of clean
energy solutions and opportunities for our citizens. We do need
to continue, continue on this trajectory of reducing emissions
in the United States. And while many people like to demonize
this country, both Americans and people from other countries
like to demonize the United States. I am once again going to go
on a victory lap and say that the United States, since 2000,
has had the greatest absolute reduction of emissions in the
world, period.
So we need to recognize that we are actually doing a pretty
good job and we can continue on this trajectory without
wrecking the U.S. economy. And we can make progress in terms of
options, energy options for our citizens. And we can help to
bend this curve of growing emissions that we are seeing around
the world, not from the United States, but from other countries
like China, India, and others, to ensure that we can provide a
future for these next generations that is sustainable, that is
resilient.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Without objection, members who wish to enter
opening statements into the record may have 5 business days to
do so.
Now I want to welcome our witnesses. First, we have Dr.
Noah Diffenbaugh, who is a professor of Earth, energy, and
environmental sciences at Stanford University. Dr. Diffenbaugh
studies the climate system, including the processes by which
climate change could impact agriculture, water resources, and
human health. He served as a lead author for Working Group II
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and has
provided testimony in scientific expertise to Federal and State
policymakers.
Dr. Rachel Cleetus is the policy director with the Climate
and Energy Program at the Union of Concerned Scientists. Her
research focuses on the risks and costs of climate impact. She
is an expert on policies to promote climate resilience. She has
coauthored numerous reports, including the recent Union of
Concerned Scientists' report, Underwater: Rising Seas, Chronic
Floods, and the Implications for U.S. Coastal Real Estate.
Mr. Keith Hodges represents the 98th District in the
Virginia State House of Delegates, where he has worked on
flooding and coastal resiliency and has produced legislation on
those. Mr. Hodges is a lifelong resident of the 98th District
of Virginia and was elected in 2011.
Mr. Matt Russell is the executive director of Iowa
Interfaith Power and Light, as well as a fifth generation Iowa
farmer. He is a leader and expert on sustainable agriculture
and finding solutions to climate change. Prior to joining Iowa
Interfaith Power and Light, Mr. Russell worked at the Drake
University Agricultural Law Center focusing on issues
concerning retail agriculture, conservation, climate change,
rural development, and Federal farm policy.
Without objection, the witnesses' written statements may be
made part of the record.
With that, Dr. Diffenbaugh, you are now recognized to give
a 5-minute presentation on your testimony.
STATEMENTS OF NOAH DIFFENBAUGH, SENIOR FELLOW, STANFORD WOODS
INSTITUTE FOR THE ENVIRONMENT; RACHEL CLEETUS, POLICY DIRECTOR,
CLIMATE AND ENERGY PROGRAM, UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS;
KEITH HODGES, VIRGINIA STATE DELEGATE, 98TH DISTRICT OF
VIRGINIA; AND MATT RUSSELL, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, IOWA INTERFAITH
POWER AND LIGHT
STATEMENT OF NOAH DIFFENBAUGH
Mr. Diffenbaugh. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairwoman Castor and Ranking Member Graves and
the committee, for the invitation to testify.
My name is Noah Diffenbaugh. I am a professor and senior
fellow at Stanford University. I am appearing today in my
personal capacity.
The subject of today's hearing is creating a climate
resilient America. The good news for our country is that
although climate change is already impacting Americans, there
are many opportunities for us to become more resilient, and in
doing so build a more vibrant, secure, and equitable Nation.
My testimony will focus on the scientific evidence for the
changing risks posed by global warming. You have already heard
testimony summarizing the IPCC reports and the National Climate
Assessment. So I would like to start by summarizing an
assessment that my colleagues and I recently published
evaluating the scientific evidence from the perspective of
EPA's endangerment finding.
As you know, EPA issued the endangerment finding for
greenhouse gases in 2009. This followed the 2007 Supreme Court
ruling that EPA must regulate greenhouse gases under the Clean
Air Act if those gases are found to, quote, ``endanger the
public health and welfare,'' end quote.
The finding evaluated risks in eight areas: public health;
air quality; food production and agriculture, forestry; water
resources; sea level rise and coastal areas; energy,
infrastructure and settlements; and ecosystems and wildlife.
Drawing on more than 280 studies, our multidisciplinary
team found that, not only was the evidence for endangerment
strong in 2009, but also that the evidence has increased in all
eight areas of the original finding.
We also found that there is now strong evidence of entirely
new kinds of impacts that weren't featured in the finding.
These include ocean acidification, interpersonal violence,
national security, and economic well-being.
Economic well-being represents a particular area of
increased understanding. Recent analysis shows that should
global warming continue along the current trajectory, the
majority of U.S. counties are likely to suffer economic damages
arising from impacts in areas such as labor productivity,
agricultural yields, and coastal damage.
Integrating across these sectors suggests that each 1
degree Celsius of warming is likely to result in damages
exceeding 1 percent of U.S. GDP, with poorer counties suffering
the most.
Further, in my research with Professor Marshall Burke, also
at Stanford, we found that holding global warming to 1.5
degrees Celsius could reduce cumulative economic damages in the
United States by $6 trillion, relative to the 2 degree C
target.
Across the country, we are already experiencing rising
economic costs from extreme events. In my home State of
California, we have experienced a remarkably costly series of
extremes over the past 7 years, from drought and heat waves, to
flooding and mudslides, to wildfires and smoke plumes. These
events have caused billions of dollars in damage, killed tens
of millions of trees, cost tens of thousands of jobs, left
thousands of residents without running water, and claimed
hundreds of lives. And many other parts of the country have
experienced similar impacts.
One reason that the evidence for endangerment has increased
over the past decade is that we have made tremendous strides in
understanding the influence of global warming on individual
extremes. My research shows that global warming has already
increased the odds of record-setting hot and wet events for
around 75 percent of North America, and record-setting dry
spells for more than 50 percent of North America.
The influence of global warming has also been detected in
many specific events, from the extremely hot, dry summer that
devastated crops in the Midwest in 2012, to the prolonged
California drought, to the storm surge flooding during
Hurricane Sandy, and the record-setting rainfall delivered to
Houston by Hurricane Harvey.
In the aftermath of these extremes, we are seeing inspiring
examples of how communities, companies, and State and local
governments can work together to build climate resilience. In
California, the State's climate efforts offered a roadmap that
integrates mitigation, adaptation and, quote, ``an integral
commitment to remedying past injustice,'' end quote.
In California and across the country, we are seeing
examples of how to simultaneously reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, sustain economic growth, address environmental
injustice, and invest in climate resilience for all citizens.
I applaud the committee for working to create a climate
resilient America. And I am happy to answer any questions.
[The statement of Mr. Diffenbaugh follows:]
Written Testimony of Dr. Noah S. Diffenbaugh
Kara J Foundation Professor and Kimmelman Family Senior Fellow
Stanford University
Hearing on ``Creating a Climate Resilient America''
United States House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
May 23, 2019
Good morning. Thank you Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves,
and the members of the Committee for the invitation to testify today.
My name is Noah Diffenbaugh. I am a Professor in the School of
Earth, Energy and Environmental Sciences at Stanford University, and a
Senior Fellow at Stanford's Woods Institute for the Environment. I am
appearing today in my personal capacity, not on behalf of Stanford
University.
I study Earth's climate, including how changes in regional and
local conditions--such as extreme weather events--affect people and
ecosystems. I have just completed a 4-year term as Editor-in-Chief of
Geophysical Research Letters, one of the leading peer-reviewed journals
publishing climate science research. I have been a lead author for a
number of scientific assessments, including the IPCC Fifth Assessment
Report and the California Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group.
The subject of this hearing of the Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis is ``Creating a Climate Resilient America''. The good news for
our country is that, although climate change is already impacting
Americans, there are many opportunities for us to become more
resilient, and in doing so build a more vibrant, secure, and equitable
nation.
To create a more climate resilient America, we must understand the
changing risks posed by global warming. My testimony today will focus
on the scientific evidence of those risks, including how they have
changed in response to the warming that has already happened, and how
they are likely to change in the future in response to different
greenhouse gas trajectories.
There have been many reports synthesizing the scientific knowledge
of climate change. In addition to the IPCC reports and the National
Climate Assessment--which have been summarized during previous
testimony--my colleagues and I recently evaluated the scientific
evidence \1\ from the perspective of EPA's ``Endangerment Finding'' for
greenhouse gases.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Duffy, P.B., Field, C.B., Diffenbaugh, N.S., et al., 2019.
Strengthened scientific support for the Endangerment Finding for
atmospheric greenhouse gases. Science, 363(6427), eaat5982.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you know, EPA issued the Endangerment Finding in 2009, following
the 2007 Supreme Court ruling that EPA must regulate carbon dioxide and
other greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act if those gases are found
to ``endanger the public health and welfare.'' The Finding evaluated
climate risks in eight areas: (1) public health; (2) air quality; (3)
food production and agriculture; (4) forestry; (5) water resources; (6)
sea level rise and coastal areas; (7) energy, infrastructure and
settlements; and (8) ecosystems and wildlife.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
For each of these areas, our multidisciplinary team assessed (i)
strength of evidence for a link with anthropogenic climate change, (ii)
severity of observed and projected impacts, and (iii) new risks beyond
those considered in the original Finding. Drawing upon more than 280
studies, we found that not only was the evidence for endangerment
strong in 2009, but also that the evidence has increased in all eight
of the areas considered in the Finding. Further, we found that there is
now strong evidence of entirely new kinds of impacts that were not
featured in the original Finding. These include ocean acidification,
interpersonal violence, national security, and economic wellbeing.
Economic wellbeing represents a particular area of increased
understanding. For example, recent analysis \2\ shows that should
global greenhouse gas emissions continue along the current trajectory,
the majority of US counties are likely to suffer negative economic
impacts. These include decreased labor productivity and increased crime
throughout most of the US, along with impacts from mortality, energy
expenditures, coastal damage, and/or crop yields across large swaths of
the country. Integrating across these sectors suggests that each 1+C of
warming is likely to result in damages exceeding 1% of US GDP, with
poorer counties suffering the most.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Hsiang, S., Kopp, R., Jina, A., Rising, J., Delgado, M., Mohan,
S., Rasmussen, D.J., Muir-Wood, R., Wilson, P., Oppenheimer, M. and
Larsen, K., 2017. Estimating economic damage from climate change in the
United States. Science, 356(6345), pp.1362-1369.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Work that I have published with Prof. Marshall Burke \3\ has used a
different approach, but yielded similar results: Analyzing aggregate
GDP, we found that holding global warming to 1.5+C could reduce global
economic damages by more than $20 trillion (relative to the 2+C
target), with cumulative savings to the US economy potentially totaling
$6 trillion. Further, in a new study published last month,\4\ we found
that historical global warming has negatively impacted per capita GDP
in most countries in the tropics and sub-tropics, including reductions
of as much as 25% in Central and South America (relative to a world
without global warming). Our estimates suggest that these southern
neighbors are likely to experience increased economic damages in
response to continued warming.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Burke, M., Davis, W.M. and Diffenbaugh, N.S., 2018. Large
potential reduction in economic damages under UN mitigation targets.
Nature, 557(7706), p.549-553.
\4\ Diffenbaugh, N.S. and Burke, M., 2019. Global warming has
increased global economic inequality. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 116(20), pp.9808-9813.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Here in the US, we are already experiencing rising economic costs
from extreme events. As American citizens suffer through heatwaves,
droughts, floods, hurricanes and wildfires, there is now clear evidence
that the frequency of extremes is increasing, and that the costs are
rising. In particular, the past decade has witnessed tremendous strides
in understanding the influence of global warming on individual extreme
events, such as the recent California Drought \5\ and the record-
setting Houston rainfall that occurred during Hurricane Harvey.\6\ My
research \7\ shows that global warming has already increased the odds
of record-setting hot and wet events for around 75% of North America,
and record-setting dry spells for more than 50% of North America. In
addition, the influence of global warming has now been detected in many
specific events, including heatwaves, cold snaps, heavy rainfall,
floods, droughts, and the precipitation and storm surge delivered by
tropical cyclones.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Diffenbaugh, N.S., Swain, D.L. and Touma, D., 2015.
Anthropogenic warming has increased drought risk in California.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(13), pp.3931-3936.
\6\ Emanuel, K., 2017. Assessing the present and future probability
of Hurricane Harvey's rainfall. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 114(48), pp.12681-12684.
\7\ Diffenbaugh, N.S., Singh, D. and Mankin, J.S., 2018.
Unprecedented climate events: Historical changes, aspirational targets,
and national commitments. Science advances, 4(2), eaao3354.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
In my home state of California, we have experienced an extremely
costly series of such events over the past 7 years, from drought and
heatwaves, to flooding and mudslides, to wildfires and smoke plumes.
These events have caused billions of dollars in damage, killed tens of
millions of trees, cost tens of thousands of jobs, left thousands of
residents without running water, claimed hundreds of lives, and created
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
public health emergencies throughout the state.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Many other parts of the country have experienced similar events in
recent years, from the Northeast to the Southwest, and the Gulf to the
Great Plains. In the aftermath, we are seeing inspiring examples of how
communities, companies, and state and local governments can work
together to build climate resilience. The California Climate-Safe
Infrastructure Working Group's recent report \8\ is a prime example of
a roadmap that integrates mitigation, adaptation and ``an integral
commitment to remedying past injustice''. This commitment is emerging
across California's climate efforts, which include the recently renewed
cap-and-trade policy, the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act, and
the Safeguarding California Plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group (CSIWG). 2018. Paying
it forward: The Path Toward Climate-Safe Infrastructure in California.
Report of the Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group to the
California State Legislature and the Strategic Growth Council.
Sacramento, CA: CNRA, Publication number: CNRA-CCA4-CSI-001.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although our nation faces serious risks from climate change, and
income inequality and environmental justice remain critical concerns,
we are seeing many examples around the country of how it is possible to
simultaneously reduce greenhouse gas emissions, sustain economic
growth, and invest in climate resilience for all citizens.
Climate change presents imposing challenges, but there are also
many opportunities to build a more climate resilient America. I applaud
the Committee for working on this critical issue, and I look forward to
discussing any questions that you may have.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Dr. Cleetus, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF RACHEL CLEETUS
Ms. Cleetus. Thank you.
Good morning, and thank you, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking
Member Graves, and members of the select committee. Thank you
for providing me the opportunity to testify here today.
My name is Rachel Cleetus, and I am the policy director and
the lead economist for the Climate and Energy Program at the
Union of Concerned Scientists.
I would like to start today with some research that we
released last year on the impacts of worsening tidal flooding
on coastal property in the United States. What our studies
showed is that by the end of the century, approximately 2.5
million U.S. coastal homes and commercial properties currently
worth more than $1 trillion would be at risk from chronic
flooding. And by 2045, within the lifetime of a typical
mortgage issued today, about 325,000 coastal properties worth
$136 billion are at risk. The properties at risk by 2045
contribute nearly $1.5 billion to today's property tax base,
and those numbers jump to $12 billion by 2100. States with the
most homes at risk include Florida, with 1 million homes at
risk by the end of the century; New Jersey with 250,000; and
New York with 143,000.
And the declining value of these homes, while it will be
devastating for individual homeowners, also has broad
implications for other parts of our economy, including the
affected communities, lenders, investors, and taxpayers. And we
know that communities that have fewer resources to begin with
will be the hardest hit. These include communities in
Louisiana, North Carolina, New Jersey, and Maryland, that our
research shows will be highly exposed to chronic flooding and
have higher than average poverty rates.
UCS has also developed an interactive mapping tool that
allows you to explore these risks in your congressional
districts, and we have fact sheets to go along with that.
Our research points to a choice we face: If the global
community adheres to the primary goals the Paris Agreement of
keeping warming to below 2 degrees Celsius and its land-based
ice loss is limited, the U.S. could avoid up to 85 percent of
these coastal property losses.
UCS has also analyzed the exposure of 18 military
installations along the eastern Gulf Coast to sea level rise.
In the absence of preventive measures, these sites, including
bases in Virginia, Georgia, and Florida, face major risks. By
2050, most of the installations we analyzed will see more than
10 times the number of floods they experience today. By 2100,
eight bases are at risk of losing 25 to 50 percent of their
land to rising seas. Four installations, Naval Air Station Key
West, Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Dam Neck Annex, and Parris
Island, are at risk of losing between 75 and 95 percent of
their land by the end of the century.
As Dr. Diffenbaugh pointed out, scientists have linked
Hurricane Harvey's unprecedented levels of rainfall to warmer
air and oceans caused by climate change. We did analysis in the
wake of that storm showing that more than 650 energy and
industrial facilities may have been exposed to Hurricane
Harvey's floodwaters.
In the Houston area, low-income communities and communities
of color have long been disproportionately exposed to toxic
chemicals, as local environmental justice groups like TEJAS
have pointed out. And in the hurricane's wake, we saw
floodwaters contaminated with toxic chemicals and potent
bacteria, compromised industrial facilities, toxins released
into the air, all of which magnified the public health burden
on these communities.
Climate change is making heavy rains heavier and more
frequent in many parts of the country, with human alteration of
the land, including engineering of rivers, and increased
construction in flood plains. Many parts of the U.S. are at
greater risk of destructive and costly floods. This spring
alone has brought terrible flooding to many parts of the
country, including Louisiana, Texas, the Midwest, and all along
the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers. NOAA data confirmed that
at the end of April 2019, the U.S. has just experienced the
wettest 12 months on record.
Climate projections show that these conditions are likely
to grow worse in many parts of the country in the decades
ahead. The Fourth National Climate Assessment also highlights
many ways in which climate change is going to contribute to
worsening health risks, including through extreme heat events,
flooding, wildfires, intensifying storms, and other events,
which can contribute to poor air quality, heat-related
illnesses, water and vector-borne diseases, mental illnesses
associated with stress and trauma.
And in many cases, socioeconomic and environmental factors
can exacerbate the vulnerability of specific populations,
including the elderly, the very young, outdoor workers and
athletes, many tribal communities and communities of color, and
people who live in poverty.
These grave risks require an urgent response from the
Federal, State, and local policymakers, as well as the private
sector, to better protect communities and build resilience.
Broadly, we need to make sure that these risks are being better
communicated and taken into account in our policies and
programs, everything from FEMA and HUD programs to what is
happening at the local level in terms of building codes and
zoning codes. We need to make sure that robust expeditious
funding of disaster assistance flows quickly to hard-hit
communities in a way that builds resilience to future events.
We need bold and visionary leadership. We need resources
for adaptation, investments and coordination, governance,
stakeholder engagement. And our Nation's resilience efforts
must prioritize the needs of those who will be
disproportionately exposed to these risks.
Most importantly, we must make deep cuts in heat-trapping
emissions and contribute to global efforts to limit climate
change. Every fraction of a degree we can avoid matters in
terms of the climate impacts we will face.
Adaptation is costly, and there are limits to how much
change we can adapt to. Transitioning to a low-carbon economy
by investing in renewables and efficiency and other low and
zero carbon options reaching that zero carbon emissions by mid
century will not only help address climate change, it will
deliver tremendous near-term public health and economic
benefits.
Ms. Castor. Dr. Cleetus----
Ms. Cleetus. In closing, I am here today both as a climate
expert and as a mom. I have two young children aged 11 and 13,
and like many of you with young people in your lives, I am
acutely aware that the choices we make today, choices that you
and Congress are uniquely empowered to help make, will be
deeply consequential to their future. I hope we will seize this
opportunity to make their future generations prosper without
fear of runaway climate change.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The statement of Ms. Cleetus follows:]
Written Testimony of Dr. Rachel Cleetus, Policy Director, Climate and
Energy Program
Union of Concerned Scientists
``Creating a Climate Resilient America''
House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
May 23, 2019
Hello and thank you, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and
Members of the Select Committee, for providing me the opportunity to
testify here today. My name is Rachel Cleetus. I am the policy director
and lead economist for the climate and energy program at the Union of
Concerned Scientists. I am here today to share my perspectives on the
impacts of climate change, particularly on coastal communities, and
some vital, urgent steps our nation must take to limit the harms coming
our way.
impacts of sea level rise on coastal property
I'd like to start with some research my colleagues and I have been
doing on the impacts of sea level rise to coastal communities. Our
research shows that long before rising seas permanently submerge
properties, millions of Americans living in coastal communities will
face more frequent and disruptive high-tide flooding. Last year we
released a report showing that, by the end of the century, under a high
sea level rise scenario (which I will use throughout this testimony
unless otherwise indicated),\1\ approximately 2.5 million US coastal
homes and commercial properties currently worth more than $1 trillion
would be at risk from chronic flooding--a threshold we defined as
flooding that occurs 26 times per year or more. By 2045, within the
lifetime of a typical mortgage issued today, about 325,000 coastal
properties worth $136 billion will be at risk of chronic flooding (see
figures 1 and 2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The high scenario, which is drawn from the 2014 National
Climate Assessment, assumes rapid ice sheet loss and projects a global
average sea level rise of 6.6 feet (2.0 m) above 1992 levels by the end
of this century. This scenario is considered most applicable in
situations with a low tolerance for risk. This makes it most suitable
for estimating the scale of risk to residential properties, which
typically represent a homeowner's greatest single asset. For more on
our data and methodology, please see: https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/
default/files/attach/2018/06/underwater-analysis-full-report.pdf and
https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2018/06/underwater-
analysis-technical-backgrounder.pdf.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The properties at risk by 2045 currently house 550,000 people and
contribute nearly $1.5 billion toward today's property tax base. Those
numbers jump to about 4.7 million people and $12 billion by 2100 (see
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
figure 3).
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
States with the most homes at risk by the end of the century are
Florida, with about 1 million homes (more than 10% of the state's
current residential properties); New Jersey, with 250,000 homes; and
New York with 143,000 homes.
The declining value of coastal homes will be damaging, even
devastating, to individual homeowners. It will also have more
widespread consequences, including for affected communities, lenders,
investors, and taxpayers. Falling property values mean reduced local
tax revenue from those properties. Our calculations show that in about
120 communities along US coasts, the properties that would be at-risk
in 2045 currently represent a full 20 percent or more of the local
property tax base. Many coastal residents, whether they own homes or
not, would be affected as property tax bases shrink, which typically
leads to reduced services or tax hikes for remaining taxpayers. This
could prevent cities and towns from fully funding schools, emergency
services, and the maintenance and new construction of infrastructure--
including critical adaptation measures that could help protect homes,
businesses, and infrastructure itself from chronic flooding. Access to
additional capital for such projects depends on a municipality's credit
rating; its credit rating depends on its financial health and degree of
risk exposure, both of which are compromised as chronic flooding
worsens. Mortgages on homes that could be chronically flooded during
the term of the loan are inherently riskier, exposing lenders to
losses.
Communities with fewer resources to start with, or that are
otherwise disadvantaged, will likely be most heavily affected by
chronic flooding and its accompanying financial losses. Nearly 175
communities nationwide can expect significant chronic flooding by 2045,
with 10 percent or more of their housing stock at risk. Of those,
nearly 40 percent--or 67 communities--currently have poverty levels
above the national average. The largest share of these is in Louisiana,
where there are 25 communities with above-average poverty rates and
with 10 percent or more of the homes at risk by 2045. Louisiana is not
the only state where poverty and exposure to chronic inundation
intersect to create a hotspot of heightened risk. North Carolina, New
Jersey, and Maryland also have significant numbers of highly exposed
communities with above-average rates of poverty (see Figure 4). Within
the next 30 years, about a dozen such communities along Maryland's
eastern shore are projected to have one-third or more of their property
tax base at risk.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
These results do not include future development or new homes, nor
do they include the impacts on critical infrastructure such as roads,
bridges, power plants, airports, ports, public buildings, and military
bases that will also be in harm's way. When all of these are taken
together, the effects of chronic flooding could have staggering
economic impacts.
UCS also developed an interactive map tool that lets you explore
the risk sea level rise poses to homes in your congressional district
and provides district-specific fact sheets about those risks.\2\ What
our maps show is that rising seas will begin to reshape many coastal
communities in the coming decades, in some cases quite drastically.
Communities need representatives in Congress who will advocate for the
research, funding, and policies needed to help them cope with sea level
rise and coastal flooding head-on. In some cases, that will include
help with relocation to safer ground.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Interactive map, data and fact sheets for all coastal
Congressional districts in the
lower 48 states available here: https://ucsusa.maps.arcgis.com/apps/
MapJournal/index.html?appid=b53e9dd7a85a44488466e1a38de87601.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our research also points to the choices we face: If the global
community adheres to the primary goal of the Paris Agreement of capping
warming below 2+C, and with limited loss of land-based ice, by the end
of the century the United States could avoid losing residential
properties that are currently valued at $780 billion, contribute $10
billion annually in property tax revenue, and house 4.1 million people.
impacts of sea level rise on rail infrastructure
We also used our data and methodology to assess the risks of
chronic flooding to Amtrak's Northeast corridor route between Boston
and Washington, one of the most heavily travelled rail routes in our
nation. Our maps were used in a Bloomberg story on this subject, Rising
Waters Are Drowning Amtrak's Northeast Corridor.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2018-amtrak-sea-level/.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Many parts of the Northeast Corridor rail route are at risk of
chronic flooding starting by 2060, including sections near Wilmington,
Delaware, and throughout Connecticut, New Jersey, and New York (see
figure 5). Current preparation efforts fall far short of these
realities.
impacts of sea level rise on u.s. military bases
UCS has also analyzed the exposure of 18 military installations
along the East and Gulf coasts to more frequent and extensive tidal
flooding, land loss as some areas flood with daily high tides, and
deeper and more extensive storm surge inundation.\4\ In the absence of
preventive measures, these sites, including bases in Virginia, Georgia
and Florida face major risks:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.ucsusa.org/global-warming/science-and-impacts/
impacts/sea-level-rise-flooding-us-military-bases.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By 2050, most of the installations we analyzed will see
more than 10 times the number of floods they experience today.
By 2070, half of the sites could experience 520 or more
flood events annually--the equivalent of more than one flood daily.
By 2100, eight bases are at risk of losing 25 percent to
50 percent or more of their land to rising seas.
Four installations--Naval Air Station Key West, Joint Base
Langley-Eustis, Dam Neck Annex, and Parris Island--are at risk of
losing between 75 and 95 percent of their land by the end of this
century (see figure 6).
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
flooding and exposure to toxics during hurricane harvey
Hurricane Harvey's unprecedented levels of rainfall--which
scientists have linked to warmer air and oceans caused by climate
change \5\--exacted a huge toll on the residents of Texas and
Louisiana. In the wake of this storm, UCS analysis showed that more
than 650 energy and industrial facilities may have been exposed to
Hurricane Harvey's floodwaters.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Risser, M.D. and M. F. Wehner. 2017. Attributable Human-Induced
Changes in the Likelihood and Magnitude of the Observed Extreme
Precipitation during Hurricane Harvey. Geophysical Research Letters.
Volume 44, Issue24 28 December 2017 Pages 12,457-12,464. https://
doi.org/10.1002/2017GL075888. Trenberth, K. E., Cheng, L., Jacobs, P.,
Zhang, Y., & Fasullo, J. (2018). Hurricane Harvey links to ocean heat
content and climate change adaptation. Earth's Future, 6. https://
doi.org/10.1029/ 2018EF000825.
\6\ https://blog.ucsusa.org/kristy-dahl/flooded-by-hurricane-
harvey-new-map-shows-energy-industrial-and-superfund-sites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To highlight these facilities, the Union of Concerned Scientists
developed an interactive tool showing affected sites. The tool relies
on satellite data analyzed by the Dartmouth Flood Observatory to map
the extent of Harvey's floodwaters, and facility-level data from the US
Energy Information Administration and the Environmental Protection
Agency.
The tool includes several types of energy infrastructure
(refineries, LNG import/export and petroleum product terminals, power
plants, and natural gas processing plants), as well as wastewater
treatment plants and three types of chemical facilities identified by
the EPA (Toxic Release Inventory sites, Risk Management Plan sites, and
Superfund sites).
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Gulf Coast is home to a vast chemical industry. The EPA's Toxic
Release Inventory (TRI) program lists over 4,500 facilities in Texas
and Louisiana alone that are required to report chemical releases to
the environment.
Before the storm hit, many facilities shut down preemptively,
releasing toxic chemicals in the process. In the wake of the storm,
explosions at Arkema's Crosby facility highlighted the risks that
flooding and power failures pose to the region's chemical facilities
and, by extension, the health of the surrounding population.
In the Houston area, low-income communities and communities of
color are disproportionately exposed to toxic chemicals. Our analysis
shows that over 160 TRI facilities, at least seven Superfund sites, and
over 30 facilities registered with EPA's Risk Management Program were
potentially exposed to floodwaters. The number of flooded Superfund
sites may be even higher than the map shows, as indicated by
preliminary reports from the EPA and other sources.
Though most of the impacts from this exposure remain unknown, the
risks include compromised facilities and the release of toxins into the
air and receding floodwaters.
Energy infrastructure
In the week after Hurricane Harvey reached the Texas coast,
disruptions to the region's energy infrastructure caused gas prices to
rise nationally by more than 20 percent. Our analysis found that more
than 40 energy facilities may have been exposed to flooding,
potentially contributing to disruptions in operations.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Wastewater treatment infrastructure
Wastewater treatment facilities comprised the bulk of the
facilities (nearly 430) that we identified as potentially exposed to
flooding. The EPA monitored the quality and functionality of water
systems throughout the region and reported that more than half of the
wastewater treatment plants in the area were fully operational as of
September 3, roughly nine days after the storm made landfall.
With floodwaters widely reported as being contaminated with toxic
chemicals and potent bacteria, wastewater treatment facilities were
likely contending with both facility-level flooding and a heightened
need to ensure the potability of treated water.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
growing risks from inland flooding
Climate change is also shifting rainfall patterns, making heavy
rain heavier and more frequent in many areas of the country. With human
alteration of the land--like the engineering of rivers, the destruction
of natural protective systems, increased construction on floodplains,
and increased area of impermeable surface--many parts of the United
States are at greater risk of experiencing destructive and costly
floods.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2018/07/gw-
fact-sheet-epif.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This spring alone has brought extended flooding to many parts of
the country, including Louisiana, Texas, the Midwest and the central
part of the country along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers. NOAA
data confirm that (at the end of April 2019) the US has just
experienced the wettest 12 months on record.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
This\ \record-breaking flooding has washed out roads and bridges in
many places, sometimes for days on end, making it difficult for people
to travel safely to work and school.\9\ In Nebraska alone, the flooding
caused an estimated $100 million in damage to the state's highway
system.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/temp-and-precip/us-maps/1/201904#us-
maps-select.
\9\ https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2019/05/10/really-
genuinely-scary-torrential-rain-houston-strands-cars-leaves-thousands-
without-power/?utm--term=.9612e14621c9.
https://kfor.com/2019/05/08/odot-several-highways-closed-due-to-
flooding-across-the-state/.
https://www.wxyz.com/getting-around-metro-detroit/flooding-across-
metro-detroit-closes-several-roads-highways.
\10\ https://dot.nebraska.gov/news-media/nebraska-flood-2019/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rail lines in Nebraska and Missouri were shut down for weeks.\11\
Businesses that rely on safe and reliable transportation have also been
affected.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.grainnet.com/article/166508/transportation-
impacts-of-midwest-flooding.
https://www.freightwaves.com/news/railroad/rail-volumes-drop-for-
march-30.
\12\ https://www.mprnews.org/story/2019/04/21/flooding-roundup-
communities-weary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A growing body of evidence has linked specific extreme rainfall
events to human-caused climate change. The record-breaking rainfall
during Hurricane Harvey that brought devastating flooding to Houston,
for example, was made about three (1.5-5) times more likely and around
15% (8-19%) more intense because of human-caused climate change.\13\
Human-caused climate change also made the devastating rains in
Louisiana in 2016--in which more than two feet of rain fell in a two-
day period--more likely. A study of that particular event concluded
that such downpours are expected to occur 40 percent more often and be
10 percent more intense now than they were before the Industrial
Revolution.\14\ Projections of future climate suggest that the
frequency and intensity of extreme precipitation events will continue
to increase across much of the United States in the coming decades.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ van Oldenborgh, G.J., K. van der Wiel, A. Sebastian, R. Singh,
J. Arrighi, F. Otto, K. Haustein, S. Li, G. Vecchi, and H. Cullen.
2017a. Attribution of extreme rainfall from Hurricane Harvey, August
2017. Environmental Research Letters 12(12):1-11. doi:10.1088/1748-
9326/aa9ef2.
\14\ van der Weil, K., S.B. Kapnick, G.J. van Oldenborgh, K. Whan ,
S. Philip, G.A. Vecchi, R.K. Singh, J. Arrighi , and H. Cullen. 2017.
Rapid attribution of the August 2016 flood-inducing extreme
precipitation in south Louisiana to climate change. Hydrol. Earth Syst.
Sci., 21, 897-921, 2017 www.hydrol-earth-syst-sci.net/21/897/2017/
doi:10.5194/hess-21-897-2017. Online at https://www.hydrol-earth-syst-
sci.net/21/897/2017/hess-21-897-2017.pdf.
\15\ Easterling, D.R., K.E. Kunkel, J.R. Arnold, T. Knutson, A.N.
LeGrande, L.R. Leung, R.S. Vose, D.E. Waliser, and M.F. Wehner. 2017.
Precipitation change in the United States. In Climate science special
report: Fourth national climate assessment, volume 1, fourth edition,
edited by D.J. Wuebbles, D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C.
Stewart, and T.K. Maycock. Washington, DC: US Global Change Research
Program, 207-230. doi:10.7930/J0H993CC.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2012. Summary for
policymakers. In Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to
advance climate change adaptation: Summary for policymakers, edited by
C.B. Field, V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi,
M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and
P.M. Midgley. Cambridge, UK, 1-19. Online at http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/
special-reports/srex/SREX_FD_SPM_final.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
water, wastewater and septic systems at risk from climate change
Rising sea levels and extreme storms are also making water,
wastewater and septic tank systems more prone to damage or failure,
including in coastal Florida, North Carolina, South Carolina and
Maryland. Studies show that tidal flooding, storm surges, heavy
rainfall, and saltwater intrusion pose risks to coastal infrastructure,
human health and the environment, and efforts to address these
challenges could cost billions of dollars.\16 17 18 19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ T.R. Allen, T. Crawford, B. Montz. 2018. Linking Water
Infrastructure, Public Health, and Sea Level Rise: Integrated
Assessment of Flood Resilience in Coastal Cities. Public works
management and policy. Vol 24, Issue 1, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1087724X18798380.
\17\ Septic systems vulnerable to sea level rise. November 2018.
Final Report in support of Resolution No. R-911-16. By the Miami-Dade
County Department of Regulatory & Economic Resources, Miami-Dade County
Water and Sewer Department & Florida Department of Health in Miami-Dade
County.
\18\ Mihaly, E. 2018. Avoiding Septic Shock: How Climate Change Can
Cause Septic System Failure and Whether New England States are
Prepared. Ocean and Coastal Law Journal Volume 23, Number 1 Article 2
January 2018. https://digitalcommons.mainelaw.maine.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1359&context=oclj
\19\ Harris, A. A $3 billion problem: Miami--Dade's septic tanks
are already failing due to sea rise. Miami Herald, January 10, 2019.
https://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/environment/
article224132115.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
public health impacts of climate change
Climate change will have profound effects on human health. See
Figure 8 for a conceptual diagram from the National Climate Assessment
illustrating the exposre pathways by which climate change could effect
human health.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Drawing from the National Climate Assessment, I highlight here some
major health implications of climate change: \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ See Chapter 14: Human Health in the Fourth National Climate
Assessment, and references therein. Online at https://
nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/14/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
High temperatures in the summer are conclusively linked to
an increased risk of a range of illnesses and death, particularly among
older adults, pregnant women, and children. Studies show that other
vulnerable populations include low-income households especially those
in urban areas, outdoor workers, athletes, those with pre-existing
health conditions, the homeless and the incarcerated.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ See Union of Concerned Scientists. 2018. Heat Waves and
Climate Change: What the Science Tells us about extreme heat Events.
Online at https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2018/08/
extreme-heat-science-fact-sheet.pdf; Union of Concerned Scientists.
2018. Health Risks and Impacts of Extreme Heat. Online at https://
www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2018/08/extreme-heat-impacts-
fact-sheet.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Climate change is expected to alter the geographic range,
seasonal distribution, and abundance of disease vectors, exposing more
people in North America to ticks that carry Lyme disease or other
bacterial and viral agents, and to mosquitoes that transmit West Nile,
chikungunya, dengue, and Zika viruses.
Increasing water temperatures associated with climate
change are projected to alter the seasonality of growth and the
geographic range of harmful algae and coastal pathogens, and runoff
from more frequent and intense rainfall is projected to increasingly
compromise recreational waters and sources of drinking water through
increased introductions of pathogens and toxic algal blooms. Research
has shown that a combination of warming waters and increased rainfall
bringing excess nutrients into freshwater lakes and rivers could lead
to an increase in algal blooms that pose threats to humans and marine
life, as well as affect water supplies and recreational activities.\22\
In the summer of 2018, a massive algal bloom affected over 100 miles
along the Gulf Coast in southwestern Florida, and the widespread
release of associated neurotoxins led to massive die offs of fish and
other marine species. Algal blooms have also affected the Great Lakes.\
23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ https://www.climate.gov/news-features/event-tracker/harmful-
algal-blooms-linger-parts-southern-florida-july-and-august-2018.
Chapra, S.C.; Boehlert, B.; Fant, C.; Bierman Jr., V.J.; Henderson, J.;
Mills, D.; Mas, D.M.L.; Rennels, L.; Jantarasami, L.; Martinich, J.;
Strzepek, K.M.; & Paerl, H.W. (2017). ``Climate change impacts on
harmful algal blooms in U.S. freshwaters: a screening level
assessment.'' Environmental Science and Technology 51, 8933-8943
(2016). Paerl, Hans W., and Valerie J. Paul. ``Climate change: Links to
global expansion of harmful cyanobacteria.'' Water res. 46, 1349-1363
(2012).
\23\ See, for example: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/capital-
weather-gang/wp/2018/08/14/how-climate-change-is-making-red-tide-algal-
blooms-even-worse/?utm_term=.820a42b60d02.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Projected increases in extreme precipitation and flooding,
combined with inadequate water and sewer infrastructure, can contribute
to viral and bacterial contamination from combined sewage overflows and
a lack of access to potable drinking water, increasing exposure to
pathogens that lead to gastrointestinal illness.
Climate change, including rising temperatures and changes
in some extreme weather and climate events, can adversely affect global
and U.S. food security by, for example, threatening food safety (by
altering exposures to certain pathogens and toxins), disrupting food
availability, decreasing access to food, and increasing food prices.
Food quality also is expected to be affected by rising CO2
concentrations that decrease dietary iron, zinc, protein, and other
macro- and micronutrients in crops and seafood.
Mental health consequences, ranging from minimal stress
and distress symptoms to clinical disorders, such as anxiety,
depression, post-traumatic stress, and suicidality, can result from
exposures to short-lived or prolonged climate- or weather-related
events and their health consequences. These mental health impacts can
interact with other health, social, and environmental stressors to
diminish an individual's well-being. Some groups are more vulnerable
than others, including the elderly, pregnant women, people with
preexisting mental illness, the economically disadvantaged, tribal and
Indigenous communities, and first responders.
Additionally, the Lancet Countdown on health and climate change
provides an independent, global monitoring system dedicated to tracking
the health dimensions of the impacts of, and the response to, climate
change and includes a special brief for the United States.\24 25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Watts, N. et al. 2018. The 2018 report of the Lancet Countdown
on Health and Climate Change: Shaping the health of nations for
centuries to come. Online at https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(18)32594-7/fulltext.
\25\ Lancet Countdown, 2018: 2018 Lancet Countdown on Health and
Climate Change Brief for the United State of America. Salas RN,
Knappenberger P, Hess JJ. Lancet Countdown U.S. Brief, London, United
Kingdom, 32 pp Online at http://www.lancetcountdown.org/media/1426/
2018-lancet-countdown-policy-brief-usa.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
responding to climate change
The grave risks climate change poses to our nation require an
urgent response from federal, state and local policymakers, as well as
market actors, to help protect communities and build resilience.
Important priorities for resilience include:
The federal government must play a lead role in
communicating risks to the public and incorporating those risks into
its own policies and actions. Flood-risk disclosure in the marketplace
is also vital to help individuals and businesses understand the risks
to their investments and drive more resilient outcomes.
We must fund post-disaster recovery adequately and in an
expeditious way so that aid can flow to hard-hit communities quickly
and equitably, and in a way that helps build resilience to future
events.
Post-disaster investments should be made with a view to
reducing future risks through a range of protective measures, including
home buyouts and investments in flood-proofing measures, particularly
in low to middle income communities and as appropriate, a requirement
for adequate insurance coverage.
We have to get out ahead of risks and not just respond in
the aftermath of disasters, by ramping up investments in FEMA's pre-
disaster hazard mitigation grants--including the Building Resilient
Infrastructure and Communities (BRIC) program \26\--and flood
mitigation assistance programs, and the community development block
grant program administered by the US Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD). Research shows that every $1 invested can save the
nation $6 in future disaster costs.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Under the recently passed Disaster Recovery Reform Act (DRRA),
this grant program will be funded through the Disaster Relief Fund as a
six percent set aside from estimated disaster grant expenditures.
\27\ Multihazard Mitigation Council. 2018. Natural Hazard
Mitigation Saves: 2018 Interim Report. Principal Investigator Porter,
K.; co-Principal Investigators Scawthorn, C.; Huyck, C.; Investigators:
Eguchi, R., Hu, Z.; Reeder, A; Schneider, P., Director, MMC. National
Institute of Building Sciences, Washington, D.C. www.nibs.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The National Flood Insurance Program requires commonsense
reforms to the program to ensure that it more effectively maps and
communicates all types of current and future flood risks, protects and
insures communities in an equitable way, and promotes better floodplain
management.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ https://blog.ucsusa.org/rachel-cleetus/congress-must-extend-
and-reform-the-national-flood-insurance-program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A robust federal flood risk management standard would help
protect vital federally funded infrastructure, ensure wise use of
taxpayer dollars, and set a valuable guidepost for communities.
Federal, state and local resources will be necessary to
cope with and prepare for the health impacts of climate change.
Congress should set up a diverse and inclusive expert
advisory body to provide guidance on infrastructure that not only
accounts for climate change but historic injustices as well, by
targeting investments in underserved and marginalized communities.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Union of Concerned Scientists. 2019. Building Equitable,
Clean, and Climate-Safe Infrastructure. Online at https://
www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2019/03/climate-resilient-
infrastructure-fact-sheet.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Strengthened state and local building and zoning
regulations--as well as coastal zone management regulations that
protect wetlands, barrier islands, and other natural systems that
reduce flood impacts--are needed to ensure flood-smart development
Increased funding for voluntary home buyout programs
administered by FEMA and HUD can also help homeowners move to safer
locations. Communities in high-risk areas may also increasingly need
relocation grants and technical assistance. Correspondingly,
communities receiving an influx of new residents may need financial
resources.
Banks, insurers, real estate investors, developers, and
other major financial actors in coastal areas should establish
guidelines and standards to incorporate the risks of sea level rise in
their business models, thus better serving the long-term economic
interests of their clients.
Most importantly, we must make deep cuts in heat-trapping emissions
to contribute to global efforts to limit climate change. Adaptation is
costly, and there are limits to how much change we can adapt to, so we
need to do our utmost to also mitigate carbon emissions with the goal
of limiting the resilience gap for communities (see figure 13).
Transitioning to a low-carbon economy--by investing in renewable
energy, energy efficiency and other low-and zero-carbon energy
options--and reaching net zero carbon emissions by mid-century would
not only help address climate change, it will deliver tremendous near-
term public health and economic benefits.\30\ Contributing to global
efforts, including by helping developing countries make a low-carbon
energy transition and cope with and build resilience to the impacts of
climate change, is also vital.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Watts, N. et al. 2018. The 2018 report of the Lancet Countdown
on Health and Climate Change: Shaping the health of nations for
centuries to come. Online at https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(18)32594-7/fulltext.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
closing
In closing, I am here today both as an expert who has studied these
issues for a long time, and as a Mom. I have two young children who are
11 and 13 years old. Like many of you with young people in your lives,
I am acutely aware that the choices we make today--choices that you in
Congress are uniquely empowered to help make--will be deeply
consequential to their future. I hope we will seize the opportunity to
leave our children and grandchildren a world where they can prosper
without fear of runaway climate change. Thank you for this opportunity
to testify and for your leadership on climate action.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Hodges, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF KEITH HODGES
Mr. Hodges. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and
members of the select committee. My name is Keith Hodges, and I
represent the 98th District in the Virginia House of Delegates,
located in the heart of Virginia's rural coastal region. I also
have the distinct pleasure of serving as the co-chair for the
Virginia General Assembly Joint Commission on Coastal Flooding,
and serve as a member of the General Assembly State Water
Commission.
I am here today to paint a picture, a picture of the real
impacts coastal flooding is having on our rural suburban and
urban areas of the commonwealth. My constituents are already
feeling the impacts. One of the smallest localities in my
district and in the Commonwealth, Mathews County, has just
9,000 people, but has already suffered $65 million loss of land
value directly and indirectly due to flooding. The loss of land
impacts--not only impacts the property owners, but means less
tax revenue is available for critical public services such as
police, fire, and schools.
I will also outline the challenges we face in mitigating
the effect of water, the layers of government regulations that
stand in between property owners and their ability to protect
themselves, and the innovative solutions being developed to
address it; solutions that ultimately could be applied in any
coastal region in the Nation.
We can all agree that the Commonwealth's signature water
quality protection legislation, the Chesapeake Bay Preservation
Act, dating back to the late 1980s, was needed and is
responsible for the significant improvements that have made
over time, the cleanup of our most important waterways on the
East Coast.
A large portion of the Preservation Act regulated the
riparian areas, generally where the tidal wetlands and the
upland areas converge. It was written to protect the natural
spaces around the waterways, preventing overdevelopment, and
protecting water quality. That was on paper. But in reality, a
great deal of those areas are peoples' yards. It is where
peoples' lives are. It is where they grill out. It is their
homes. It is their sense of place. That is where we are seeing
the flooding. And that is where we are seeing layer upon layer
of additional government regulations.
There is a disconnect between where the laws are, laws that
prevents any sort of resiliency efforts being done, and where
the people live. It is important to note here that many of
these laws were intended to manage water running off from a
higher elevation, the land, and into the lower elevation, the
sea. It never realized that we could be facing water coming
from a lower elevation to a higher elevation, bringing the
river into people's yards. It doesn't make it right. It doesn't
make it wrong. It is just reality.
We have identified 23 laws and regulations that protect
water quality. While well intended, they are also holding us
back. In the Commonwealth of Virginia, specifically in the
rural coastal Virginia, we have been studying ways to both
adhere to the spirit of the Preservation Act and other
regulations and the goals to maintain water quality, while also
helping property owners protect their homes, localities protect
their tax base and promote resiliency.
It started with looking at legislation and regulations in a
more wholistic and innovative way. We found ways to help
property owners, residential and commercial, installing living
shorelines, proven to help water quality, resiliency, and
providing the funding and insurance to bring them to reality.
We are building shorelines that are bigger, that are wider, and
that are taller.
We have addressed storm water legislation and equalized the
cost for developers building in rural versus urban areas. We
have created ways through the Virginia Waterway Maintenance
Fund to give localities more options to use dredge materials
for resiliency efforts. We are looking at how to ensure risk
more properly and creatively; that is, ensuring nature-based
flood mitigation strategies.
And we are fighting the flood with a new campaign set to
launch this year where we are bringing together a consumer need
for solutions with the marketplace. We are connecting them
together and making it cheaper for property owners to protect
themselves.
Perhaps most innovatively, we are also leveraging
intellectual capital around the issue. Thanks to the GO
Virginia legislation, we have funded a project to study ways to
harness and focus that intellectual capital. Water goes
everywhere. It doesn't discriminate whether you are rural,
suburban, or urban. We have opted to look at it as an asset,
not a liability. We are looking at it as a relationship versus
something that is detrimental. We are reframing the way we
approach water management.
When you reframe the way you approach water management, you
can come at it from a more wholistic, economic perspective. You
can create jobs and you can protect livelihoods. We are not
sitting back and complaining about the problem. We are looking
at it as something that is not going away. We are creating an
opportunity. The opportunity requires us all to work together
to address the challenges, to find the innovative solutions
from here in Washington, to Richmond, and the localities where
constituents live, where they work, and where they play.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this important
issue here today and for helping us all see that working
together will benefit us all. As they say, a rising tide lifts
all ships.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The statement of Mr. Hodges follows:]
Testimony of Delegate Keith Hodges
Virginia House of Delegates, 98th District
House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
``Creating a Climate Resilient America''
May 23, 2019
Good Morning Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and the
members of the Select Committee. My name is Keith Hodges and I
represent the 98th District, located in the heart of rural coastal
Virginia, in the Virginia House of Delegates. I also have the distinct
pleasure of serving as the Co-Chair for the Virginia General Assembly
Joint Subcommittee on Coastal Flooding and serve as a member of the
General Assembly State Water Commission.
I am here today to paint a picture of the real impacts coastal
flooding is having on our rural, suburban and urban areas of the
Commonwealth. My constituents are already feeling the impacts. One of
the smallest localities in my district--Mathews County--has just 9,000
people but has already suffered a $65 million dollar loss of land value
directly and indirectly due to flooding. The loss of land value impacts
not only property owners, but means less tax revenue is available for
critical public services such as police, fire, and schools.
I will also outline the challenges we face in mitigating the effect
of water, the layers of government regulations that stand in between
property owners and their ability to protect themselves, and the
innovative solutions being developed to address it--solutions that
ultimately could be applied in any coastal region of the nation.
We can all agree that the Commonwealth's signature water quality
protection legislation--the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, dating
back to the late 1980s--was needed and is responsible for the
significant improvements that have been made over time to the clean-up
of our most important waterways on the East Coast.
A large part of the preservation part of the act regulated the
riparian areas, generally where the tidal wetlands and the uplands
converge.
It was written to protect the natural spaces around the waterways,
preventing over development and protecting water quality.
That was on paper.
But in reality, a great deal of those areas are people's yards.
It's where people's lives are. Where they grill out. It's their homes.
Their sense of place.
That's where we're seeing flooding. And that's where we're seeing
layers upon layers of additional government regulations.
There is a disconnect between where the laws are--laws that
prevents any sort of resiliency efforts being done--and where people
live.
It's important to note here, that many of these laws were intended
to manage water running off from a higher elevation--land--and into a
lower elevation--the sea. It never realized that we would be facing
water coming from a lower elevation to a higher elevation--bringing the
rivers into people's yards.
Doesn't make it right. Doesn't make it wrong. It's just reality.
But these 23 laws and regulations that protect water quality, while
well intended, are also holding us back.
In the Commonwealth of Virginia--specifically in rural coastal
Virginia--we have been studying ways to both adhere to the spirit of
the Preservation Act and other regulations and the goals to maintain
water quality, while also helping property owners protect their homes,
localities protect their tax base and promote resiliency.
It's started with looking at legislation and regulations in a more
holistic and innovative way.
We've found ways to help property owners--residential and
commercial--install Living Shorelines, proven to help with water
quality and resiliency, and provided the funding and insurance to bring
them to reality. We're building shorelines that are more robust--
bigger, wider, taller.
We've addressed stormwater legislation, and equalized the cost for
developers building in rural vs urban areas.
We've created ways--through the Virginia Waterway Maintenance
Fund--to give localities more options to use dredged materials for
resiliency efforts.
We are looking at how you insure risk more properly, and
creatively--that is, insuring nature based flood mitigation strategies.
And we are fighting the flood with a new campaign set to launch
this year, where we are bringing together the consumer need for
solutions with the marketplace. We're connecting them together and
making it cheaper for property owners to protect themselves.
Perhaps most innovatively, we're also leveraging intellectual
capital around this issue. Thanks to the Virginia Growth and
Opportunity Fund, we have funded a project to study ways to harness and
focus that intellectual capital.
Water goes everywhere.
It doesn't discriminate whether you are rural, suburban or urban.
We have opted to look at it as an asset, not a liability.
We are looking at it as a relationship verses something that is
detrimental.
We are reframing the way we approach water management.
When you reframe the way you approach water management, you can
come at it from a more holistic economic perspective. You can create
jobs. You can protect livelihoods.
We're not sitting back and complaining about the problem.
We're looking at it as something that's not going away.
We're creating opportunity.
That opportunity requires us all to work together to address the
challenges, to find the innovative solutions, from here in Washington,
to Richmond and all the localities where our constituents live, work
and play.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this important issue here
today, and for helping us all see that working together will benefit us
all.
As they say, a rising tide lifts all ships.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Russell, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF MATT RUSSELL
Mr. Russell. Good morning. Chair Castor, Ranking Member
Graves, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity
to talk about the opportunities and challenges for American
farmers in our climate crisis. I am a fifth generation Iowa
farmer, executive director of the Iowa Interfaith Power and
Light, and we are an organization who works with Iowans to find
and implement faith-based solutions to climate change. It is an
honor to testify this morning on behalf of American farmers.
A partial solution to the global climate crisis is right in
front of us, if we just have the courage to embrace it. This
solution will also help us clean our air and water, save our
soils, stabilize our rural communities and our food system.
That solution is to pay farmers for environmental services when
we sequester carbon. Doing so will revolutionize both
agriculture and environmental policy. These policies should no
longer be in opposition. They should complement each other in
strategic ways. Costs will be pennies per meal in the short
run, but actually, this is not a cost at all. It is an
investment in our children and grandchildren's future.
We can help solve global warming by unleashing the power of
American farmers to solve problems. It is what we do.
Regardless where you are in America, if you are a farmer, on a
daily basis you solve problems. When the rain is coming and the
hay is down and the bailer is broken, you are underneath of it
fixing it. If you are in the orchard and you are dealing with
disease, we solve problems.
The question today isn't do you believe in climate change.
The question is, do you believe in American farmers, in our
ability to innovate when confronted with major challenges. By
including agriculture in this hearing, it is clear this
committee wants to start investing in American farmers.
Paying farmers to capture carbon is an effective way to
slow climate change and make our farmers more resilient to
extreme weather. Carbon farming will also increase
productivity, build soil, improve air and water quality, and
increase economic opportunity in our rural communities.
At Iowa Interfaith Power and Light, we are gathering
farmers in church basements to talk about climate action. These
farmers are ready to help solve climate change. They point out
the current combination of public policy and markets creates a
situation where farmers investing in better conservation and
stewardship actually carry a greater burden of risk than
farmers who are willing to shortchange long-term stewardship
for short-term profits.
In the face of these distorted policy and market signals,
more and more farmers are ready to help tackle this climate
crisis. Last century, the population bomb was the greatest
challenge facing humanity. American farmers led the revolution
that helped solve this problem. Our parents and grandparents
partnered with researchers and agri-business to increase
productivity that, not only delivered enough food, but lowered
the cost of that food.
The green revolution not only prevented a global disaster,
it unleashed global growth that dramatically increased the
quality and length of life for every human all throughout the
world.
We are at a similar pivotal moment in history. We are
facing a catastrophic crisis. American farmers can again lead
the world into a future that is even more abundant than our
past. We have a mountain of research, powerful technological
tools, and pioneering farmers across the country already
starting to manage their farms to not only produce the goods
the world demands, but to provide the environmental services
this crisis requires.
To do this, we must partner with the rest of America to
leverage smart public policy and develop effective markets to
reward innovation on our farms. Here are some ways you can help
farmers lead the next agricultural revolution.
Work with farmers to develop public policy that encourages
farmer and market-led solutions to--for climate action.
American farmers, we are at our best when we yoke smart public
policy and the power of capitalism. As the world begins to put
a price on carbon, let's make sure American farmers can claim
some of the value of what we do on our farms when providing
climate change mitigation services.
Embrace the opportunities climate action holds for rural
development. Rural America is where energy is produced and
agricultural products are grown. Every farmer in every part of
this country can benefit from helping solve the climate crisis.
Rethink the politics of climate. If resources remain
focused on the politics, we all lose. But if we bring the very
best Democratic ideas and the very best Republican ideas
together, we can--our rural communities will be more resilient
to extreme weather, can hold onto the value of capturing
carbon, and can generate clean energy.
Everyone says we need bipartisan solutions; incentivizing
farmers to lead on climate action is an opportunity to make
that happen. Investing in American farmers is hands down one of
the fastest and most effective ways for climate action.
Thank you for your time.
[The statement of Mr. Russell follows:]
Written Testimony of Matt Russell
Executive Director, Iowa Interfaith Power & Light
Hearing on ``Creating a Climate Resilient America''
United States House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
May 23, 2019
Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of this committee,
thank you for the opportunity to speak about the challenges and
opportunities for American farmers in the midst of our climate crisis.
As a 5th generation Iowa farmer, member of multiple farm organizations,
and the executive director of Iowa Interfaith Power and Light, an
organization working to help Iowans find and implement faith-based
solutions to climate change, it's a tremendous honor and great
responsibility to testify on behalf of American farmers.
A partial solution to the global climate crisis is right in front
of us--we just have to have the courage to embrace it. This solution to
rising CO2 levels will also help us clean our water and air, save our
soils, and stabilize our food system and rural economies. That solution
is to pay farmers for environmental services they render in building
soil health and sequestering carbon. Doing so will revolutionize both
agricultural and environmental policy. Unlike the current
configuration, these policies should no longer be in opposition--they
should complement each other in strategic ways. Costs will be pennies
per meal for the short term--but actually, it isn't a cost at all. It's
an investment. It's an investment in our children and grandchildren's
future.
We must start believing in American farmers. We can solve global
warming by unleashing the power of American farmers to solve problems.
It's what we do on a daily basis. Regardless what we're producing on
our own farms, we're all managing complex systems. We survive because
we're masters at solving problems. The question today isn't ``do you
believe in climate change.'' The question is do you believe in American
farmers and their ability to innovate when confronted with major
challenges?
This committee is answering that question with a profound yes! By
the very nature of including agriculture in this hearing, it's clear
this committee wants to start investing in and empowering American
farmers.
On American farms, being more resilient to extreme weather and
mitigating global warming by reducing greenhouse gas pollution and
capturing carbon, can be the same thing, two sides of the same coin.
Paying farmers to capture carbon, to develop carbon farming, is an
effective way to slow climate change and make our farms more resilient
to increasingly extreme weather.
Carbon farming can increase productivity, build soil, improve air
and water quality, and increase economic opportunities in our rural
communities. This committee can help American farmers lead on climate
action and to work with us to develop the incentives that reward us
when we do.
At Iowa Interfaith Power and Light, we're gathering farmers in
church basements to talk about how their faith calls them to embrace
climate action on their farms. These farmers, mostly conventional
commodity and livestock farmers, are ready to act on climate change.
They point out the current combination of public policy and markets
creates a situation where farmers investing in better conservation and
environmental stewardship carry a greater burden of risk than farmers
who are willing to shortchange long term stewardship for short term
profit. Despite these current distorted policy and market signals, and
contrary to conventional wisdom, we're proving more and more farmers
are ready to help solve this climate crisis. We farmers recognize that
like our parents and grandparents before us, we must innovate on our
farms to provide what the world demands.
Last century, the population bomb was one of the greatest
challenges facing humanity. American farmers led the revolution that
helped solve this problem. Our parents and grandparents innovated and
partnered with researchers and agri-business to unleash increased
productivity that not only delivered enough food, but lowered the cost
of that food. The Green Revolution not only prevented a global
disaster, it unleashed global growth that dramatically increased the
quality and length of human life touching every corner of the world.
We're at a similar, pivotal moment in human history. We are facing
a catastrophic crisis; the greatest crisis humans have ever faced.
American farmers can again lead the world through this crisis and into
a future that is even more abundant than our past. We have a mountain
of scientific research, powerful technological tools, and pioneering
and innovative farmers across the country already starting to manage
their farms to not only produce the goods the world demands, but to
provide the environmental services this crisis requires.
There are no silver bullets for adapting to or mitigating climate
change. American farmers understand complex systems and how to produce
multiple benefits. We're ready to embrace the call to innovate on our
farms to not only capture carbon and reduce emissions but to also
increase productivity, build soil, improve air and water quality, and
increase economic opportunities in our rural communities. What's
missing is the call for our leadership and an investment in our
innovation. That's what this committee can do. Call American farmers to
lead on climate action and to work with us to develop the incentives
that reward us when we do. If American farmers are going to lead the
next agricultural revolution, we must partner with the rest of America
to leverage smart public policy and develop effective markets to reward
innovation on our farms.
As a committee, here are some ways you can help farmers and rural
Americans lead the next agricultural revolution.
Work with farmers to develop smart public policy for farmer and
market led climate action. American farmers are at our best when we
yoke smart public policy with the power of capitalism. As the world
begins to put a price on carbon, let's make sure American farmers can
claim some of the value of what we do on our farms when providing
climate change mitigation services.
Embrace the opportunities climate action holds for rural
development. One of the greatest strengths of American agriculture is
that it's still made up of families managing small businesses. One
reason American agriculture can move faster and more effectively than
agriculture in some other parts of the world, is that the vast majority
of land is still owned by individual Americans. Help unleash the power
of capitalism to reward these entrepreneurs for developing the small
businesses that can help defeat the climate crisis. Every farmer and
every rural landowner in every state in the country can potentially
benefit from helping solve the climate crisis. Rural America is where
energy is generated and agricultural products are grown. That won't
change as we transition into a clean energy economy. Let's make sure we
empower farmers and rural Americans to reap the rewards as we make this
transition.
Rethink the politics of climate action. If resources remain focused
on the politics, we all lose. But if we encourage farmers and rural
Americans to bring the very best Democratic ideas and the very best
Republican ideas together, our rural communities will be more resilient
to extreme weather and can hold onto the value of capturing carbon.
Everyone says we need bipartisan solutions. Incentivizing farmers and
rural communities to lead on climate action is an opportunity to make
that happen.
The things farmers need to do to adapt to extreme weather are the
very same things they need to do to develop carbon farming to help
mitigate the climate crisis. The world has a limited time for climate
action. America has to invest in expedient and cost-effective efforts
to reduce emissions and capture carbon. Investing in American farmers
is hands down one of the fastest and most effective ways for climate
action. No other group of Americans is more threatened by climate
change than farmers and at the same time more capable of providing
solutions to help solve this climate crisis. We need your courage, and
your leadership to fashion climate legislation that includes a robust
section to pay farmers for performance-based agriculture and ecosystem
services. American farmers, rural communities, our country, and the
entire world is depending on your leadership.
Ms. Castor. Well, thanks to all of our witnesses for your
very compelling testimony.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Well, Mr. Russell, you caught my attention when you were
talking about the dual benefits of climate action when it comes
to our farmers across this country. And you highlighted some
ways that we can reduce carbon pollution while supporting our
agricultural economy, dual benefits, because we don't have time
to go backwards. And we have to do these things, yes, in the
short term, because while America, we have made progress on
reducing carbon pollution, unfortunately, in 2018 our emissions
went up. And as we have heard in our previous hearing, the U.S.
and the world need to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050
to avoid catastrophic climate impacts.
So get a little more specific even than what you
highlighted there at the end of your testimony on what we can
do to encourage, incentivize farmers to help us reduce carbon
pollution. And then talk about how this translates to American
consumers and our food system here in the United States.
Mr. Russell. Yeah. I will try to be brief in a general
overview. Essentially, in the fossil fuel economy, we have used
fossil fuels to do amazing things, and the green revolution was
one of those. And we have used that to kind of force nature to
do some particular things, and that was very successful. But in
this new economy that we are moving into as a response to
climate change, we have to think about how we farm differently.
So instead of forcing nature to do particular things, we
have to work with nature to come up with the benefits that we
need. And this doesn't mean throwing out our agriculture
systems. It means leaning into what we already have. So we have
the policy tools to do this. Our farmers understand this and
are already trying to--and our land grant universities are
diving into this. But we have to unleash the power for them to
do that and signal to them that we are going to support this
more. Essentially, it means taking agricultural systems and
stacking a number of environmental services.
There are really five things that farmers can do across the
country. It doesn't matter what kind of farm you are on. It is
conservation tillage. How do we till the land as least as
possible? Permaculture, how do we have something growing all
the time? Cover crops is a big thing in the Midwest, is a
category there. Integrating livestock into our agricultural
systems. Managed grazing is a big piece of that, but it is all
kinds of integrating, pork, poultry, dairy, all the livestock.
How do we integrate that so that we are increasing the
biological activity in the soil. We need to extend our crop
rotations. So we have to add new crops into the mix.
I think I got all four of them there. And the fifth thing
then is renewable energy.
And so when you stack all of those things together, it
makes our rural economy, our farmers more resilient to the
extreme weather, because soils can hold water when it rains and
have water stored when it is dry. But it also then captures
carbon and provides a service. So we can't do one or the
other--I mean, we can, but we are not going to get the
benefits. We do it at the same time, and we incentivize farmers
and we partner with the research scientists. We can lead this
like no other place on the planet. And if we don't, other
farm--other agricultural systems in other parts of the world
are going to do this in the next decade. It is ours to lose if
we don't.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Dr. Cleetus, the Union of Concerned Scientists has done
fantastic work on measuring the impacts of climate on our
coastal communities. I am very sensitive to this, representing
a coastal district in Florida. And I see the cost burden going
up and up and up for the folks I represent in my State, whether
it is flood insurance, property insurance, what local
communities are having to do with fixing storm water and
wastewater. I mean, the list goes on and on.
But I want to shift here. One of the things we don't talk
about are the rising costs relating to public health due to
climate. Could you go into greater detail there on solutions
for us moving forward?
Ms. Cleetus. Sure. As I mentioned, the National Climate
Assessment has pointed out the multiple ways in which climate
change is already affecting health and will do so in the
future. To take just one example, extreme heat events, which
are getting worse, and they are now affecting parts of country
that weren't affected before.
So what is really important in this moment is, first of
all, that we need to understand what the climate trends are
already showing and what the risks are coming our way. We need
to identify vulnerable populations. I mentioned several in my
testimony, including the elderly, the very young, people with
preexisting medical conditions, outdoor workers, homeless
people, incarcerated people, first responders. We need to
identify these vulnerable populations and where they are in the
country and make sure that we have got early warning systems in
place, that our healthcare systems have the resources to deal
with the consequences of these extreme events and the health
outcomes that they will have.
That means actually having a holistic picture. We are
dealing with climate change, but we are also talking about
healthcare systems, and doing these things together,
mainstreaming climate resilience across the board is the call
of the hour.
We need better coordination from the Federal to the local
level, Health and Human Services, CDC, EPA, NOAA, agencies
working together at the Federal level helping at the local
level. We have also got to understand that in some of these
coastal places, we will have displaced population----
Ms. Castor. I may need you to continue when you are
answering another question, because I have got to recognize the
ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Cleetus. Sure.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
I want to thank you again for your testimony.
Mr. Russell, fifth generation farmer. Certainly, lots of
history there. Would you agree that over those generations with
improvements in fertilizers and other techniques, that there
has been an increase in yield per acre of different
agricultural products?
Mr. Russell. Absolutely. That is why I was talking about
the green revolution. We did that immensely.
Mr. Graves. And which has helped out the United States, but
countries all over the world. And so what is your--your
recommendation is, which I think makes a lot of sense, is to
basically incentivize farmers to innovate to help improve sort
of the biogenic environment or the natural environment's
ability to sync. And Delegate Hodges actually mentioned the
engineered oyster reefs, which is another sink for greenhouse
gases.
There is a tax provision that was included called 45Q that
does provide a tax credit under certain circumstances for
carbon sequestration. And, basically, what you are saying is
that should also apply to farmers and to incentivize them to
carry out practices that does increase the uptake of greenhouse
gases or sequestration. Is that----
Mr. Russell. Yeah. And I am not extremely familiar with
that tax credit, but that is exactly the type of solutions that
we need for farmers to have access to.
Mr. Graves. That is great. And I think that there is a role
for incentivizing, again, the biogenic environment, whether it
be through farmers or finding other techniques, but also
recognizing that the use of fertilizers, which is very natural
gas heavy, there is a complementary relationship. You can find
ways to sink while still increasing yield and you kind of get a
win-win.
Dr. Diffenbaugh--did I get that right? Thank you.--I want
to make sure that I understand a few things. Number one, based
on earlier opening statement and comments from previous expert
witnesses, you do agree that there is momentum built up in the
greenhouse gas concentrations to where if we cut all emissions
from the United States today, we would still see increases in
temperature and sea rise and things along those lines?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. Yeah. I actually published a paper in 2012
running exactly that thought experiment of what if, not only
the U.S., but all of the OECD countries, cut emissions
instantaneously.
Mr. Graves. So there is no regrets for us carrying out
resiliency activities right now. I mean, those are things that
no matter what we do with our emissions profile, those are no
regrets investments in helping to improve the resiliency of our
coastal communities and communities all over the United States.
Is that accurate?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. Yes. I think there are two key points. One
is that resilience can be a win-win, as we have heard
throughout the morning, that there are opportunities both to
manage climate risks, both by managing our greenhouse gas
trajectory and by becoming--catching up with the climate change
that is already happened and becoming more prepared for the
climate change that will happen in the future.
Mr. Graves. So if you look back between 2005 and 2017, the
United States has reduced emissions by somewhere just under 1
gigaton; whereas during a similar period of time, and I think
moving forward toward--during a similar period of time, I
think, and I need to go back and check this, but I think China
increased their emissions by, I want to say, maybe four or five
times what the U.S. reduced theirs by. Under Paris, by 2030,
they are expected to increase another 5 gigatons.
So the U.S. is taking these aggressive efforts to cut
emissions while other countries are increasing emissions
multiple times, we are not headed in the right direction, are
we, in regard to trying to head off this mitigation challenge
that we are experiencing, meaning that we are going to end up
with net temperature increases, with net sea rise, and things
along those lines, if the U.S. is reducing and other countries
are significantly increasing emissions? Is that accurate?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. So we know because of the fundamental
physics of planet Earth, the basic energy balance of planet
Earth, that in order to stabilize the global temperature at any
level, that essentially requires reaching net zero emissions.
And as was mentioned earlier, reaching net zero by mid century
gives about a 50 percent chance of staying below 2 degrees C.
Mr. Graves. Net zero means everybody, though, is my point;
is that we can't just come to the United States and stop all
emissions and have other countries more than offset the
emissions we are reducing by increasing their emissions and
having any type of environmental--positive environmental
outcome.
Mr. Diffenbaugh. So net zero is a global requirement for
the global energy balance. It is important to keep in mind that
we have had about 1 degree Celsius of global warming already.
The U.S. has contributed about a quarter of the emissions that
have, you know, led to that warming historically. And, in
fact----
Mr. Graves. But if China is increasing fivefold what we are
reducing, where----
Mr. Diffenbaugh. But if we look--if we look at the total--
if we look at the total cumulative emissions historically, the
U.S.----
Mr. Graves. Is there something we can do about historic
emissions or can we only do things about prospective emissions?
We can carry out some of the activities, like Mr. Russell
indicated and Delegate Hodges indicated, to sequester carbon,
but in terms of--we can't do things about--otherwise about
emissions that have already been released. We have got to look
forward.
So having China on a trajectory of quadrupling what we are
reducing isn't the right direction that we need to be heading
in.
Mr. Diffenbaugh. So we are dealing now with the emissions
that have already been released in that we are paying out year
after year in the cost of climate change that we are living
with right now. And as I said in my opening statement, we have
opportunities to manage those risks by simultaneously managing
our emissions and increasing our resilience.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Lujan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. And I want to
thank our chair and our ranking member for holding this
hearing.
Dr. Diffenbaugh, yes or no, should the United States take
action to reduce emissions?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. The question of should is a question for
elected officials such as yourself.
Mr. Lujan. Dr. Diffenbaugh, must the United States take
action to reduce emissions?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. In order to stabilize the global
temperature, the global----
Mr. Lujan. That is not a yes or no.
Let's move on to the next one. I will submit it to you in
writing, that way we can get a thorough response.
Dr. Cleetus, should the United States take action to reduce
emissions?
Ms. Cleetus. Yes. As part of the global effort to limit
climate change, the United States and the----
Mr. Lujan. Yes or no is fine. Thank you.
Delegate Hodges, yes or no, should the United States take
action to reduce emissions?
Mr. Hodges. In a market-based approach.
Mr. Lujan. Is that a yes?
Mr. Hodges. Yes. In a market-based approach.
Mr. Lujan. At least you qualified it, but that is a yes. I
appreciate that.
Mr. Russell, should the United States take action to reduce
emissions?
Mr. Russell. Absolutely.
Mr. Lujan. I was getting lost on that last exchange of
should we or shouldn't we or where should we go. I think that
we must take action on resiliency and that the United States
must take immediate action to reduce emissions. The two go hand
in hand. If any of you are concerned about rising sea levels,
it is not just about the action we take now; it is about the
actions we take forward. This is not a complicated question.
And so I hope that that provides a little bit of content and
context to at least where I stand on the issue. I appreciate
the testimony today.
In New Mexico, we are experiencing extreme weather as a
result of climate change as well. For generations, summer
monsoons and winter snowpack provided New Mexico communities
with the water they needed to thrive, even during times of
drought.
This last year, we had a flood in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
that some described as a 1,000-year episode. The year before, a
flood that was described as a 500-year episode. And when we
talk about the importance of resiliency, and also for all my
colleagues that represent coastal communities, there weren't
programs to help those families that experienced those episodes
as well.
I think that as we talk about resiliency and making sure
that we are able to work with families, that we take into
consideration areas like New Mexico, where we sit in the high
desert and are drought-prone, where wildfire may be more likely
than a flood, but 2 years in a row of 500-year and 1,000-year
episodes are very concerning.
To Mr. Russell, you said that every farmer in every part of
the country should have access to these programs. Does that
include farmers who maybe farm on an acre or two?
Mr. Russell. Yeah. To be clear, when we are bringing
farmers into basements in churches and we are leading with what
is your faith calling you to respond with your farm, most of
those farms are conventional commodity and livestock farms,
6,000, 6,500 acres. But we have had a few farmers in that room
that do have like a couple of acres of produce. So that is the
mix in Iowa. But it is in every part of this country.
If you are managing your farm so that at the end of the
day--or at end of the year you have a net balance of less--like
more carbon on your farm and less emissions, your balance is
negative, we as taxpayers should be paying you for those
services because that is what the world is demanding. And so
every farmer in the country is going to manage their own system
with that metric.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Russell, let me ask the question a little
differently. In Iowa, you have some of the largest farms in
America.
Mr. Russell. Yeah.
Mr. Lujan. There are a lot of programs that help the
largest producers in the country where most food is produced.
You also have farmers that raise in a basement or on an acre of
land. Should those farmers that raise crops in their basement
or, in my case, in New Mexico, most farmers raise crops on an
acre of land, should those farmers also be included in the
programs as we talk about the goals associated with carbon
capture and what farmers can achieve?
Mr. Russell. Right now, a lot of our programs are practice
based. So if you follow the--we need to shift to a performance
base, so if on my farm I can show, it doesn't matter what size
my farm is, that I am delivering, I should qualify.
Mr. Lujan. I am interpreting that as a yes.
Mr. Russell. Absolutely, yes.
Mr. Lujan. Just a straight answer. We have only got 5
minutes here.
Dr. Diffenbaugh, does the Stanford Woods Institute for the
Environment have any papers that you published on the
importance of reducing emissions in America, even though you
are here in your personal capacity?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. I have published a number of papers
quantifying the differential impacts at different levels of
emissions.
Mr. Lujan. And do any of those documents include the need
to call for action on reducing emissions?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. I am unaware in my peer-reviewed
scientific writings or in my public op-ed writings of any time
in which I have stated that----
Mr. Lujan. I will go back and read them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Palmer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Just to clarify the record, we are not suggesting that the
United States not reduce its carbon emissions. We are leading
the world in that area. The fact of the matter is, and some of
you may disagree--Madam Chairman, the clock is not on, not that
I don't mind talking as long as I can----
Ms. Castor. Got it.
Mr. Palmer. All right. Time change.
What was my point? Oh, that we are leading the world in
reducing carbon emissions. There are also other factors that
impact the weather. I mean, I know you are all expert
scientists, but what about the shift in the magnetic poles and
the potential for impacting weather. Anyone want to comment on
that? Probably not.
Mr. Russell. No, I am happy to comment on that.
Mr. Palmer. Alright.
Mr. Russell. I mean, we have seen across the State talking
to farmers over the last decade, 15 years, that--you know, we
first started talking about extreme weather, we wouldn't talk
about climate change, but we talked about extreme weather. And
then we came up with a lot of natural cycles to lean into. And
we are now believing increasingly that those natural cycles
exist, but that something else is happening that is really
radically different. And we are ready to start leaning into
fixing those things we can fix. We can't fix the magnetic
field, but we can fix carbon, and it does have a profound
effect on our farms.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I am glad you mentioned the natural
cycles, because I think it is becoming more and more apparent
that natural variation is having a greater impact on climate
change than carbon emissions. That doesn't mean that carbon
emissions don't have an impact. They do, they certainly do.
But in terms of resiliency, and I thought that is what we
were here to talk about, adaptation and mitigation, we need to
be preparing for what we know we cannot stop. I mean, they shut
down the Tampa airport not too long ago because of the shift in
the magnetic fields, and they are shifting at an unprecedented
rate. I think it is, like, 30 miles per day. You have that,
combined with the solar activity, and our magnetic fields
protect the Earth from those cosmic rays which impact our
weather, as do ocean currents, changes in ocean currents. And
we need to be focused on how do we protect ourselves from that.
These events will cause sea level rise. We heard someone
mention 500-year floods, 1,000-year floods. There is a reason
we talk about 500-year floods and 1,000-year floods, is that we
have had massive floods throughout the history of the world.
Climate has a history.
So I think when you talk about this, if you put all of your
focus just on reducing carbon emissions and we don't take into
account these other events that are taking place, we are going
to find ourselves in a really bad place.
You want to comment on that, Doctor.
Mr. Diffenbaugh. Yeah. So I think, as you may have gathered
from my recent exchange with Congressman Lujan, I am pretty
conservative in my statements. In this question of whether the
contribution of natural variability, the contribution of solar
forcing, the contribution of human forcing, my work is
extremely conservative. The work in my community is extremely
conservative. Our null hypothesis is that when an extreme event
happens, it was due to random chance and that global warming
had no role. We are extremely conservative, both in terms of
our intellectual framework and in terms of our statistical
treatment.
So our statistical treatment is beyond a reasonable doubt,
statistically, and we need very, very, very high confidence in
order to reject a null hypothesis that it wasn't--the null
hypothesis being that it was random chance.
It is very difficult to move us off of that position, and
the reality is that even with that level of conservativism, we
still find that for severe heat events, as I mentioned earlier,
more than 75 percent of North America, the scales have already
been tipped towards record-breaking heat events, record-
breaking wet events, at half of North America, record-breaking
dry events. And that is even within the framework of being
extremely conservative.
Mr. Palmer. I find that interesting. You are in California,
right?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. Correct.
Mr. Palmer. And our temperature records only go back so
far, but yet we have record evidence of major droughts that far
exceed the droughts that California has experienced in the last
75 to 100 years. The same thing of the southwestern part of the
United States. And again, climate has a history. And my point
is, is that we know that climate is changing. It always
changes. We are in an interglacial period.
Mr. Diffenbaugh. So for California, there have been--and
the broader western U.S.--there have been many, many, many
studies analyzing, not only the instrumental record that goes
back around a century, but these geologic proxy records that
you are mentioning. And, in fact, the California drought
actually was an unprecedented event in those proxy records that
we have available to us, in terms of the combination of low
precipitation and high temperature.
Mr. Palmer. Just one last point. In terms of mitigation/
adaptation, California had the opportunity to expand their
reservoirs and didn't, and you got about 40 million people
using water, which I think really makes a drought situation
much more difficult.
I thank you, Madam Chairman. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Ms. Brownley, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Diffenbaugh, I wanted to also ask you, you talked about
wildfires in California. I am from California. I represent
Ventura County. Over the last 14 months, the entire county has
burned through two very significant fires, Thomas Fire and
Woolsey Fire. If we do nothing, everything stays the same and
we move forward. Can you describe what wildfires look like if
nothing changes?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. Yes. We have very strong evidence that
global warming has already increased the risk of wildfire in
the western United States. And, in fact, about half of the
increase in area burned has been attributed to that drying of
the vegetation from the rising temperature. And we certainly
are seeing, as you know very, very well, and your constituents,
clearly, sadly know very well, we are experiencing the impacts
of that global warming that has already happened. We also have
very strong evidence that if emissions continue, we will
continue to experience intensification of that wildfire risk.
Ms. Brownley. Does that mean more fires, more frequent
fires? What does that mean exactly?
Mr. Diffenbaugh. Well, so I think we can expect
continuation of the trends in areas burned. So what we are
hearing very clearly from Cal Fire is that, one, they no longer
consider there to be a wildfire season. It is a year-round
phenomenon. Two, they are experiencing fires that expand faster
and are more difficult to control. And those are key
contributors to the increase in the area burned. Three, the--
because of the elevated risk across the State and across the
region, our old systems of deployment, the planning, the
resource allocation throughout the year and in different
geographic regions is no longer durable. And we certainly saw
that very tragically this last autumn season where having both,
you know, those severe fires in both northern California and
southern California simultaneously that late in the year made
it, frankly, impossible to contain those fires until they were
very, very large.
So I think that we have very strong evidence that, at a
minimum, we can expect continuation of the recent trends, which
have been very steep. And, you know, our current research is
focused on understanding whether there could be processes that
accelerate those trends even further.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Dr. Cleetus, you talked about, in your testimony, with
regards to coastal flooding will exacerbate income inequality.
If you could talk a little bit more about that.
Ms. Cleetus. Well, as I pointed out, our research is
showing there is a lot of coastal property at risk from chronic
flooding, but it is not just property, right. There is a lot of
things in the way, including infrastructure, critical
infrastructure that people depend on. For many people, their
home is their single biggest asset, and this matters even more
for low-income and fixed-income folks if they lose property.
Local property tax bases getting eroded has a tremendous effect
on the ability to fund local services that people depend on,
emergency services, social services.
So there is a spiraling effect. As properties get affected,
other things start to--the domino effect starts to play in. And
in some places, like in coastal Louisiana and Maryland, many
people are going to be displaced by this flooding. They already
are being displaced as land gets lost. So especially for low-
income folks, communities of color that have had historic
burdens, this means that the effect will be even more magnified
on them.
Ms. Brownley. I have a very large Naval base in my
district, it is coastal, very important to our national
security. Could you speak to impacts on national security?
Ms. Cleetus. Absolutely. Our research is showing that there
are a lot of military installations around the country that are
at risk from flooding, coastal installations. And we know that
the U.S. military takes this threat seriously. They understand
that, both here in the U.S. and around the world, their mission
critical readiness depends on preparing for these impacts. For
example, naval station Norfolk is doing a lot to help prepare
for these impacts. We have seen reports from DOD on climate
resilience. They are also investing heavily in renewable
energy, because they understand that that is also critical for
their mission.
And the community surrounding the bases are also being
affected. And we have seen that with the hurricanes that we
have seen with Michael and Florence last year, terrible
hurricanes, terrible impacts on U.S. military installations.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Griffith, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much. And I appreciate our
witnesses being here today.
Delegate Hodges, good to see you. And greetings from
Congress to the oldest legislative body to have continuously
met and have been elected in the world, the Virginia House of
Delegates, formerly the House of Burgesses. And while Virginia
hasn't always gotten it right and there is certainly some
really large, bad things we have done, one of things we did was
to bring elected representative government to the new world.
And would you please tell the members of the committee, with
the exception of former delegate and State senator Don
McEachin, who already knows, exactly how old is the Virginia
legislature?
Mr. Hodges. Let's see. Well, actually, it dates back to the
House of Burgesses. And let's see, 1689, I believe.
Mr. Griffith. 1619, so this is the 400th year of its
celebration.
Mr. Hodges. Oh, I should know. That is right across the
river too.
Mr. Griffith. You talked about Gwynn's Island.
Mr. Hodges. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. And, of course, it is an interesting--Mathews
County in Gwynn's Island is an interesting area. And there was
a book recently written about the men who fought in World War
II, because they all knew the water so well because the roads
weren't as good as the waterways to get around.
You talked about regulations that were affecting the
ability of Virginia to respond to the water rise and the
increased water rising. Can you give us some more detail on
that, because you only had 5 minutes?
Mr. Hodges. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And the
Hodges man in Mathews County, no relation that I know of, but
that is who it was about.
We have identified 23 laws and regulations passed 50 years
going back to the Clean Water Act through ENS, storm water, the
Chesapeake Bay Act; septic. All of these programs had a well-
intended purpose: protect our waterways and protect our water
quality. But what we found is, over the years, we didn't intend
for sea level rise and things changing.
And everything that we are working on flooding and chairing
that flood commission, those barriers are in place to get
results. We can study everything, but unless you can get that
wall that government has put in place--government is here
looking at solutions today, but also, government is our largest
barrier.
Mr. Griffith. So are you saying, Delegate, that in order to
protect some of these areas from flooding, you need to build a
wall, but first you have to tear down the wall of regulation
that prevents you from protecting land from being flooded?
Mr. Hodges. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. So what we need to do is--are you asking us
to do a comprehensive review of the laws to make sure that what
we thought was going to be water flowing into the waterways is
now water flowing onto the land, and to make sure that we
haven't created any improper barriers that would prevent you as
a State legislator from protecting the people in your district?
Mr. Hodges. Yes, sir. I like to say, if we had an eraser
and could start from scratch, how would you build this program
that still protects water quality, that protects our property
owners, and looks at long-term effects of the flooding? All of
these laws and regulations are intertwined. And, unfortunately,
our government, they think in silos and it creates a huge
barrier and permitting process, and headaches for landowners.
And we have to find a way to tear down that wall and do a
comprehensive review. We can build a better mousetrap at a
lower cost and help business and property owners.
Mr. Griffith. So no matter why the seas are rising, they
are rising, and you want to make sure you can protect your
people that you represent in the coast of Virginia.
Mr. Hodges. Yes, sir, definitely. Number one priority.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Appreciate it. And then, you know,
one of the big concerns, and we have heard several of the folks
already mention, is that a lot of the pollutants that we are
worried about, you know, coming in the future are coming from
overseas. And we all share the air. In fact, there is a
wonderful study that NASA did. They followed a sandstorm from
the middle of the Gobi Desert, and it took 10 days to get to
the eastern shore of Virginia.
So what they are doing with, you know, carbon emissions in
Asia only takes 10 days, maybe India is 11 or 12, to get to the
United States. And so if we are not careful, we are going to
ship all of our jobs off to Asia because we said you can't do
anything here. And we are going to end up with the air
pollution and the CO2 anyway. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Hodges. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. And so we need to look at things in creative
ways. Mr. Russell brought up the farming, and some organic
farming folks in my district say that a lot of the practices
they use help capture more carbon than the more industrialized
farming. I think that is probably true, and we should find ways
to encourage that.
Mr. Hodges. And if I may, Mr. Congressman.
Mr. Griffith. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hodges. We are all actually at a market-based approach.
Chairing the Rappahannock River Basin Comission, we have been
able to quantify the value of forestry as a water quality
initiative, and forestry also helps protect with flooding. And
through a market-based approach in quantifying that, we had 4.3
billion metric tons of carbon sequestration in Virginia
forestry, but it was unable to get it to the marketplace so we
have come up with a solution.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Mr. McEachin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And, again, I want to echo Congressman Griffith's
sentiments and welcome Delegate Hodges to the other side of the
Potomac.
Mr. Hodges. Good to see you.
Mr. McEachin. I hope you will take a moment to come to the
House floor and see the joke of a mace that we have. Only those
of us who have served in the Virginia legislature can
understand what we are talking about, but I hope you will take
a moment to do that.
On a more serious note, though, to the extent that you have
identified regulations that are not allowing you to, or us in
Virginia, to combat sea level rise, I invite you to send to my
office suggested changes. And I mean that sincerely and
seriously. Get your executive director to jot down some notes
and let us take a peek at it and, copy Morgan on it too so he
will keep me honest.
Mr. Russell, I would like to ask you--I know we have gone
over this a couple of times through different members, but I
think we are all struggling for us to try to see, for you to
put clothes on this notion of paying farmers to sequester
carbon. I think it is a great idea, sounds great. I am a big
believer in creation care. I want to invite you to share with
us with more specificity what that looks like. Are we talking
about a tax credit or are we talking literally a payment? What
does it look like to you at least?
Mr. Russell. Well, thank you for the question. We have the
most robust toolkit in this country around agriculture than any
other place on the planet, any other country. The history of
our land grants, the USDA programs. So I am not going to
advocate a specific thing today but more a directional
approach. We already have the tools in place, so how do we
complement good public policy that creates incentives with
markets?
And so in terms of capturing carbon, right now, we have in
our farm programs a lot of practice-based programs. If you do
this, check, you get a cost share. But in the future, it looks
like the signals are that there is going to be a monetization
of carbon. There is going to be some kind of market.
Congratulations to California for already moving in that
direction and for inviting farmers to participate in that
market. That is where we are headed.
So how do we position American farmers to lead that and
then participate in it?
And so when Secretary Northey left Iowa as Secretary of
Agriculture and went to become Under Secretary of programs, I
was talking with him and talking about this opportunity. And he
said, Matt, how could we pilot something like this in the farm
bill? Right. So an example would be, if I can show on my whole
farm that I am essentially a negative carbon balance, I am
pulling more carbon out than I am releasing, then can I get a
higher crop insurance subsidy? In other words, can the
taxpayers reward me for that performance-based effort? That is
just one example. The farm bill is loaded with opportunities.
And collectively and creatively, when we put farmers in a
leadership position helping drive and understand that policy,
what we can do is the same kind of transformation that happened
from horses to tractors. And I live on a farm that was built in
the 1930s, and we have got a barn with five stalls for draft
horses. That farm bet on horses in the future, and they were
wrong. We went to tractors.
Right now, when we keep everything the same, we are betting
on horses, when the future is telling us we are headed to
tractors. And tractors are monetized carbon, carbon markets,
paying people for solutions to solve this problem.
And to Representative Palmer's point, excellent; I agree
100 percent. We can't just do resiliency and we can't just do
carbon cap; we have to do both together. And the fortunate
thing for agriculture is when we capture carbon, we actually
become more resilient. It is a twofer. And we have the tools in
our farm programs already to adjust and develop. And we have
farmers who are so capable of solving problems if we invite
them in to do this, in the next decade, we can--it is not a
transformation of agriculture that throws out everything we
have got. It is a transformation of agriculture that builds on
everything we have.
When we increase the organic matter in our soils from 2
percent in Iowa up to 5 percent, we go from 200 bushel corn to
300 bushel corn with half the added nitrogen. That is the
future, that is the promise.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mrs. Miller, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you all for
being here today.
Mr. Russell, in 1992, we bought a farm. In 1994, we bought
five female and one bull American bison. I as a legislator
learned how to deal with chicken litter. As a farmer, I learned
how to deal with buffalo litter. And I agree with many of the
things you say, because farmers do solve problems. One of the
problems was when the government thought multiflora roses would
be a wonderful fence, and they have been a terrible thing to
deal with.
Delegate Hodges, welcome, from the other Virginia. I
represent West Virginia. And we are geographically challenged
in an entirely different way than you are. Our folks, as they
moved west, settled along the rivers. Some of them did go to
the top of the mountains, but most of the population was along
the rivers. And we have had to deal with a lot of flooding.
Dr. Cleetus, I am a mother and a grandmother and very
concerned with our climate and the environment that we give to
our children and our grandchildren. The policies and the
programs you talk about make us realize that this issue is
multipronged. It isn't just one area. It encompasses many
people, many areas. And I know what bad policy and what
unintended consequences can do to devastate whole communities.
Dr. Diffenbaugh, I recently read an article in The New York
Times that states that China, in their northern province,
Shandong, is releasing CFC-11, which is really bad for the
ozone. And from the Montreal Protocol, all of that was supposed
to be finished; maybe mid century, there would be nothing left.
And this is really a bad thing for our climate.
So I want you to know that we are dealing with many
different types of problems, as some of the other Congress
people have mentioned, in dealing with the ozone and with our
environments. So I just want people to realize that things are
happening out there in the world that directly affect all of
us.
But we are here to talk about resilience, and so I want to
talk about what happened in my area recently. We have been
having a lot of flooding. In 2016, it devastated several
different counties in my district. There were three schools in
Nicholas County, West Virginia, which, in my district, totally
were destroyed. The flood damage was terrible, the impact on
these three schools.
When you think about schools in rural America, they are
your community. They are the center of everything that happens.
It is not only a place of learning, but it is a community hub.
And it is now 2019, and we are still trying to find out what
went wrong and review the assessment needed to replace these
schools. This incident has illuminated the fact that our
communities need to be equipped to handle disasters and what to
do once that they receive the Federal assistance. That is where
the slip is between the cup and the lip.
Last year, President Trump signed the Disaster Recovery
Reform Act, DRRA, which enacted many provisions to help build
up our capacity for our--any catastrophic event. This is an
action, it is not just talk.
Delegate Hodges, given your position on the State level,
how can we better equip our States, counties, and cities to
best utilize disaster funding and prepare for the next
disaster?
Mr. Hodges. Thank you for the question. As an answer to
that, we--and as Congressman Griffith had asked, the regulatory
burdens actually tie our hands to be able to utilize these
funds sometimes. They are not always used in the most effective
way. We actually have created a living shores revolving loan
program that helps to build living shorelines and incentivize
landowners to do that. We have created, through a septic loan
program, to repair our failed septic systems that are
contaminating our waters when flooded. But I do believe that
the funding challenge is real. We need to better utilize those
funds.
Mrs. Miller. What you are saying to me with those answers
is it really is the State and the counties that best know how
to handle----
Mr. Hodges. They do. And from the top down is not the
solution. It needs to come from the bottom up. And as you said,
each area of the country is different and, you know, how we are
dealing with flooding. So we are the ones that know best how to
utilize those funds to get them to our homeowners, to get them
to our farmers, and to utilize those funds in the best way.
So it really should come from the ground up, but the
regulations and laws have gone from the top down. So we need to
look at tearing down those walls. The pie is only so big. You
know, there is only so much money, and we need to better
utilize those funds and get them into the right hands.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Levin you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Chair Castor.
I appreciate everyone's testimony today. It reinforced a
fact that we know well in southern California where I live, and
that is that our sea levels are rising and that means serious
consequences for our public health, our communities, and our
property. In my district, we are seeing decades-old structures
falling into the Pacific Ocean. Literally, things like
basketball courts and parking lots and public restrooms that
are no longer able to operate. And that might sound trivial,
but this is just the beginning of much worse to come, based on
much of the research that you have done.
The U.S. Geological Survey last year projected higher
levels of climate change in my communities in Orange and San
Diego counties over the next century. A lot of the best work
being done in this area is being done at the Scripps Institute
of Oceanography, which is in my district, as is the University
of California in San Diego. And researchers at Scripps have
created a network that measures wave characteristics, tide
heights, water levels. And it is used to do wave modeling and
predictions, as well as flood forecasting.
Using that network, the folks at Scripps can predict when
the city of Imperial Beach is going to be at greatest risk. And
if you have heard about Imperial Beach, they have had
significant concerns with flooding.
Dr. Cleetus, I wanted to ask you a question. I certainly
share your belief that we need to cap warming in order to limit
sea level rise. But do you see a benefit in expanding the types
of things that Imperial Beach and the Scripps institute are
working on, perhaps to other cities to be able to forecast
flooding? And do you think it could help us avoid some of the
costs of climate change that you outline in your testimony?
Ms. Cleetus. Absolutely. I think this kind of scientific
data and research is critical to help local communities
understand the risks that are coming their way, and kind of
measures that will work and the kinds that may not work in
light of the risks that are coming. So absolutely, sharing that
information, cities and towns are often the laboratory of
innovation in this space, and I fully encourage that kind of
sharing.
Mr. Levin. I wanted to turn to a different topic, which is
one that you have probably been hearing about in the news,
infrastructure. I think we probably here all want a great
infrastructure bill, but we seem to be moving further away from
one. But I think it is really important that, with you here, we
talk about how to build sustainable infrastructure that is
really forward looking and thinking about climate change.
So to Dr. Cleetus and Dr. Diffenbaugh, what types of
projects and programs would you like to see in a discussion of
a climate change resilient infrastructure bill?
Ms. Cleetus. So the first thing is we have to make sure
that the infrastructure we are building is going to be climate
resilient, and it is taking into account these projections that
we are seeing around extreme precipitation, heat, and other
kinds of extreme events. We can also simultaneously be building
low carbon climate resilient infrastructure. So get some
twofers out of this, renewable energy, energy storage, other
things that cut emissions that also keep the grid online and
secure during extreme weather events.
Mr. Diffenbaugh. I appreciate that question. And I would
point you to the California Safe--Climate-Safe Infrastructure
Working Group AB 2800 and our report that was released last
summer.
A couple of highlights. One is creating climate-safe
infrastructure starts with an acknowledgment that the climate
is changing. There were many engineers on that working group,
and a lot of the discussion was focused on the ways in which
the historical data no longer accurately predicts the frequency
of extreme events. We have heard already about 1,000-year
events and 500-year events happening in quick succession and
that is because of the nonstationarity of the climate. And so
acknowledging those changes and updating the way in which
planning is done is critical.
And then I would echo the point about win-wins between
resilience and emissions. One proposal that a colleague of
mine, Michael Wara, at Stanford has made in an op-ed in the Los
Angeles Times with regard to wildfires. One of the big risks of
wildfires, as you know, are the electric lines and PG&E has
been in the news a lot about that. So my colleague, Dr. Wara,
has proposed having solar and storage, battery storage and
solar capability as a way of providing electricity when those
lines are decommissioned. So this will provide both resilience
by reducing the wildfire risk, but also low carbon energy and
maintaining electricity availability to vulnerable populations
when those lines are deenergized.
Mr. Levin. So I am out of time, but I would love to make
sure that we follow up with you and the appropriate people in
our Transportation and Infrastructure Committee so that they
can get that study.
Mr. Diffenbaugh. I would be very happy.
Mr. Levin. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Carter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I thank all of you
for being here. Interesting discussion today, and appreciate
all of you.
Delegate Hodges, thank you for being here. Appreciate you
coming and testifying. You know, in another life, I was a
mayor. And I remember when I was a mayor, you know, there are
all these projects you want to do and you just can't afford to
do them. And it is challenging. In fact, we had the mayor of
Los Angeles here yesterday that we met with to talk about these
specific issues. And even he expressed the frustration, you
know, with not being able to do all the projects that he wanted
to do.
But I wanted to mention a project that is being done down
in Georgia. In fact, it is being led by Georgia Tech, the
Georgia Institute of Technology. It is a program that installs
sensors. And let me back up for just a second. I represent the
entire coast of Georgia, over 100 miles of pristine coastline.
So rising sea levels are important to us, obviously, and we are
very concerned.
But the program at Georgia Tech, they have installed
sensors that help the coastal areas to pinpoint the specific
areas that might be impacted and that we need to build up
resiliency and roads, bridges. And this is a great program.
And I just wanted to ask you, Delegate Hodges, how
important do you think it is that we use metrics that can help
us show these type of events and the impact that they could
have?
Mr. Hodges. Sure. Actually, thank you, Congressman, for the
question. Metrics are very important. It is important to have
the science and the data. As we are, you know, also looking at
sea level rise, where I live, we also have land subsidence with
groundwater withdrawal. So just a very small lowering of the
land can have a tremendous effect on the sea level. So the
metrics are very important, the science is very important. And
I am fortunate enough to have the Virginia Institute of Marine
Science in my district that I work very closely with that
provides data that works with me very closely. So a world-
renowned center.
Mr. Carter. How do you think the Federal Government can
help in this?
Mr. Hodges. Funding and any access, you know, any
assistance with GIS. And also, as I mentioned earlier, to get
out of the way.
Mr. Carter. Exactly. The permitting process.
Mr. Hodges. The permitting process is number one,
especially with dredge material, dredge spoils. You know, the
funding for dredging is no longer there from the Federal
Government. We have identified a backlog of the permitting at
VMRC with dredging. And we kind of streamlined that in
legislation, but there is still a problem to having access to
those dredge spoils that can be used for living shorelines of
resiliency.
Mr. Carter. Absolutely. Absolutely. And speaking of which,
the University of Georgia, my alma mater, where I graduated
from pharmacy school at, that is--they have got a project that
is a very interesting project as well. And they are using--and
it is--working in conjunction with the Corps of Engineers and
with private businesses. So I am really proud of that. But it
uses natural material like dredge spoils to build up
resiliency. An example is they are building wetlands along the
river. You know, I have always said, look, we have got to do
all these things. We have got to have mitigation, adaptation,
and innovation, and we do in order to address the situation.
But do you think this is something, this example of using
light dredge spoils? I mean, commonsense things like this, is
this something the Federal Government ought to be pursuing?
Mr. Hodges. Yes, sir. Dredge spoils can be of assistance,
and you mentioned--you know, living shorelines. They can be
used in living shorelines, which not only helps water quality,
but resiliency and flooding. We are working on ways to
incentivize landowners through tax relief at the local level, a
loan program. But we need to build them bigger, we need to
build them better. And these natural assets are also--they are
assets, other like sometimes hardening structures are a
liability.
Mr. Carter. Right, right. And, you know, this is such an
important issue for us along the coast of Georgia because we
got like one-third of all the world's marsh land right in
Georgia on the Georgia coast. So making sure we protect that
marsh land is extremely important. Thank you, Delegate Hodges.
I wanted to ask before I go, Mr. Russell, I thought it was
in your testimony you mentioned using smart public policy
combined with capitalism. And I found that to be quite
interesting and quite encouraging, to be quite honest with you.
I just wanted to ask you, do you agree that private investment
and robust markets are necessary to improve resiliency for us?
Mr. Russell. Absolutely. Our wind energy in Iowa is a
perfect example of smart public policy. And shout-out to
Senator Grassley, standing up, granddaddy of those tax credits,
and defending them still. Smart public policy and markets built
on top of it, we have a whole wind industry in our State. We
are going to be 40 percent of one calculation of our energy,
electricity renewable from wind. Absolutely, that is the key to
the future.
Mr. Carter. Thank you very much. And I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Huffman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
And I am once again reminded how nice it would be to take
this committee on the road to California so that we could
educate our colleagues across the aisle, and we continue to
hear assertions about what is going on in California, things
that have many Pinocchios attached to them. I know that we have
got work to do.
So thank you, Dr. Diffenbaugh, for pointing out that the 5-
year drought that California just recently came through is
actually not consistent with anything we have experienced in
modern history and even going back to the proxy record, whether
you want to look at tree rings or any other proxy records. This
was different. It was deep, it was hot, and it was climate
change related.
And the other assertion that we heard, of course, was that
California has not been expanding water storage. Factually
incorrect. California has expanded water storage, as well as
invested in all sorts of other resiliency strategies, which is
why we came through that drought of record without our economy
skipping a beat, including the agricultural economy. So I think
this committee could learn a thing or two about resiliency.
California is not perfect, but this sport of California bashing
at some point needs to give way to some fact-based
conversation.
I enjoyed the conversation about these twofers that several
of our witnesses and my colleagues have referred to. And so I
wanted to follow up on that a little bit.
Dr. Cleetus, in your research, have you identified other
examples that we haven't talked about, strategies that can be
twofers, that can provide resiliency while also drawing down
greenhouse gas emissions at the same time?
Ms. Cleetus. I think there are tremendous opportunities
across the economy too. I work on a power sector in particular,
and in that sector there, is no question that investing in
energy efficiency, low carbon energy, twinned with storage, not
only helps us get affordable energy, low carbon energy, but
also will help us build resilience through extreme events and
extreme heat that are coming our way. And making sure that
these are targeted at communities that are being
disproportionately affected by these climate impacts is really,
really important.
So, for example, having these in public housing, upgrading
public housing to have energy efficiency weatherization
investments, investments in cooling because of the extreme heat
coming our way that is putting people at risk.
Mr. Huffman. All right. And let me ask you, Mr. Russell,
about your testimony on this subject. You talked about some
ways in which agriculture can be part of the solution. Talk a
little bit more about how climate smart farming practices like
planting cover crops, crop rotation, no-till farming can help
sequester carbon as we mitigate for climate change.
And also, the question I had as I was listening to your
testimony is, I know that right now the agricultural sector is
a part of the problem in terms of greenhouse gas emissions. We
have a lot of chemical inputs, fertilizers, et cetera. Do these
climate smart farming practices actually reduce those chemical
inputs in other beneficial ways?
Mr. Russell. I will try to be brief. I promise I will be
brief.
Essentially, when we look at managing living systems to
develop the services needed that humans need, that is what
agricultural is; historically, it has been food, and now going
forward, it is going to be less about food. Still about food,
but a lot of other things. And we have seen that over the last
few decades, biofuels and other things, and now climate
services.
So with that in mind, as we lean into that, what we do is
we increase the biological activity in the soil. The green
revolution created productivity, but it didn't pay attention to
the biology of the soil. The future is going to be about the
biology of the soil, so photosynthesis, getting the biological
activity. And when you do that, you get that carbon out of the
atmosphere, through the plants, through the roots, through the
biological activity, and stored working in the soil. So that is
kind of how that happens.
The result of that is that you increase organic matter
tremendously, which holds more water when it is raining, has
more water stored when its dry. So we get carbon sequestration
and we get more resiliency. So that has happened, and that is
the twofer that is happening at the same time.
We have not managed our agricultural systems. We don't have
agricultural industry invested in that model. But we know that
farmers are able to develop that model. And so it is
disruptive, but it is not necessarily disruptive to rural
communities and farmers in the same way that it is disruptive
to agriculture in general. So that is part of the rub.
Mr. Huffman. Well, thank you for that.
And finally, Delegate Hodges, I was intrigued by a number
of the strategies that you talked about. I am a big believer in
beneficial reuse of dredge spoils and the oyster reef
restoration. Those both sound like great strategies. But I do
think we know we have to be careful about how we do coastal
resiliency strategies.
And I would just note that the Virginia Institute of Marine
Science that you referred to, coupled with Virginia Tech, did a
study on at least a prior version of your bill and found some
unintended consequences that still need some more work. So I
would urge you to keep working on it.
I was grateful for your statement that you would support
greenhouse gas reduction through market-based strategies.
However, I note that you voted against efforts to include
Virginia in RGGI and TCI. So if the existing market-based
strategies aren't good enough, I hope you will find some that
you can put forward and support, because we have got to work on
greenhouse gas reduction and not just resiliency.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Casten, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
We are going to try to finish before votes, so if you all
could be brief. Thank you.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Chair Castor.
Mr. Russell, in your work with religious leaders and people
of faith in Iowa, do you ever come across the argument that as
a species, our moral behavior should be predicated on other
people being moral first?
Mr. Russell. I would say no.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Cleetus, you mentioned in your testimony, I think you
said that $136 billion of property is at risk from coastal
flooding. That is, of course, a small fraction of the total
economic loss from some of the wildfires and floods and
droughts that Dr. Diffenbaugh has talked about, expansion of
tropical diseases, crop failures. If we fail to get all the way
to net zero, but we make a meaningful reduction in carbon, can
we assume that we will avoid some of those economic losses?
Ms. Cleetus. We have to reach net zero by mid century to
really limit some of these losses. And the burden will fall to
our children and grandchildren.
Mr. Casten. I am not asking the moral question. I am just
asking, do we save that money only if we get to net zero or do
we save a portion of that money if we get part----
Ms. Cleetus. Every fraction of a degree we can avoid
matters. So we have got to go all in on mitigation and
adaptation right now.
Mr. Casten. Thank you.
I would conclude from the two comments that we have both a
moral obligation and an economic incentive to reduce CO2 as
quickly as we can. And I would hope all of my colleagues will
stop with this nonsensical argument that we have to wait for
China.
I want to stay with you, Dr. Cleetus, and specifically on
the flooding issue. If we eliminated CO2 emissions today, how
much sea level rise is already baked into the system?
Ms. Cleetus. Unfortunately, we have a couple of feet of sea
level rise already baked in. And what is really worrisome is
that we are starting to see that land-based ice sheets are
getting more and more unstable. So we may have set off a
feedback loop that will have consequences for hundreds of
years. And that land-based ice, once it starts to go, cutting
emissions will unfortunately not be able to cut that feedback
loop. So this is the moment to really dig in and cut emissions
as fast as possible.
Mr. Casten. So if we are looking at a couple of feet, talk
to me about the major population centers in the United States
that are below sea level with that level of rise, just the top
ones off the top of your head.
Ms. Cleetus. Everywhere along the eastern Gulf Coast,
Boston, New York City, Miami, all around the eastern Gulf
Coast, and many, many small communities that are not in the
headlines but are going to be hit really, really hard with
this.
Mr. Casten. So I sit on the Financial Services Committee,
and we recently had Fed Chairman Powell before us. And one of
the questions that I asked him was that as he looks at the
tests we do to evaluate the integrity of banks, does the
Federal Reserve consider the exposure that banks have with 30-
year mortgages in these communities. And the answer was
essentially no. We are somewhat unique in that.
And, Chair Castor, I would like unanimous consent to enter
into the record ``Avoiding the storm: Climate change and the
financial system.'' It is a report by the Bank of England.
Ms. Castor. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
ATTACHMENT: Breeden, S. (2019, April). Avoiding the storm: Climate
change and the financial system. Official Monetary & Financial
Institutions Forum. London.
The speech is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/
avoiding-the-storm-climate-change-and-the-financial-system-
speech-by-sarah-
breeden.pdf?la=en&hash=AC28DFEFED7B14A197E6B0CB48044D06F4E38E84
Mr. Casten. The Bank of England has asked their banking
system to factor this in. You spoke a bit about that. Can you
speak a little bit about what we should be doing on the other
committees here to try to make sure that we evaluate those
risks to our financial system?
Ms. Cleetus. The private sector and the financial sector
have a huge role to play. And when we did this research, we
actually reached out to a number of private sector actors,
bankers, lenders, investors. And what we heard from all of them
was, yes, the science is real. Yes, the risk is real. And, no,
the market is not pricing it accurately right now.
The risk is flying below the radar. And, unfortunately,
this is very, very risky for coastal communities, because
should the market suddenly start to price the risk, the impact
will be very harsh especially on low-income and fixed-income
folks.
So, absolutely, I think there is a responsibility from the
Federal Government to ensure that our economic system,
including our banking system, is taking these risks into
account.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Last thing, and again, this is from our
purview on the Financial Services Committee, that the flood
insurance program is up for renewal. You mentioned some
commonsense reforms. We have to decide that pretty quickly. Can
you help us understand a couple of those reforms that you would
like to see in the flood insurance program?
Ms. Cleetus. We need better flood mapping and money for it
to accurately access these risks. We need to make sure that we
are investing ahead of time, not just after disaster. So flood
mitigation measures, including voluntary home buyouts, have to
be funded well. We have to do this equitably so that we are not
hitting low- and fixed-income folks in an inequitable way. So
building in affordability measures as we do these things is
very, very important. We have to get more people insured
because these events are getting worse.
Mr. Casten. When you mention voluntary home buyouts, just
help me to understand, because we have--what should we do with
that land once we have got it bought out?
Ms. Cleetus. Turn it over into green space. That is land
that should not be developed. But developing in these risky
areas is only increasing the risk to people, property, and the
taxpayer.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Neguse, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Madam Chair.
In September of 2013, the State of Colorado experienced
what is known as a 100-year flood. Over the course of 1 week,
an entire year's worth of rain fell along Colorado's front
range. Over 18,000 people were evacuated from their
communities, including my own. They returned to find thousands
of homes and hundreds of roads and bridges destroyed. In total,
the flood cost more than $4 billion in damages and tragically
claimed 9 lives.
Despite the devastation of this disaster, I am proud that
Colorado has worked to repair and replace the affected roads
with flood zones and the communities. And, ultimately, I
believe these communities are smarter and stronger than before.
But it is important to note, as we have rebuilt, ultimately,
resiliency was not a choice; it was a necessity. The increase
in extreme weather events means that our communities must be
quick to respond, repair, and recover. And in the face of
increasing climate disasters and uncertainty, my district is
taking action on developing climate resiliency. So that is why
I believe today's topic is so important. I appreciate the
witnesses and their testimony. We absolutely need to have
infrastructure in place to address the impacts of climate
change, and we must do it soon.
But I would be remiss if I did not agree and associate
myself with the remarks of my colleague from California,
Representative Huffman, which is to say that all of this work
means nothing if we don't take real concrete action to address
the cause of climate change and reduce our greenhouse gas
emissions. Because if we don't, 100-year events like the
catastrophic flooding in my State could become much more
common.
I want to ask you, Dr. Cleetus, in your testimony, you
emphasized the kind of local communities and the ability of
local communities to make recommendations for responding to
climate change. In Colorado, as you might be familiar, I
represent northern Colorado, so Boulder, Fort Collins, the
Central Mountains. We have a number of communities that have
developed these plans. I believe per capita the front range has
more of these communities that have developed such plans than
anywhere else in the United States. And yet there are many
communities elsewhere in the State that have not.
I am wondering if you could perhaps offer a bit more detail
in terms of why you believe these plans are so important and
how Congress and the Federal Government can help incentivize
and motivate local communities to step forward.
Ms. Cleetus. Yeah. We need action from the Federal to the
local, so we need Federal resources and know-how on data and
capacity building. The local communities understand best how
adaptation is going to work in their geographies and their
environments and the risks that are coming their way. For
example, the wildfire risks that are coming and getting worse
in the area of Colorado that you describe.
And those wildfire risks affect forestry, they affect
watersheds. They have all kinds of now gone effects. In the
seasons after them, you start getting flooding events in the
denuded landscapes. So we need to have more and more
communities that are in power that have the resources and the
tools and know how to develop these plans, to develop them in a
well-resourced way, and to be able to take actions to protect
themselves.
So we are really looking now for the Federal Government to
step up with the resources so that communities can do these
plans better in an inclusive way with the stakeholder process
that includes a wide variety of perspectives.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Dr. Cleetus.
And finally, Mr. Russell, thank you for your testimony.
There are some exciting things happening back in my district
around regenerative agriculture and so forth. I am curious,
though, and I want to go back to a comment you made in
reference to one of the questions that was posed with respect
to the burgeoning growing wind industry in your State, in your
home State of Iowa. You know, I believe you attributed that in
part to the private sector, private markets. And of course, I
agree that the private sector, of course, has a role. But I
also am curious if you believe that there are any government
investments that played a significant or substantive role in
the wind industry becoming what it is in the State of Iowa.
Mr. Russell. Absolutely. I mean, you first have the
renewable portfolio standard as a starter and then the tax
credits and continuing. So that is the foundation, good smart
public policy, and then we have grown a tremendous economy on
top of it. And that is really the future that is being
presented to us, a future of abundance if we are willing to use
smart public policy to move in and use capitalism to get the
future we need, which is, you know, clean renewable energy and
managing living systems.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Dr. Russell.
And with that, I guess I would only hope that our
colleagues on this committee from both sides of the aisle, that
we could join together to help build and refine and expand the
foundation that you just described. I think that is the role of
this committee and ultimately the Congress from a Federal
policymaking standpoint.
So with that, I would yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Mr. Lujan for a UC request.
Mr. Lujan. Madam Chair, I would ask unanimous consent to
submit two articles into the record. The first is from Science
Advances, ``Unprecedented climate events: Historical changes,
aspirational targets, and national commitments.'' And the other
is from The Hill, titled, ``Paris Agreement goals could save
trillions in avoided climate damages.''
I think I was asking the question in the wrong way to Dr.
Diffenbaugh. So I appreciate the few pieces that I was able to
identify. Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
ATTACHMENT: Diffenbaugh, N. S., Singh, D., & Mankin, J. S. (2018).
Unprecedented climate events: Historical changes, aspirational targets,
and national commitments. Science Advances, 4(2).
The report is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://advances.sciencemag.org/content/advances/4/2/
eaao3354.full.pdf
ATTACHMENT: Diffenbaugh, N. S., & Burke, M. (2018, May 27). Paris
Agreement goals could save trillions in avoided climate damages. The
Hill.
The article is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://thehill.com/opinion/energy-environment/389550-paris-
agreement-goals-could-save-trillions-in-avoided-climate
Ms. Castor. I also ask unanimous consent to have a
statement for the record from Representative Bobby Scott of
Virginia.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Statement for the Record
Congressman Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
Creating a Climate Resilient America
May 23, 2019
Thank you, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves and members of
the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis for holding this hearing on
creating a climate resilient nation.
I represent the 3rd congressional district of Virginia where the
Chesapeake Bay meets the James, Nansemond, and Elizabeth Rivers, which
presents both challenges and opportunities. The U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers has worked closely with our communities to ensure that they
can continue to live with the water that surrounds our community.
Unfortunately, due to sea level rise, both attributable to climate
change as well as historic subsidence, these waterways also pose a
serious risk. Some studies estimate that sea level rise to be as much
as 7 feet by the year 2100, which makes the Hampton Roads region the
second largest population center at risk from sea level rise in the
nation, behind only New Orleans. The City of Norfolk is specifically at
risk from flooding due to high tides, nor'easters, and hurricanes. As
the home of Naval Station Norfolk and numerous other federal and
military facilities, this recurrent flooding also poses a severe
national security risk.
State and local elected officials in Virginia already appreciate
the significant threat sea level rise poses to Hampton Roads.
Unfortunately, the cost to proactively and aggressively address this
problem head-on is far too great for any city to bear by itself. While
Norfolk has already spent considerable sums of money to study its
recurrent flooding issues and implement resilient infrastructure where
feasible, the scope of the entire project to actually address the
problem is expected to total in the billions of dollars.
As this committee considers ways to make our nation more resilient,
I urge you to make flood mitigation a priority. I encourage you to look
at the Building Up Infrastructure and Limiting Disasters through
Resilience (BUILD Resilience) Act, legislation that I introduced last
Congress with Senators Mark Warner and Tim Kaine and that I intend to
introduce again soon. The BUILD Resilience Act would establish a
competitive grant program for resilient infrastructure investment to
bolster the ability of regions, such as Hampton Roads and New Orleans,
to implement projects and strategies to reduce regional vulnerability
to threats like sea level rise and recurrent flooding. Analyses by the
Congressional Budget Office and the Multi-hazard Mitigation Council of
the National Institute of Building Sciences estimate that every $1
invested in resilient infrastructure upfront saves $3 to $4 in future
losses on the back-end after a major disaster strikes. Investing
upfront in resilient solutions can potentially help save taxpayers and
impacted communities billions of dollars in avoided costs.
Madam Chairwoman, thank you for allowing me the opportunity to
share my concerns creating a climate resilient America with the select
committee.
Ms. Castor. Thank you all. Thank you to our witnesses for
being here today. We are interested in building a more
resilient America.
Without objection, all members will have 10 business days
within which to submit additional written questions for the
witnesses. I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as
possible.
We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:50 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
United States House of Representatives Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis
Hearing on May 23, 2019 ``Creating a Climate Resilient America''
Questions for the Record
Dr. Noah Diffenbaugh
Kara J Foundation Professor and Kimmelman Family Senior Fellow
Stanford University
the honorable kathy castor
1. China's increasing emissions were raised in the hearing. Can you
provide additional perspective on China's emissions and what impact
they should or should not have on U.S. climate policies?
While it is true that China's emissions have been increasing (along
with those of many other countries, and the global total), there are a
number of important aspects to consider as Congress deliberates US
climate policies. Many of the relevant datasets are provided by the
Global Carbon Project. In addition to the information below, I refer
you to their most recent Global Carbon Budget.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Global Carbon Project, 2018 Global Carbon Budget: https://
www.globalcarbonproject.org/carbonbudget/18/presentation.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We know from the fundamental physics of Earth's energy balance that
the warming of the planet is approximately proportional to the total
cumulative greenhouse gas emissions.\2\ As a result, stabilizing the
global temperature--and thus the global climate system--very likely
requires reaching net-zero emissions.\3 4\ As the figures on the
following page illustrate, the US has contributed the largest share
(25%) of the world's total cumulative fossil fuel emissions, meaning
that we are the largest contributor to the global warming that has
already occurred. (And, as I articulated during my testimony on May 23,
2019, US citizens are already experiencing acute impacts from that
global warming.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Matthews, H.D., Gillett, N.P., Stott, P.A. and Zickfeld, K.,
2009. The proportionality of global warming to cumulative carbon
emissions. Nature, 459(7248), 829-832.
\3\ Matthews, H.D. and Caldeira, K., 2008. Stabilizing climate
requires near-zero emissions. Geophysical research letters, 35(4),
https://doi.org/10.1029/2007GL032388.
\4\ Stocker, T.F., Qin, D., Plattner, G.K., Tignor, M., Allen,
S.K., Boschung, J., Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V. and Midgley, P.M.,
2013. Climate Change 2013: The physical science basis. Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to being the largest historical emitter, according to
the Global Carbon Project the US remains the largest emitter per
capita, with annual per capita emissions that are more than twice as
large as China or the EU, and almost 10 times as high as India.\1\
Further, it is also important to consider that, in addition to having
much larger per capita emissions than China, the US also consumes
products that are produced in China, and in other countries around the
world. When the emissions that are embodied in these products are also
considered, the total emissions associated with consumption in the US
(and in the EU) are even greater than the respective territorial
emissions, while the total emissions associated with consumption in
China (and in India) are lower than the respective territorial
emissions.
Further, it is also important to consider the emissions intensity
of the economy of each country. As is illustrated in the chart
published by The Economist in May 2019 (reproduced below), China--and
India and Indonesia--are curbing their emissions much earlier in their
respective economic developments than the US and other OECD countries.
For example, as the chart shows, China's per capita GDP is currently
similar to the per capita GDP of the US and large European economies
during the mid-20th century. However, China's emissions are currently
approximately half of what the emissions of the US and large European
economies were during the mid-20th century. As a result, in addition to
having lower per capita emissions, China is much more economically
efficient in its emissions than the US, and is in fact curbing its
emissions much earlier in its long-term economic trajectory.
A final point of context is that, because greenhouse gases are
well-mixed throughout the global atmosphere, they affect the global
energy balance, and thus climate around the world. As a result, US
citizens are exposed to the climate change caused by all global
emissions. As stated above, the US has accounted for 25% of the total
global emissions to date, and we remain the largest per capita emitter.
The future trajectory of US emissions will thus contribute very
strongly to the climate risks that Americans experience in the future,
with greater US emissions contributing to greater risks. (For a summary
of these risks, please refer to my testimony on May 23, 2019.) Further,
in addition to being exposed to the climate change caused by future US
emissions, Americans are also exposed to the climate change caused by
the emissions of all other countries. Put simply, the greater the total
global emissions, the greater the climate change that will occur in the
US, and the greater the risks to US citizens.\5\ As a result, even if
one views the Chairwoman's question of US climate policies only from
the perspective of risks in the US, there is clear evidence that
policies that reduce the total global emissions will reduce the future
risks to Americans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Diffenbaugh, N.S., 2013. Human well-being, the global emissions
debt, and climate change commitment. Sustainability Science, 8(1),
pp.135-141.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TG37407A.017
the honorable suzanne bonamici
1. Like California, Oregon has faced horrific wildfires over the
last few years and, unfortunately, it is becoming the norm. Last
summer, our region known for its damp and green landscapes was
suppressed by an orange blanket of haze. Surrounded by plumes of smoke
moving south from British Columbia, north from Southern Oregon and
California, and east from the Cascades, air quality in the Portland
metropolitan area was recorded at levels unhealthier than Mumbai,
Jakarta, and every major industrial city in China.
Dr. Diffenbaugh, what are the economic and health consequences of
wildfires?
During my testimony on May 23, 2019, I summarized results of a
recent review that my colleagues and I conducted evaluating the
scientific evidence underpinning the EPA's ``Endangerment Finding'' for
greenhouse gases.\6\ As is summarized in that peer-reviewed paper, the
area burned in the western United States has increased approximately
tenfold since the mid-1980s (see attached figure). Further, evidence
shows that ``human-caused climate change caused over half of the
documented increases in fuel aridity since the 1970s and doubled the
cumulative forest fire area since 1984.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Duffy, P.B., Field, C.B., Diffenbaugh, N.S., et al., 2019.
Strengthened scientific support for the Endangerment Finding for
atmospheric greenhouse gases. Science, 363(6427), eaat5982.
\7\ Abatzoglou, J.T. and Williams, A.P., 2016. Impact of
anthropogenic climate change on wildfire across western US forests.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(42), pp.11770-
11775.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These wildfires have proved very costly. For example, according to
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the 2018
western wildfires had a CPI-adjusted cost of $24.5 billion, while the
2017 western wildfires had a CPI-adjusted cost of $18.7 billion.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ NOAA Billion Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters, Table of
Events: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/events/US/1980-2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to the high financial losses caused by of catastrophic
wildfires, we also know that the historical increases in area burned
have been accompanied by rising costs of fire suppression. For example,
as reported in the National Climate Assessment, both the total US
burned area and federal spending on fire suppression have increased
fourfold over the past 30 years, with suppression costs rising reaching
approximately $2 billion/year in recent years (see attached figure).\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Fourth National Climate Assessment, Chapter 6 ``Forests'':
https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/6#fig-6-4.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Beyond the direct financial costs, it is also clear that wildfires
have substantial health consequences. A recent review concluded that,
``Consistent evidence from a large number of studies indicates that
wildfire smoke exposure is associated with respiratory morbidity with
growing evidence supporting an association with all-cause mortality.''
\10\ This finding confirms what so many US citizens have experienced
first-hand in recent years: that wildfires can have far-reaching health
consequences beyond the geographic area where the fires occur. In
addition, of relevance for decisions about the management of wildfire
risks, evidence is now emerging that health impacts of wildfires are
greater than health impacts of prescribed burns.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Reid CE, Brauer M, Johnston FH, Jerrett M, Balmes JR, Elliott
CT. 2016. Critical review of health impacts of wildfire smoke exposure.
Environmental Health Perspectives 124:1334-1343; http://dx.doi.org/
10.1289/ehp.1409277.
\11\ Prunicki, M., Kelsey, R., Lee, J., Zhou, X., Smith, E.,
Haddad, F., Wu, J. and Nadeau, K., 2019. The impact of prescribed fire
versus wildfire on the immune and cardiovascular systems of children.
Allergy. DOI: 10.1111/all.13825.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Although further research is needed to quantify and project the
full costs of rising wildfire frequency in different areas of the US,
we already have very strong evidence that wildfires are increasing, and
anthropogenic climate change is contributing to that increase, and that
costs associated with wildfires are increasing.
the honorable mike levin
1. Dr. Diffenbaugh, you responded to Representative Brownley saying
that recently half the wildfire area burned in California is due to the
rising temperature, and you expect this trend to continue.
Many Members on this committee are concerned about the cost of
inaction on climate, and I believe it is important to understand the
degree to which wildfire costs should be included in that cost of
inaction. Have you or your colleagues quantified the financial costs
associated with the greater burned area driven by climate change?
During my testimony on May 23, 2019, I summarized results of a
recent review that my colleagues and I conducted evaluating the
scientific evidence underpinning the EPA's ``Endangerment Finding'' for
greenhouse gases.\12\ As is summarized in that peer-reviewed paper, the
area burned in the western United States has increased approximately
tenfold since the mid-1980s (see attached figure). Further, evidence
shows that ``human-caused climate change caused over half of the
documented increases in fuel aridity since the 1970s and doubled the
cumulative forest fire area since 1984.'' \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Duffy, P.B., Field, C.B., Diffenbaugh, N.S., et al., 2019.
Strengthened scientific support for the Endangerment Finding for
atmospheric greenhouse gases. Science, 363(6427), eaat5982.
\13\ Abatzoglou, J.T. and Williams, A.P., 2016. Impact of
anthropogenic climate change on wildfire across western US forests.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(42), pp.11770-
11775.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These wildfires have proved very costly. For example, according to
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the 2018
western wildfires had a CPI-adjusted cost of $24.5 billion, while the
2017 western wildfires had a CPI-adjusted cost of $18.7 billion.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ NOAA Billion Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters, Table of
Events: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/events/US/1980-2019.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
In addition to the high financial losses caused by of catastrophic
wildfires, we also know that the historical increases in area burned
have been accompanied by rising costs of fire suppression. For example,
as reported in the National Climate Assessment, both the total US
burned area and federal spending on fire suppression have increased
fourfold over the past 30 years, with suppression costs rising reaching
approximately $2 billion/year in recent years (see attached
figure).\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Fourth National Climate Assessment, Chapter 6 ``Forests'':
https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/6#fig-6-4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beyond the direct financial costs, it is also clear that wildfires
have substantial health consequences. A recent review concluded that,
``Consistent evidence from a large number of studies indicates that
wildfire smoke exposure is associated with respiratory morbidity with
growing evidence supporting an association with all-cause mortality.''
\16\ This finding confirms what so many US citizens have experienced
first-hand in recent years: that wildfires can have far-reaching health
consequences beyond the geographic area where the fires occur. In
addition, of relevance for decisions about the management of wildfire
risks, evidence is now emerging that health impacts of wildfires are
greater than health impacts of prescribed burns.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Reid CE, Brauer M, Johnston FH, Jerrett M, Balmes JR, Elliott
CT. 2016. Critical review of health impacts of wildfire smoke exposure.
Environmental Health Perspectives 124:1334-1343; http://dx.doi.org/
10.1289/ehp.1409277.
\17\ Prunicki, M., Kelsey, R., Lee, J., Zhou, X., Smith, E.,
Haddad, F., Wu, J. and Nadeau, K., 2019. The impact of prescribed fire
versus wildfire on the immune and cardiovascular systems of children.
Allergy. DOI: 10.1111/all.13825.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Although further research is needed to quantify and project the
full costs of rising wildfire frequency in different areas of the US,
we already have very strong evidence that wildfires are increasing, and
anthropogenic climate change is contributing to that increase, and that
costs associated with wildfires are increasing.
2. During the hearing, Rep. Levin asked the following question:
``What types of projects and programs would you like to see in a
discussion of a climate change resilient infrastructure bill?'' You
responded: ``I would point you to the California Climate Safe
Infrastructure Working Group, AB 2800, and our report that was released
last summer.'' Please provide that report.
The reference for the report is:
Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group (CSIWG). 2018. Paying it
forward: The Path Toward Climate-Safe Infrastructure in California.
Report of the Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group to the
California State Legislature and the Strategic Growth Council.
Sacramento, CA: CNRA, Publication number: CNRA-CCA4-CSI-001.
The report is available from the California Natural Resources
Agency at this website: http://resources.ca.gov/climate/climate-safe-
infrastructure-working-group/.
Questions for the Record
Dr. Rachel Cleetus
Policy Director, Climate and Energy Program
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS)
the honorable kathy castor
1. There was discussion in the hearing about the potential for the
shift in magnetic poles to impact weather and whether natural
variations have a greater or smaller impact on climate change than
carbon emissions. What impact does the shift in magnetic poles have on
weather and how does that compare to both natural variations and carbon
emissions have on climate change?
The science is clear: human-caused emissions of heat-trapping gases
are the dominant contributor to observed climate change since the mid-
20th century, and natural variations cannot account for more than a
marginal contribution.
The Fourth National Climate Assessment (NCA) is an authoritative
summary of the latest climate science conducted by the US Global Change
Research Program (USGCRP), which produces these reports on a regular
basis under Congressional mandate.\1\ Volume 1 of the Fourth NCA, the
Climate Science Special Report, provides a clear answer to the
question, and I quote below:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See https://www.globalchange.gov/about for the mandate of the
USGCRP.
Many lines of evidence demonstrate that human activities,
especially emissions of greenhouse gases, are primarily
responsible for the observed climate changes in the industrial
era, especially over the last six decades. Formal detection and
attribution studies for the period 1951 to 2010 find that the
observed global mean surface temperature warming lies in the
middle of the range of likely human contributions to warming
over that same period. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change concluded that it is extremely likely that human
influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming
since the mid-20th century. Over the last century, there are no
alternative explanations supported by the evidence that are
either credible or that can contribute more than marginally to
the observed patterns. There is no convincing evidence that
natural variability can account for the amount of and the
pattern of global warming observed over the industrial era.
Solar flux variations over the last six decades have been too
small to explain the observed changes in climate. There are no
apparent natural cycles in the observational record that can
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
explain the recent changes in climate.
The US National Academy of Sciences and the UK Royal Society have
put together a short reference document, Climate Change: Evidence and
Causes, that also clearly lays out the current state of climate science
for policymakers, decisionmakers and the public.\2\ As the document
notes:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See http://dels.nas.edu/resources/static-assets/exec-office-
other/climate-change-full.pdf
``Scientists know that recent climate change is largely
caused by human activities from an understanding of basic
physics, comparing observations with models, and fingerprinting
the detailed patterns of climate change caused by different
human and natural influences. . .
The expected changes in climate are based on our
understanding of how greenhouse gases trap heat. Both this
fundamental understanding of the physics of greenhouse gases
and fingerprint studies show that natural causes alone are
inadequate to explain the recent observed changes in climate.
Natural causes include variations in the Sun's output and in
Earth's orbit around the Sun, volcanic eruptions, and internal
fluctuations in the climate system (such as El Nino and La
Nina). Calculations using climate models have been used to
simulate what would have happened to global temperatures if
only natural factors were influencing the climate system. These
simulations yield little warming, or even a slight cooling,
over the 20th century. Only when models include human
influences on the composition of the atmosphere are the
resulting temperature changes consistent with observed
changes.''
2. China's increasing emissions were raised in the hearing. Can you
provide additional perspective on China's emissions and what impact
they should or should not have on U.S. emissions targets or other U.S.
climate policies?
Climate change is a global problem and it will require a concerted
effort by the entire global community--especially the major emitting
nations--to help address it. No one nation, whether it be the US or
China, can tackle this on its own.
The reality is global emissions are still rising, at a time when
they need to fall sharply. According to the IEA, in 2018 global energy-
related carbon dioxide emissions were up 1.7% and hit a record high of
33.1 GtCO2.\3\ China's emissions grew by 2.5% and US emissions by 3.1%.
According to the EIA, US energy-related CO2 emissions were up 2.8% in
2018, the largest increase since 2010.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See https://www.iea.org/geco/.
\4\ See https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=38133.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clearly, both the US and China--and all major emitting countries--
will need to cut emissions significantly if we are to meet our climate
goals of limiting global temperature increase to well below 2+C, aiming
for 1.5+C. The US can and must play a leadership role. One of the most
impactful things we can do is stay committed to the Paris Agreement and
work hard to implement it in a robust way, in cooperation with other
countries including China. Unless we act boldly together, we will fail
to meet our climate goals and future generations everywhere will suffer
as a result. The urgency of the climate crisis requires that we face
this challenge head-on and not retreat to insular ways of thinking.
The US and China are both global leaders in renewable energy and
there is a huge opportunity to expand the global market in these
technologies and create new jobs and economic opportunities in the
process. Right now, the policy environment in the US is lagging and
putting our nation at a competitive disadvantage. Now is the time to
set ambitious targets for transitioning to a low-carbon economy and
reaping all the economic, health and environmental benefits of doing
so.
China is both a global leader in renewable energy deployment and,
unfortunately, in coal consumption. The US similarly has seen a big
surge in renewable energy over the last decade but 2018 also saw the
nation reach new records in the production, consumptions and export of
fossil fuels.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=39392.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2018, China was responsible for 32% of all new renewable power
investments (see figure 1).\\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See http://www.ren21.net/gsr-2019/.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It also led in solar PV installations (see figure 2)
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
China is also leading the world in electric vehicle deployment (see
figure 3)
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
3. The minority witness, Mr. Keith Hodges, testified that
government regulations promulgated under the Clean Water Act and other
environmental protections are a barrier to creating communities that
are resilient to flooding. Are environmental regulations barriers to
protecting communities from the impacts of climate change?
In short: no. In fact, environmental standards that help preserve
natural ecosystems like wetlands, mangroves, barrier islands and
vegetation can help reduce the harms and costs of flooding to
communities in a very cost-effective and sustainable way. It would be
very misguided to try to address flooding--which is worsening due to
sea level rise and extreme precipitation driven by climate change--by
eroding environmental protections. For more on the value of green
infrastructure in protecting against flooding, please see resources
from the EPA and NOAA.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See https://www.epa.gov/green-infrastructure/manage-flood-risk
and https://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/training/gi-cost-benefit.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the honorable suzanne bonamici
1. According to the Oregon Climate Change Research Institute's
Fourth Climate Assessment, in 2015 the Northwest experienced its
warmest year on record. Temperatures were about 3.4 degrees Fahrenheit
above normal. Snowpack in Oregon was the lowest on record, at more than
89 percent below average. Precipitation from January to June 2015 was
nearly five inches below average. In addition to producing the largest
harmful algal bloom recorded on the West Coast, these conditions also
led to low water levels and warmer water temperatures. As a result,
there were widespread losses for our fisheries, including hundreds of
thousands of sockeye salmon in the Columbia River.
Dr. Cleetus, can you discuss the effects of warming temperatures
and decreased snowpack and precipitation on the larger ecosystem,
particularly our endangered fisheries, in the Northwest? How will
climate change affect species in the future?
As with the rest of the nation and the world, Oregon residents are
experiencing impacts from global warming, resulting from the buildup of
heat-trapping emissions in the atmosphere. The average annual
temperature in the Pacific Northwest has risen by at least 1.5+F since
the first half of the 20th century, and winter minimum temperatures
have increased by more than 4.5+F.
Forest mortality is rising in Oregon.\8\ Wildfires are becoming
more frequent and intense, and the costs to fight them are growing. In
2018, the price tag reached more than $514 million. More than 132,000
Oregon homes were at high or extreme risk of damage from wildfire in
2018.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Abatzoglou, J.T., and A.P. Williams. 2016. Impact of
anthropogenic climate change on wildfire across western US forests.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113(42):11770-11775.
Online at http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1607171113, accessed December 18,
2018.
\9\ CoreLogic. 2018. CoreLogic wildfire risk data. Irvine, CA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Higher temperatures and changes in precipitation already
significantly affect water resources in the Northwest. Since 1955,
parts of Oregon have experienced a decrease in average snowpack on
April 1 of more than 70 percent.\10\ Winter snow accumulation in the
mountains is a natural water storage system on which Oregon relies
during its drier summer months, most critically for agriculture.
Snowpack decline is projected to continue as more winter precipitation
falls as rain rather than snow throughout much of the Pacific
Northwest.\11\ Snow already melts as much as 30 days earlier than in
the mid-20th century, reducing summer stream flows in many of the
Northwest's snow-fed rivers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Mote, P.W., S. Li, D.P. Lettenmaier, M. Xiao, and R. Engel.
2018. Dramatic declines in snowpack in the western US. npj Climate and
Atmospheric Science 1(1):2. Online at http://doi.org/10.1038/ s41612-
018-0012-1, accessed December 18, 2018.
\11\ Wehner, M.F., J.R. Arnold, T. Knutson, K.E. Kunkel, and A.N.
LeGrande. 2017. Droughts, floods, and wildfires. In Climate science
special report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, volume I, edited by
D.J. Wuebbles, D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and
T.K. Maycock. Washington, DC: US Global Change Research Program. Online
at http://doi.org/10.7930/J0CJ8BNN, accessed December 18, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The increasing acidity of ocean surface waters is also damaging
marine life. About 40 percent of the human-produced carbon dioxide
released to the atmosphere over the last 250 years is now dissolved in
the oceans, where it reacts chemically to make seawater more acidic and
corrosive.\12\ Many types of shellfish are very sensitive to the
effects of ocean acidification, posing potential risks to the fishing
industry. For example, altered ocean chemistry contributed to declines
in hatchery production near Oregon's Netarts Bay due to the softening
of oyster shells at the largest independent producer of seed oysters in
the Pacific Northwest.\13\ Increased ocean acidification is projected
to continue altering the marine food web by decreasing the abundance of
shell-forming species, which in turn threatens Pacific salmon and other
culturally and commercially significant marine species.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ DeVries, T., M. Holzer, and F. Primeau. 2017. Recent increase
in oceanic carbon uptake driven by weaker upper-ocean overturning.
Nature 542(7640):215-218. Online at www.nature.com/ articles/
nature21068, accessed January 2, 2019. doi:10.1038/ nature21068.
\13\ Barton, A., G.G. Waldbusser, R.A. Feely, S.B. Weisberg, J.A.
Newton, B. Hales, S. Cudd, B. Eudeline, C.J. Langdon, I. Jefferds, T.
King, A. Suhrbier, and K. McLaughlin. 2015. Impacts of coastal
acidification on the Pacific Northwest shellfish industry and
adaptation strategies implemented in response. Oceanography 28(2):146-
159. Online at http://dx.doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2015.38, accessed
December 18, 2018.
\14\ Dalton, M.M, K.D. Dello, L. Hawkins, P.W. Mote, and D.E. Rupp.
2017. The third Oregon climate assessment report. Corvallis, OR: Oregon
Climate Change Research Institute. Online at https://pnwcirc.org/
sites/pnwcirc.org/files/ocar3_finalweb.pdf, accessed December 13, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to the Fourth National Climate Assessment:\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/24/.
The negative impacts on Northwest fisheries associated
with ocean warming, acidification, and harmful algal blooms are
expected to increase. This could lead to extensive fisheries
closures across all of the region's coastal fisheries, with
severe economic and cultural effects on commercial and
subsistence shellfish industries.
Projections for increased stream temperature indicate
a 22% reduction in salmon habitat in Washington by late century
under a high emissions future.
For more on the risks and solutions for climate change in Oregon,
please see a recent UCS factsheet, Confronting Climate Change in
Oregon.\16\ See also the Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II,
Chapter 24 which is focused on the Northwest.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2019/01/
Confronting-Climate-Change-Oregon-2019-final.pdf.
\17\ See https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/chapter/24/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[all]