- LIBYA FRACTURED: THE STRUGGLE FOR UNITY
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
LIBYA FRACTURED: THE STRUGGLE FOR UNITY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 18, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-125
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-815PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
Mr. Christopher Blanchard, Specialist in Middle Eastern Affairs,
Foreign Affairs, Defense, and Trade Division, Congressional
Research Service...............................................
6
Frederic Wehrey, Ph.D., senior fellow, Middle East Program,
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.....................
23
Ms. Alice Hunt Friend, senior fellow, International Security
Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies........
30
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
Mr. Christopher Blanchard: Prepared statement....................
8
Frederic Wehrey, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.......................
25
Ms. Alice Hunt Friend: Prepared statement........................
32
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
54
Hearing minutes..................................................
55
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........
56
LIBYA FRACTURED:
THE STRUGGLE FOR UNITY
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 o'clock
p.m., in room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana
Ros-Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
After recognizing myself and my friend, the ranking member
Deutch, for 5 minutes each for our opening statement, I then
will recognize other members seeking recognition as well.
We will then hear from our witnesses. Without objection,
the witnesses' prepared statements will be made a part of the
record.
And members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record, subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
The Chair now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
Nearly 7 years after Qaddafi's removal, Libya remains mired
in civil conflict, political division, lawlessness, and
economic crisis, with few signs of abating anytime soon. ISIS
and al-Qaeda, though seriously degraded, are regrouping, and as
we have seen in a series of car bombings this year, they are
still very much capable of violence. Despite backing by the
United Nations and its partners, the western-based Government
of National Accord, or GNA, has not been able to provide
security or consolidate power throughout Libya's vast
territory, and it continues to clash with eastern-based House
of Representatives backed by General Haftar and his Libyan
National Army, or LNA.
Armed militias, some with ties to the LNA and GNA, profit
off the lack of security and the rule of law, smuggling drugs,
weapons and people, and migrants using Libya as a waypoint into
Europe, suffer horrific treatment at the hands of smugglers,
including torture, sexual abuse, and enslavement.
Adding to the chaos, a host of external actors continue to
back different Libyan factions with the U.S. and the U.N.
supporting the GNA; Egypt, the UAE, and Russia supporting
Haftar, and Qatar and Turkey supporting the country's Islamist
groups. And as we saw when three French soldiers were killed
fighting ISIS alongside Haftar forces in 2016, even France has
played both sides, sometimes assisting the U.S. and the GNA
while at other times supporting Haftar and his factions.
All of this has made political reconciliation more remote,
as both sides have dug in their heels and negotiations have
stalled. The prospect of U.N.-backed elections this year, which
were probably too soon anyway, also seems to have fallen by the
wayside.
There are some encouraging signs, however, including better
governance at the local and municipal levels and growth in the
oil sector, which for now has saved Libya's economy from
collapse. And it remains to be seen how Haftar's now-confirmed
hospitalization in Paris will impact Libya's fractured state.
If he is, indeed, incapacitated, will this be the opening that
Libya needs for reconciliation or will there be more chaos as
his coalition breaks apart and his backers look for a
successor?
With the challenges I have laid out, as well as the
competing foreign policy priorities elsewhere, it is perhaps
understandable that this administration would be wary of
spending political capital in Libya. The administration does so
at its peril, however, as this is a problem that is not going
away and is only going to get worse for the region, for Europe,
and for U.S. interests, if it is not addressed.
Just last month, our U.S. commander in Africa stated that,
``The instability in Libya and North Africa may be the most
significant threat to the U.S. and our allies' interest on the
continent.''
Our partners in Tunisia and Egypt are already feeling the
impact. Mali, Chad, and Sudan have been impacted. And we have
seen how ISIS networks in Libya can reach into Europe with the
Manchester and Berlin terror attacks in the last 2 years alone.
Libya's instability is a major problem for U.S. interests,
and we need a concerted effort from this administration to make
it a priority. It is past time to appoint a new U.S. Ambassador
to Libya. And soon, as it is viable from a security standpoint,
we need to consider reopening our Embassy in Tripoli to
increase engagement on the ground. The administration should
also fill the empty special envoy slot as soon as possible, so
that the U.S. has another dedicated diplomat who can work with
our partners and coordinate our Libya policy, whatever that may
be.
More than anything, more than military aid, more than
financial aid, Libya needs U.S. leadership, leadership that can
corral the various countries' interfering in Libya, leverage
our connections, and help push the political reconciliation
process forward. I urge this administration to give Libya the
attention that it deserves.
And with that, I am pleased to yield to my friend, Mr.
Deutch, the ranking member.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for calling this
hearing and for your continued recognition of Libya's
importance.
I also would like to thank our panel of witnesses for
attending and for their wealth of knowledge on these vital
topics.
We have all been shaken and horrified by the images and
stories coming out of Libya, including slave markets, dismal
conditions of refugee camps, extrajudicial killings, torture in
illegal retention facilities, and other human rights violations
on a shocking scale. These are all issues that desperately need
to be tackled and are all symptoms of the years without a
functional government.
I am proud that this committee unanimously passed House
Resolution 644 strongly condemning the slave auctions of
migrants and refugees in Libya, but we acknowledge the only way
to stop these evil practices is to see Libya set toward a path
of lasting stability.
Despite the efforts of the United Nations, the
internationally brokered Government of National Accord, based
in Tripoli, has been far from successful. The rise of competing
strongmen and militias, defined by their quickly changing
loyalties, and the persistent vacuums allowing terror groups to
grow, are preventing the country from moving toward stability.
And these factors of instability are enabling a
humanitarian crisis to fester and worsen, emphasizing the need
to address the root causes of Libya's plight. Unfortunately,
the country's trajectory does not appear to have been altered
over the previous year in any way that would suggest that
conditions are improving.
Attempts to bring together warring parties have been
hindered by fractured loyalties and varying goals. Libya's
economy is disjointed and struggling to rise above the
prevailing black market. This only serves to promote smuggling,
trafficking, and other illicit activities. Libyans, who once
benefitted from the country's oil reserves, lack opportunity
and job prospects, with youth unemployment now over 40 percent.
Unfortunately, without functioning institutions, the
government will continue to lack the ability to put basic
structures in place for economic improvement. A continued
fractured government and persistent security concerns will also
prevent investment in the country.
The implications of Libya's unrest and instability don't
only apply to its own security. Libya's neighbors are directly
impacted by the lawlessness, movement in smuggled weapons and
trafficked people, and a draw for terrorist groups seeking safe
haven from regions with stronger rule of law.
As we have seen in Syria, Russia has attempted to expand
its influence by exploiting the Libyan unrest. With little
regard for human dignity and international law, Russia will not
lead Libya toward stability. They only work toward furthering
their own interests, likely at odds with our own national
security priorities. That is why a coherent United States
policy, along with the U.S.'s work with the U.N. to move Libya
in the right direction, becomes even more pressing.
The U.S. has long focused on counterterrorism, pressuring
Libya to combat the various extremist threats plaguing the
country. This is continuously challenged by the difficulty in
securing Libya's vast desert borders. Border security is
further challenged, given the chaos of the Sahel and sub-
Saharan Africa, the use of Libya as a transit point for ISIS
and al-Qaeda's allied fighters, and the smuggling of weapons to
various terror groups. As conflict persists among Libya's armed
forces and militia groups, it appears less and less likely that
border security will increase.
We maintain the goal of setting Libya on a course toward
stability through a buildup of democratic institutions, the
resiliency of which is not reliant upon personalities, but upon
the framework of a functional government. U.S. engagement has
been a challenge, given that U.S. Embassy personnel continue to
operate out of Tunis. Nonetheless, we remain committed to
democracy and governance and civil society programs.
Of course, the solution for Libya must be ultimately a
Libyan solution. We must look at the specific population needs,
cultural dynamics, tribal identities, and social conditions to
find a path forward that works for Libyans. And despite the
obvious challenges, it remains in our national security
interest, and those of international stability, that we
continue to encourage and assist Libya in moving toward
stability and preventing dangerous transnational terror groups
from finding safe haven there. Only once good, honest, and
comprehensive governance takes hold will the root cause of the
horrors that we have witnessed be truly addressed.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses as to how
Libya can best move forward on the path of reconciliation that
resists the influence of non-state actors and provides
stability and opportunity for all of the people of Libya.
And I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Deutch, our
ranking member.
And now, I would like to turn to the members of our
subcommittee for any opening statements they would like to
make, and we will start with Mr. DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. Kinzinger of Illinois?
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I don't have a lot to say, except that, obviously, we find
ourselves in a pretty tough situation there, a lot of debate, a
lot of questions, but I think it is obvious that, with the part
of the world that Libya is in, and potentially the
ramifications for the rest of the world, including Europe, of a
failed Libyan state, it is important that we stayed engaged.
Unfortunately, we have been seeing Libya sometimes how we
have been seeing, for instance, Syria, which is just through
the lens of a counter-ISIS campaign, which is important, but
this is a much bigger issue than just a fight against terror.
So, I appreciate all of you being here, and I want to thank
the chair for having this hearing.
And I will yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Adam.
Mr. Chabot of Ohio?
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for holding
this important hearing, and I will be very brief.
I happened to be the chair of this committee when Qaddafi
fell, when the so-called Arab Spring was happening, et cetera.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. You might have been the cause of all
these democracy movements.
Mr. Chabot. Yes, maybe. Maybe. All this democracy.
But I was in Libya with the Ambassador a month before he
and three other brave Americans were killed. And so, it was
obviously a traumatic experience for our country. It is one of
the, I think, most unfortunate circumstances, not that incident
necessarily, but just the overall chaos that ensued after the
fall and where we are now. There is a tremendous amount that
needs to be done in Libya.
Hopefully, this hearing will shed some light on that. And
so, I thank you very much for holding it. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much. That was such a
tragedy. Thank you so much, Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Cicilline of Rhode Island is recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and the ranking
member, for holding this hearing.
Libya has been a difficult challenge for the United States
and our allies since the fall of Muammar al-Qaddafi. As we have
seen in many other places, it is far easier to topple a
government than to rebuild a new one. Libya continues to be
challenged by political fragmentation, rival factions,
decentralization, terrorist threats, and the challenges of
migration.
I want to take a moment in my opening to recognize and
remember the men who were killed in the attack on our consulate
in Libya in 2002. Ambassador Chris Stevens, Sean Smith, Glen
Doherty, and Tyrone Woods served our country with honor and
gave their lives in defense of our freedoms.
I thank our witnesses for appearing here today and look
forward to hearing your perspectives on what we can do to help
stabilize Libya and ensure a viable path forward, so the people
of Libya can live in peace.
Thank you. And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Cicilline.
Seeing no other requests for time, I am so pleased to
recognize our witnesses.
First, we are delighted to welcome Mr. Christopher
Blanchard, a specialist in Middle Eastern Affairs at the
Congressional Research Service. Mr. Blanchard has covered
developments in Libya since 2005 and served as an election
observer for Libya's first post-Qaddafi elections in 2012, very
historic.
Thank you for being here today. We appreciate all the work
you have done over the years at CRS, and we look forward to
your testimony, Mr. Blanchard.
Next, we are delighted to welcome Dr. Frederic Wehrey. Did
I do that right? Thank you. He is senior fellow in the Middle
East Program at Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and
a 21-year veteran of the U.S. Air Force.
Thank you for your service, Dr. Wehrey.
He has just had a book published about Libya, and has
written many articles on Libya and the wider Middle East.
Thank you for your service again, and thank you for your
testimony today, Doctor.
And finally, we are delighted to welcome Ms. Alice Friend.
Is that right? Just like that? Okay. Friend, that is a great
name.
She is senior fellow in the International Security Program
at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Previously, Ms. Friend served in various roles at the
Department of Defense, including as Principal Director for
African Affairs in the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy. She has also held numerous research positions at
CSIS and at the Center for New American Security.
Thank you for being here today, and we also look forward to
your testimony.
As I had said previously, your written testimony will be
made a part of the record. Please feel free to summarize.
We will start with you, Mr. Blanchard.
STATEMENT OF MR. CHRISTOPHER BLANCHARD, SPECIALIST IN MIDDLE
EASTERN AFFAIRS, FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENSE, AND TRADE DIVISION,
CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE
Mr. Blanchard. Thank you Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking
Member Deutch, members of the committee, for inviting me to
testify today on behalf of the Congressional Research Service
on Libya. I will summarize my testimony by briefly making three
observations.
First, as you have discussed, several internal and external
factors are disrupting Libya's post-Qaddafi transition. These
factors are interrelated and they have been difficult to
overcome. For example, transitional leaders and institutions
with competing claims to legitimacy have accumulated in Libya
since 2011. This challenges U.S. preferences to work with and
through a single national government partner.
Since December 2015, the U.N. Security Council and the
United States have recognized the negotiated GNA as Libya's
governing authority. This seeks to confer international
legitimacy on the GNA and to encourage unification. But,
nevertheless, the GNA and its eastern-Libya-based rivals have
made little progress, as you have noted. The GNA's reach
remains limited and, importantly, it relies on militias for
security support.
In 2017, U.N. officials launched an action plan to move the
transition promptly and to renew the legitimacy of these Libyan
institutions, but its implementation has faltered. Meanwhile,
the power of armed non-state groups remains unmatched, and
there is a lawless atmosphere that persists. Militias,
criminals, and terrorists, including remnants of the Islamic
State, operate with impunity in some areas, endangering
civilians and committing human rights abuses. These entities
exploit instability and state weakness for political and
financial gain. This creates powerful incentives for them to
maintain the unstable status quo. Thousands of migrants,
refugees, and internally displaced persons remain particularly
vulnerable.
Many foreign governments are seeking to mitigate
transnational threats emanating from Libya, and some are
actively working to shape the transition's outcome in line with
their preferences. Libya's oil resources, its geographic
location, and weak institutions all raise the stakes of its
instability for others. Libyan-based terrorists, traffickers,
and armed groups pose risks to U.S. partners in North Africa,
the Sahel, Europe, and beyond. Locally organized Libyan actors
cooperate and compete amongst themselves and with these
outsiders. Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, and the European
states are all engaging directly with different Libyan factions
for a range of specific purposes.
As my written testimony and reporting for CRS describe in
more detail, this produces a complex and opaque web of
overlapping interests and rivalries. Taken together, these
challenges and dynamics are likely to last and to have enduring
effects, even if the current mediation efforts improve.
Second, U.S. policy in Libya has two main goals. It seeks
to eliminate Libya-based terrorists and combat other
transnational threats, and it seeks to support the transition
to a unified, inclusive, and accountable government as the
basis for long-term stability. The Trump and Obama
administrations have used different blends of diplomacy and
military operations, sanctions, and foreign aid to achieve
relatively consistent objectives over time. Diplomatically, the
United States is lending support to U.N. mediation rather than
seeking to engineer a U.S.-defined solution. Given that zero-
sum attitudes have divided post-Qaddafi Libya, U.S.
policymakers judge that an inclusive, Libyan-defined solution
is more likely to result in stability than solutions imposed by
force or by outsiders. Current policy also reflects the
judgment that a settlement can't be reached without
international support and coordination.
So, what more can the United States do to support Libya's
transition? Events since 2011 suggest a series of factors to
consider. More active U.S. diplomacy and more robust assistance
could boost actors that share U.S. goals, but also could create
enduring costs for the United States, link the United States to
actors that lack domestic legitimacy, or invite others to
intervene similarly. Less active U.S. involvement could reduce
diplomatic and financial burdens on the Unites States and could
simplify relations with outsiders, but it might also result in
less desirable security outcomes. If security were to
deteriorate rapidly, containment costs could increase, pressure
on U.S. partners could rise, and calls for new U.S.
intervention could emerge.
Third, for Congress, different scenarios may raise unique
questions, but certain topics have been shown to have lasting
relevance in Libya, regardless of how conditions have evolved.
These include the balance of U.S. diplomatic, military, and
foreign aid efforts; the roles of other outside actors;
frameworks defined by the U.N. Security Council; funding and
terms for U.S. assistance; the selection and vetting of U.S.
partners, and authorizations for the use of military force.
This concludes my brief remarks. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blanchard follows:]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
Dr. Wehrey?
STATEMENT OF FREDERIC WEHREY, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW, MIDDLE EAST
PROGRAM, CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL PEACE
Mr. Wehrey. Thank you. Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking
Member Deutch, members of the subcommittee, it is a privilege
to speak with you here today about Libya's ongoing struggle for
stability, peace, and unity.
I join you, having visited western Libya in December of
last year, where I glimpsed firsthand the severity of the
challenges, the growing power of its predatory armed groups and
the criminal networks, the plunder of its economy, the
potential re-emergence of radicalism, to name but a few.
Underpinning all of these inflictions is the weakness of
governing institutions and national political fissures.
I will start with my visit to the central coastal city of
Sirte, the object of intense American focus in 2016 during the
war against the Islamic State. While the Islamic State was
ousted from its stronghold there at the cost of over 700 Libyan
lives, Sirte faces daunting challenges of reconstruction and
recovery. Bridging the social damage wrought by the Islamic
State's divisive rule is especially crucial, as is restoring
law and order.
Though the Islamic State has dispersed to the desert
southwest of the city, it is still potent. It could easily
exploit Libya's political divisions and the unwillingness of
armed groups to confront it. We have seen this before where
Libya's opposing factions where so focused on battling each
other that they ignored the growing radical presence in their
midst. That is why national-level reconciliation is so
important, along with unifying and reforming the security
sector.
Another important component of reform lies in the judicial
and penal sector. Arbitrary detentions, torture, and killings
in militia-run prisons is a potential time bomb for radicalism.
In one such prison that I visited, suspected Islamic State
fighters are detained in the same facility as petty criminals
and drug addicts, along with the political rivals of the
militias.
And, of course, the militia-run detention centers for
migrants are a wholly different moral tragedy. Thousands of
migrants are kept in these horrific conditions, which I saw
firsthand, and many of these detention centers, of course, are
run by militias affiliated with the Government of National
Accord. All this must change.
Though security conditions in the absence of a diplomatic
presence have constrained our ability to engage, there are
still plentiful opportunities, especially at the level of
municipal governance. Elected city councils in Libya are one of
the country's bright spots. In many cases, they enjoy strong
legitimacy and they have been engines for reconciliation in a
way that national actors have not. American aid and assistance
to municipalities is, therefore, a worthy investment.
But municipal governance is hampered by corruption in
national economic institutions. Libya is afflicted by a culture
of entitlement by its armed groups, many of whom, as I have
mentioned, are affiliated with the government. The plunder of
Libya's Central Bank adds to the income that these groups
already get from illicit activities like smuggling, fuel
smuggling and human trafficking. A lasting fix to this problem
requires sustained American diplomatic engagement with
officials from the Central Bank and other economic
institutions.
Now all of these challenges I have outlined hinge upon
progress on the political front, on national reconciliation.
The U.S. and its partners must continue to play a strong
convening and persuading role, especially among its regional
Arab allies and, also, the Europeans to support the U.N.-led
roadmap. The U.N.-led roadmap is currently headed toward
convening national Presidential and parliamentary elections.
This shows that Libyans have not given up on a democracy,
despite the turmoil of the past year. However, a word of
caution is in order. Elections by themselves, if they are held
hastily without a constitutional framework, risk a return to
strife. We have seen this before in the past in 2012 and in
2014.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wehrey follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Doctor.
Ms. Friend?
STATEMENT OF MS. ALICE HUNT FRIEND, SENIOR FELLOW,
INTERNATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Ms. Friend. Chairman Ros-Lehtinen, Ranking Member Deutch,
members of the committee, distinguished colleagues, it is my
pleasure to be here today to discuss the current situation in
Libya.
The complexity of the civil war in Libya is rivaled only by
the complexity of the related crisis it breeds. The diversity
and ferocity of the country's domestic politics create
obstacles for terrorists attempting to establish havens, but
also make the role of Islam in governance a central and
contentious object of Libyan politics, amplifying Libya's
salience to global Islamic terrorism. Libya's oil resources,
proximity to Europe, and cultural connections to the Middle
East make it a strategic prize for multiple powerful outside
actors, and its competing governments and myriad militias fuel
an international race for Libyan proxies. In the midst of it
all, an historic volume of migrants is coming through Libya,
fleeing into the Mediterranean, overwhelming European and
broader international resources.
Ending major violence and stabilizing Libyan politics to
the point where powerful actors accept a single government will
be the most durable way to address terrorism and humanitarian
needs. Yet, the path to political equilibrium will likely be a
long one. The international community, including the United
States, should have a patient and realistic approach to Libyan
politics that also accounts for Libyan internal security
concerns.
The current challenge for the U.S. is knowing whom and how
to engage among the constantly shifting array of power brokers
and would-be national leaders to encourage political
accommodations and meaningfully address the humanitarian
crisis. The reported incapacitation of the Libyan National Army
command and the east-dominant center of power, Khalifa Haftar,
is likely to generate some political and security realignments
if Haftar is unable to return to the country.
Although group alignments with the U.N.-backed Government
of National Accord should open the door to outsider engagement
in principle, the persistent dynamism of Libyan politics
recommends a cautious approach to security assistance. Even if
the policy remains largely focused on countering ISIS and al-
Qaeda, the U.S. will need to determine ways to sustain pressure
on terrorist groups without undermining the prospects for
Libya's stability.
With regard to ongoing U.S. efforts to disrupt and
dismantle ISIS's operations in Libya, I believe the current
offshore pressure campaign and counterterrorism capacity-
building efforts among Libya's neighbors strikes the right
balance between U.S. national security and the prospects for
Libyan stability.
Given the range of crises consuming American policymakers'
time, it seems likely that U.S. efforts in Libya overall will
remain relatively modest, but continued negotiations and
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement are best
accomplished with the support of the U.S., not only in a
diplomatic sense and by eventually assisting the development of
national security forces, but also in a role supporting U.N.
Security Council prohibitions on disrupting constructive intra-
Libyan balances of power. This latter effort requires deft
diplomacy, especially with Gulf partners and Russia, given the
issue linkages elsewhere, but it would be the kind of
international leadership only the U.S. can provide.
Thank you again for calling us together today, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Friend follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, thank you very much. Excellent
testimony. We are very grateful for it.
I wanted to follow up on something that I had said in my
opening statement about Haftar and his health. We have
discussed the power struggles between the west and the east,
the GNA and the LNA, and how external actors back different
factions. With the uncertainty around Haftar, this raises
serious questions about the direction in which Libya may go if
he is incapacitated. And we may have already seen the first bit
of fallout this very afternoon, as news reports indicate that
the general's chief of staff survived a car bomb today in
Benghazi.
So, if you could tell us what the implications could be for
the political process and for Libya's security if the general
is out of the picture--and, of course, we don't know that--or
perceived to be weakened? Of course, Haftar's health scare, and
the uncertainty that brings, also calls into question the U.N.
Envoy in Libya's efforts and assertion just last month that he
believes Libya is still on track to have elections before the
year is out. I think that was more aspirational than realistic,
but it does raise questions about the U.N. support mission in
Libya and the Special Representative's role in all of this, and
it also underscores the lack of a role the United States has
thus far played in Libya. Can the U.N. effort be successful
without the United States leadership in Libya? And how could
the U.S. use our leverage to bring the external actors together
to support the U.N. effort to seek political reconciliation?
And as you know, last month the Foreign Affairs Committee
passed House Resolution 644 strongly condemning the slave
auctions that Mr. Deutch talked about of migrants and refugees
in Libya. This is, obviously, a major concern and a
reprehensible human rights issue. But I was hoping we could get
a better understanding of the trafficking picture and the
actors involved. Who is responsible for detaining migrants and
refugees in Libya? Are there outside actors involved? How do
they come in? How do they operate? What role do the Libyan
factions play in all of this, and how can Congress and the U.S.
do more to help this awful situation?
You can tackle one or all of them, as you see fit,
whichever one is your favorite. Mr. Blanchard?
Mr. Blanchard. That is a rich agenda. I will try to proceed
through those quickly.
I think the danger in the East is a vacuum, both political
and military, as we have seen or are observing, and you are
hearing more about what is behind Haftar, right? The LNA is a
coalition. And so, from a security standpoint, that is quite
true. The different forces would need to select new leadership
and that could get messy.
With regard to politics, Haftar's personal ambitions,
although not directly and often clearly stated, are a sticking
point in the negotiations. His desire, at a minimum, to lead
the security forces, if not play a political role in the
future, has been a sticking point. And so, his removal could,
arguably, create an opportunity in that regard.
In terms of the role of the U.N. mission and the United
States, I think it is helpful to think about the role that the
U.S. plays with the U.N. as setting a floor. Our role in the
Security Council, our vote and diplomacy there with regard to
things like the arms embargo and things like assets is the
quiet backstop to what the U.N. mission is trying to do.
In addition, our diplomacy, the statements that have been
made in the Security Council are quite clear that this is the
plan, this is the way we are moving forward. So, while we are
not taking an active role, if you ask the actors with whom we
may have challenging relationships, they certainly see our role
as present.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. That is comforting. Thank you.
Dr. Wehrey?
Mr. Wehrey. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I think Haftar's removal in the East would just underscore
what we have always known, that his coalition was just a
coalition. Ever since he launched his operation in May or the
summer of 2014, tribes, different religious groups and
different militias attached themselves to his operation for
their own self-serving purposes. Once he could claim liberation
of Benghazi, that coalition has started to unravel. So, even
before his health problems, there was also a lot of dissent
when I was there in Benghazi, against his style of rule,
against the empowerment of his sons, against his political
ambitions, his corruption. So, all of this was building. You
have different centers of power in the East, three different
cities. You have different tribes that are maneuvering.
The bottom line is I think you are going to see jockeying.
It may devolve into some violence. I think it is also an
opportunity in the sense that, if some new figure emerges at
the head of the LNA, the Libyan National Army, that could be
more amenable to western Libya, that could be an opportunity
for reconciliation. It is important to underscore in western
Libya just how demonized Haftar was because of his baggage,
because of his political ambitions.
I think the United States has an important role to play
with the regional Arab states that backed Haftar, the United
Arab Emirates and Egypt. They had already been cooling about
General Haftar a bit. He was not delivering for them. I think
this just underscores the point that, if these regional states
want influence in the new Libya, they need to support the
backing of a new figure in the East that is more amenable to
reconciliation and unifying the country.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Dr. Wehrey.
Ms. Friend?
Ms. Friend. Ma'am, I agree with what my colleagues have
said. I think there will be a real fight for control of the LNA
if he doesn't return. I think who takes over will really matter
because, if it is a contentious figure, then the infighting
will continue, and if it is a powerful figure----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Let me just interrupt. When you say
``fight for control,'' will that be a bloody fight for control,
an electoral fight for control?
Ms. Friend. I think it will be bloody, ma'am. I think, as
you pointed out in your comments, we are already perhaps
starting to see some of the struggles in today's car bomb
attack.
And so, I think there will be several consequences to this
that are possible. There could be reduced pressure on violent
Islamist groups in the area. Governance of Benghazi will
certainly be very different going forward. I think it will
interrupt reconciliation between the east and the west, simply
because it is unclear who westerners now negotiate with. But it
may help continuance of the LPA, which Haftar had announced in
December was now defunct. So, I also agree it might be an
opportunity. I also think it is going to interrupt Russian
influence, at least for a time. They are going to have to
figure out where they are going to put their investments now.
On the U.S. side, I tend to focus on the counterterrorism
piece. I think it is important the U.S. continue to be
extremely discriminating in targeting, because, again, as all
of these groups are realigning on the ground, we need to know
exactly who we are watching and who the enemies are, and who is
simply caught up in a fight, as it were.
When it comes to trafficking, I would just say there is
great variance among groups across the Sahel in how much they
benefit from and are involved in trafficking, but it does allow
them to blend in, if you will. And they are part of a larger
illicit criminal network and lawlessness problem. And so,
again, from a targeting perspective and figuring out who it is
that we are most interested in from an American national
security perspective, that just complicates matters.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Very difficult to figure that out.
Thank you so much.
And I am pleased to yield to Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses.
The U.N.-appointed Envoy to Libya, Ghassan Salame, plans to
amend the 2015 political agreement establishing the current
government, hold a national conference, call a referendum on
the constitution, and hold elections this year, as I am sure
that you are aware and, Dr. Wehrey, you mentioned this. Human
Rights Watch warned last month that Libya is not ready to hold
free and fair elections, setting concerns about potential
coercion, discrimination, and intimidation.
So, I would like to know from each of you, what milestones
does Libya need to reach to demonstrate that it is ready,
actually, for fair elections? And I suppose, what can the U.S.
do to help create the conditions for them to achieve those
milestones?
Mr. Blanchard. So, to begin, the Libyan electoral
authorities have conducted a new voter registration drive, and
that is one of the sort of highlights that SRSG Salame points
to, that 2.5 million Libyans stepped forward to participate.
That shows a baseline of a desire to participate in an
election.
The laws surrounding a referendum, the setting of
districts, the balance, all that needs to be agreed, and hasn't
been. Again, as the Special Representative points out, I think
he said at the meeting in Saudi Arabia, some of our Libyan
brothers are very creative in their means of preventing action
on those electoral issues, the nuts and bolts, right, the
electoral structure. That needs to be taking place. So, I would
watch that quite carefully.
We saw participation decline over the past electoral
exercises. And so, to the extent that we see turnout, that is
something to watch very closely. Because, really, what this is
about is the legitimacy, the lack of legitimacy in domestic
institutions. That is what needs to be reset here.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Wehrey. I think there are a number of key danger
points. The first one is the lack of a constitutional
framework. I mean, my discussions with Libyans is, without a
constitution, whatever government is produced is going to be
yet another transitional government that is going to lack
legitimacy, lack real authority.
The other key milestones are voting laws, security. My
visits to especially eastern Libyan underscored a degree of
disenchantment with democracy, that we tried these elections
before. Some people want a strongman, and that is why Khalifa
Haftar was able to step into the void. And so, people saw that
after the 2012, and especially the 2014, voting, there were
parliaments that could not deliver to their constituents that
were locked in committee disputes, and that led to strife. So,
overcoming that popular aversion to elections is important.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Anything that you have?
Ms. Friend. Yes, sir. I would say that I think a study of
the conditions prior to the 2014 elections would be very useful
because, of course, those elections were what, then, led to
greater disillusion politically inside the country.
And then, just from my own narrow purview, I always say
capacity for electoral security is extremely important because
elections marred by violence, as we have seen in Kenya and
elsewhere, have very poor outcomes as well.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Some have argued that, based on the highly fractured nature
of Libyan politics, governance may be better suited for a
federalized system, granting relative autonomy for various
regions. I am wondering whether you believe some manner of
federalized Libya might bring about increased security and
popular confidence in governance compared to a strong
centralized government, where they have had so much, I think,
disappointment with that model. Is that a feasible thing to
consider?
Mr. Blanchard. Decentralization has been a core theme of
the political conversation in Libya since 2011. As Fred
mentioned, municipalities have stepped forward and into the
void to a certain extent. While a Federal arrangement or a
decentralized political arrangement may emerge, difficult
questions about state resources, the distribution of funding,
management of security, all those would remain to be decided
and dealt with. And it is likely that those will remain
difficult.
Mr. Cicilline. If I could just have one final question,
with the chairman's indulgence? We have heard a lot about
outside actors in Libya, and I want to focus for a moment on
Russia, which appears to be playing several sides in this
conflict. There are claims that Russia has facilitated the
delivery of weapons to Haftar's forces, sometimes through legal
sales to Egypt, and the Russian special forces are reported to
be operating in the porous border region between Egypt and
Libya. So, if you could give me your assessment of what is
Russia's goal with respect to Libya and what does it have to
gain in Libya? And what does the U.S. risk by Russia increasing
its influence, or attempting to increase its influence, in the
various warring Libyan groups long term?
Mr. Wehrey. I think Russia wants to undercut European and
U.S. influence. I think this is an opportunity for them. I
think they have a number of financial goals in mind regarding
arms contracts, many of which they had before the revolution.
Gas deals, they had infrastructure projects. So, I think partly
it is monetary, but it is also a political opportunity. I don't
think they have got all their eggs in the Haftar basket. I
think they are diversifying their contacts to include Misurata,
to include Tripoli. They see themselves as a potential power
broker. They could certainly undercut the U.S. and the
Europeans.
Ms. Friend. Yes, sir, I would agree with that. I think they
are playing as many sides as possible, so that they will have
influence in the eventual government that wins out.
Mr. Blanchard. Yes, I mentioned the Security Council
earlier. The Russians have the same quiet role that we have and
the ability to delay and obstruct.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much. Thank you, Madam
Chairman, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline. Excellent
questions and great answers.
And now, I am pleased to yield to one of our favorite
veterans on our subcommittee----
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thanks.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. Mr. Kinzinger.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you. That is very nice. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
As I said in the opening, thank you all for being here.
I actually think Libya is an interesting study. With all
the challenges we have, it actually could end up, if we figure
out how to handle it--it is a very wealthy country with a
relatively small population. I also used Libya as kind of the
example when people argued, although the situation on the
ground has changed a little bit much now, against intervention
in Syria. I said, well, you have \1/2\ million dead Syrians.
You don't have that level of instability in Libya, even though
there is a major challenge.
The problem with Libya is our failure to follow through, I
think, what was rightfully an intervention. And then, we just
kind of assumed it would all work itself out, and it didn't.
So, I think leaving Libya with no strategy, if we are
dealing with a post-Qaddafi world, we can look back in 2020 and
say, here is everything. I think it is important for us to talk
about, though, what we could have done differently post-Libya,
because it would be naive of us to think we will never be in
this kind of situation again.
So, Mr. Blanchard, if you have ideas of what we could have
done differently? Or else we will go down the panel. I am
curious of what you guys would say. If you could go back in
time, what would you have changed in order to try to create a
better post-Qaddafi scenario?
Mr. Blanchard. I think perhaps Alice might be better suited
to talk about the Obama administration's view and what the
conversation may have been. The President himself has been
clear in terms of what he saw as the failure, and it really
was, as you mentioned, the assumption not just that it would
work itself out, but that the European partners and Arab states
would step forward in a coordinated manner.
If we look at the diplomatic level, it really is what SRSG
Salame calls too many cooks in the kitchen, and too many cooks
maybe with bad intent or their own selfish intent. So, it is
that coordinating function, the speaking with one voice, and
making sure that there wasn't daylight such that those
individual interests could begin to play themselves out and
amplify the internal dilemma. So, early coordinated action may
have been something that I would focus on.
Mr. Kinzinger. Ms. Friend, actually, if you want to jump
into that? And then, we will go to you, sir.
Ms. Friend. Yes, sir. By the time I stepped into my
Pentagon job in the Africa office, from a DoD perspective, we
were already quite cautious because the empowerment of
militias, of course, was off and running. And so, it was very
hard to know from a security assistance perspective which party
not only was aligned with a legitimate government we recognized
at the time, but also would continue to be aligned and would
continue to be a good-faith actor, which was something that
AFRICOM certainly emphasized as well.
Mr. Kinzinger. Did you guys discuss peacekeepers at all,
and was that even a possibility?
Ms. Friend. I don't recall us discussing peacekeepers at
that point. I know that it has been in the ether, especially
among some Europeans, for quite a long time. Peacekeeping
itself has its own sort of difficult track record as well.
Peacekeeping is an extraordinarily difficult thing to do, and
it really depends on the parties on the ground wanting to have
a peace to keep. And I don't think we were there with Libya
yet.
And so, I think the complexity and difficulty of the
environment was something that we simply did not recognize long
enough into it. And by the time we did, it was very hard to be
able to have meaningful influence on the ground, particularly
given the security situation for our own personnel.
So, I do wish, if I could rewind the clock, I wish that the
U.S. had perhaps taken a more forceful role at the United
Nations, that we had been more involved among the parties,
although I know Ambassador Stevens could not have been a better
person to be there and working that issue.
So, it is possible that Libya is a case where forces on the
ground were such that it would have been very, very hard for
the United States to do anything unilaterally, but I do think
the international community could have put in much more focus
and effort in the early days between 2011 and 2012 to perhaps
head off the worst of the violence and get the negotiations
started sooner.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
Sir?
Mr. Wehrey. I think in the first year there was an
excessive focus on elections as a success marker. And so, the
U.N. was entirely focused on elections, to the detriment of
dealing with the DDR problem, with the militias, with the
security sector. I think the U.S. handed this off to the
Europeans and the United Nations, who were both unable and
unwilling to address it.
So, you had these elections, but, then, you had no way to
protect the democratic institutions from the power of militias.
That raises the question of a stabilization force, which I
agree brings a whole host of other consequences, but perhaps
even a limited stabilization force to secure key facilities in
Tripoli, the parliaments, economic institutions, to protect
them from militia pressure.
But the huge challenge of demobilizing the militias was
made worse when the Libyan Government itself started paying the
militias with oil wealth in late 2011. That was a disastrous
decision. So, perhaps more U.S. oversight of Libya's use of its
oil wealth could have stopped this disaster. I think by the
time we got around to trying to train and equip a Libyan
military force, the General Purpose Force, it was too late.
That effort led to disaster because the militias were too
strong. So, again, the bottom line is I think we missed a key
window in that first year to exert more of a presence.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I think it is somewhat to the extent of
the mistake made in Iraq, where we went in and there was a
sense of lawlessness after the invasion instead of law, and
people turned.
And, Madam Chair, if I could ask just one more question
with leniency?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Absolutely. Go ahead.
Mr. Kinzinger. We talk about Haftar. Whoever has the
knowledge on it--maybe all three of you--how would you compare
him and how you would see a Libya under the rule of Haftar, if
you will, versus like Qaddafi? Is he more benevolent? Is he as
ruthless? I mean, what is kind of the sense there? And I am
sure there is no way to really know, but what are your
thoughts?
Mr. Blanchard. Muammar al-Qaddafi was a very unique
individual. So, I would be reticent to compare or expect anyone
to equate quite that way.
The fact of the matter is that, personality aside, Libya
has changed. The political and security power has been
atomized, and any individual and/or ruling arrangement that
emerges from this process is going to have to recognize that.
In an odd sense, the Libya of Qaddafi's imagination, with
individual communities leading themselves and feeding upward.
That is, ironically, now more the case than it was when he was
there. And so, whoever is leading Libya in the future is going
to have to deal with, as I said, this atomization that has
occurred.
Mr. Kinzinger. Fair point.
Mr. Wehrey. I think Haftar's support was already weakened.
So, he didn't have the sort of total control that Qaddafi had.
But, that said, there were a number of similarities that his
opponents have drawn and that I witnessed when I was in
Benghazi. I mean, he was cultivating his sons. He did sort of
enact a cult of personality where you would go around Benghazi
and see billboards of Haftar's picture everywhere. The police
state, people were not free to speak their minds in Benghazi.
People who criticized them disappeared. Censorship of the
press. He brought back the old police, secret police. He relies
on tribes. He tries to manage tribes, play them off against
each other. So, there are some similarities. That said, as we
have seen with his failing health and his diminishing
influence, I don't think it compares to Qaddafi.
Mr. Kinzinger. Did you have anything else?
Ms. Friend. No.
Mr. Kinzinger. Okay. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and I
yield back.
Thank you all.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Kinzinger.
Mr. Connolly of Virginia?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And welcome to our panel.
Dr. Wehrey, let me start with you. You said one of the
bright spots potentially, not to overstate it, but were kind of
at the local level in terms of elections, function. And that
was music to my ears. I come from local government. I think it
is long neglected. I think a lot of our democracy promotion
programs start at the top and we start with the Parliament, as
opposed to starting at the village level and working the way
up.
Can we build on that, do you think? Could that maybe affect
our strategy moving forward, maybe a different course for us in
terms of what we pursue in Libya, given the fact there is a
hopeful sign, but it is working at the local level?
Mr. Wehrey. Absolutely. I mean, we have seen a number of
positive developments where there has been reconciliation
between towns that were previously fighting. Towns enjoy strong
legitimacy with their elected councils. This was true in 2012
through to the present, although I will caveat this that in the
east there are non-elected mayors that have been appointed by
the army.
So, American engagement through USAID and through other
channels, is absolutely the right way to go; however, not
necessarily these non-elected councils. But I think, I mean,
helping them to deliver services, the problem, though, also, it
goes back to the national level, where they don't get their
budgets. They are criticizing the Government of National Accord
for the way it distributes its budget. So, I think American
engagement has to be from both levels. I mean, the local is
important, but it can only get you so far. There has to be
engagement at the national level.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, but the thing about local government
that all over the world some institutions just don't get it,
but if you want to build democracy, it is built on a social
contract.
Mr. Wehrey. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. I pay my taxes, and you pick up my trash. I
pay my taxes; the clinic is open when I need it. I pay my
taxes; the road gets paved. I pay my taxes; there is a clean
source of water.
If, on the other hand, there is no respect for that and
there is no culture of, well, what do you mean we are supposed
to make all that work, we don't do that, it is corrupt, not our
business, well, then you are going to completely erode
confidence in the basic institution of governance, and it is
why it exists, let alone democracy and what kind of government.
And I think often that gets overlooked. That is why I picked up
on what you said as one maybe helpful sign that we could build
upon, expand; God forbid we invest in it.
Mr. Blanchard, we have met before and we had a talk about
terrorism in the Maghreb. And one of the things I recall you
and I talking about, and I want to give you an opportunity to
talk about it on the record here, but Libya is kind of key. I
mean, if we are going to get at terrorists, well, instability
in parts of Tunisia, parts of Nigeria, parts of Morocco, you
cannot ignore the big, huge, festering sore of Libya. It is
kind of key to addressing all the other potential hotspots in
the region.
Could you elaborate a little bit on that and how what we
are talking about relates to other things we also care about in
the region?
Mr. Blanchard. Sure. As I said earlier, I think the United
States is one actor among many outside Libya that is seeking to
mitigate transnational threats, terrorism in particular. I
think terrorism is the key driver of Egypt's desire to back
``the strongman approach'' to security in eastern Libya.
I think the continued availability of weapons, the ability,
particularly on the southern and southwest borders, of people
to transit back and forth allows a place for the ISIS fighters
that Fred talked about being displaced from Sirte to hide,
regroup, to reorganize. I also think that, in terms of our
investment, the Department of Defense is, to the extent that we
are investing in a sort of long-range counterterrorism
approach, it is a containment strategy, and it is built
entirely on this. So, it is a draw on our resources as well.
With regard to local communities, I did just want to
observe the USAID programs, the Transition Initiatives Programs
have a lot of components that are focused precisely on aspects
that you raised, you know, helping local communities and local
government improve services, take the temperature of the town
and see what they need. So, that kind of grassroots approach is
one component of our policy. But, as Fred observed, in the
absence of a nationwide national political accord, it is going
to be difficult for those to really prosper.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, it is harder, and I am a big supporter
of both NDI and IRI, and I think they are necessary. But I
think sometimes it is easier to work with parliamentarians in
the national capital than it is to roll up your sleeves and go
down to the village level and try to help them do their jobs,
and do it in a way that incorporates accountability and
transparency, which are elements of democratic institution-
building.
From my own personal experience of working on some projects
before I had this job, sometimes we do it well; sometimes we
don't. I believe the building block of democracy starts at the
local level, not the other way around.
Can I just ask one last question? This is the big
philosophical one. But I was in Libya a few years ago with our
former colleague, David Dreier, under the House Democracy
Project. What struck me about Libya was, unlike some other
places, you essentially have three population centers. They are
all near the coast. You don't have a huge interior population.
It is, relative to some other places, not all that
heterogeneous; it is a pretty homogeneous population. Tribal
divisions, yes, but they used to, I mean, they are just coming
off one-man rule for quite a long time. You could call that
stability, not one we desire, but it is not like it is a novel
thought that there could be a government, a central government,
that exercises authority. It is a small population.
So, why is this so hard? Why has it already been so long
that we see this kind of chaos, this inability to put together
meaningful coalitions that can govern and into which the
population can invest and support? Why is it so hard?
Mr. Wehrey. Congressman, thank you.
I agree. I mean, these were all things that led to our
optimism after the 2011 revolution. I think the fundamental
problem is Qaddafi ruined this country. He gutted it of
institutions. So, Libyans had no experience in self-governance.
The entire muscle fiber you need to run a country was missing.
Qaddafi ruled this in a highly personalized way.
So, things like civil society, unions, elected municipal
councils, they were all starting from scratch. And the
fundamental vacuum is also the security sector. I mean, there
was no army. So, you had the growth of these militias. You had,
unfortunately, during the revolution and after, you did have
real divisions growing between these different towns that acted
like autonomous statelets that coalesced with their own
militias, their own sources of income.
I agree it is a small population; it should be easier. But
the final thing I will add is the management of the economy. As
the U.N. has mentioned, at its core, this is a contest for
plunder, for access to economic resources. So, the economy is
both, I think, a blessing and a curse.
Ms. Friend. Sir, can I just say, historically thinking, the
idea of Libya as one unified country is actually an anomaly. It
is a very regional organization. In fact, there was no, there
still is no rail line between eastern and western. It is very
hard to drive. There is just not a lot of infrastructure
integration between east and west. And the Fezzan in the south
has always been isolated.
And so, I think, at least from a regional perspective, even
though it is a small population, there actually isn't a
tradition of integration across regions in Libya. And so, to
some extent, this is a project that is imposing a new concept
on Libya, Qaddafi notwithstanding. I mean, I think he papered
over a lot of things and just did it through strength of arms.
And I was intrigued by what Mr. Blanchard had said about
how the hangover from Qaddafi is such that there is now a deep
suspicion of centralized authority. So, it is not a historical
tradition, and with Qaddafi as their example, why should the
average person in Benghazi or Derna trust the Tripoli
government? And this is what folks there have to overcome.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Blanchard. I wouldn't want to let the international
community off the hook. As I said, seeking to mitigate
transitional threats or pursuing their own agendas, political,
regional, ideological, has led to a lot of interference, and it
has amplified the real internal challenges and difficult
dilemmas, zero-sum behavior, security threats, that Libyans are
facing. When you have outsiders coming in, observing a
difficult situation, and saying, well, ``I need to back this
person to solve my problem,'' that has an amplifying effect,
and it has really, I think, helped account for what we have
seen subsequently.
Mr. Connolly. Madam Chairman, you have been so gracious,
but it has been a very thoughtful conversation.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
Mr. Connolly. And thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. I pay my taxes, and I want clean water. I
pay my taxes. I got it.
Thank you so much, Mr. Connolly.
I would like to ask, if you would allow me, the questions
that Mr. Deutch had. And they have kind of been covered a
little bit, but I want to make sure that his are covered
extensively.
First, ``The U.N. Refugee Agency estimates that there are
1.1 million people in Libya in need of humanitarian assistance.
Displaced families, refugees, and those living without basic
services or health care continue to demonstrate Libya's need
for assistance.''
So, Mr. Deutch asks, ``Do you think the U.S. is providing
adequate levels of humanitarian assistance to Libya, and what
gaps remain where the U.S. or our international partners could
step up?''
Mr. Blanchard?
Mr. Blanchard. I am looking for the data points that I
brought with me because I want to get this right.
So, there is an International Humanitarian Response Plan
for Libya. The United States is the top contributor in 2016 and
2017 of humanitarian funding by just a hair. The Germans and
the Italians, the Europeans also put forward funds to support
that.
The needs that have been identified I think were 70 percent
met last year. Could more be done, particularly with regard to
the migrant situation? The United States approach has been, I
think, to let European states and the European Union take the
lead there. Working together, the European Union, the African
Union, and the U.N. have taken some steps to address that
problem. Again, the United States, I think, declaratory policy
is quite supportive of that, and behind the scenes we are
making a contribution.
Mr. Wehrey. Chairman, I would defer to Mr. Blanchard on the
actual specifics, but let me just underscore that the refugee
displacement issue is so profound, and I saw it firsthand. I
mean hundreds of families displaced from the city of Benghazi
are crowded into other cities in the west, Misrata and Tripoli.
There are refugees from the south that are in the capital. So,
these refugees are straining the ability of the government in
the capital.
You have other local communities that have been displaced
through fighting. The city of Tawergha is the main example, and
I have been in their camps. There are truly horrific
conditions, you know, young kids growing up year after year in
these squalid refugee camps. So, it is a huge moral problem.
The U.S. I think can always be doing more. I think its
role, however, should be focused on Libyan economic
institutions that can better address the plight of those
displaced economically. So, there again, that leads me back to
U.S. engagement with the Central Bank.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you.
Ms. Friend?
Ms. Friend. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch mentioned
root causes. I think in this case it is important to
distinguish between the humanitarian needs from the Libyan
population as a result of the violence and, then, the
humanitarian needs of the migrant population coming from sub-
Saharan African largely.
And when it comes to humanitarian needs for the Libyans, to
address that, of course, involves addressing the root causes of
the violence. And so, that, again, gets us back to these
reconciliation efforts.
And when it comes to the sub-Saharan Africans, then that is
also its own set of root humanitarian and governance issues
that are driving people out of their homes. So, we think of
about Eritreans crossing the desert in Sudan to get to Libya,
to get across the Mediterranean. Addressing what is happening
in Eritrea or what is happening in Niger, or Mali, I think is
as important as catching the problem by the time it gets to
Libya.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
And his second question--thank you for those answers--``The
U.S. and the U.N. continue striving to work through the
existing framework established under the Libyan Political
Agreement to establish and move Libya forward. Some, however,
do not recognize this agreement's legitimacy. In your opinion,
do you believe this framework is viable or does a new path need
to be forged?''
Mr. Blanchard. I think the SRSG's current approach is
driven by, as I said in my opening statement, a desire to
refresh the legitimacy of institutions, in particular, so that
decisions can be taken by a recognized authority. So, in terms
of a legitimacy deficit, it is clear--not necessarily that we
in the United States get to decide that or point to it; it is
the Libyans themselves who think that various institutions lack
legitimacy. And so, this entire exercise is, arguably, aimed at
that.
Mr. Wehrey. I agree. I mean, I think this was an important
starting point. It was flawed. Certainly, it was opposed. But
it was at least a mark on the wall. And so, before you peer
into the abyss and jump into it, you have to have something to
replace it. So, I think the U.N.'s approach with amendments,
with reviving it, giving it new legitimacy, is the right
approach. Of course, there are multiple actors across the board
that benefit from the status quo, and spoiling it. Some of
these actors are backed by international states. And that is
why I think the U.S. has an important convening role to get
everyone on the same page to say, let's move forward on this
roadmap. This LPA certainly was flawed, but was signed up to,
and it needs to be the basis.
Ms. Friend. Ma'am, I addressed in my written testimony the
security elements of the LPA, which I think in principle are
very good. The problem with the implementation has been making
the leap, as I say, from militias to a national military force.
In particular for the HOR and Tobruk that works with
Haftar, the issue has been command and control and the
Presidential Council being the Commander-in-Chief of the armed
forces with which elements of the HOR are not comfortable.
So, I think in these discussions, if these issues can be
worked out, the framework of the LPA from a security
perspective is quite sound.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, we alternate between high hopes,
low expectations, and it is just some kind of wild ride. And
unfortunately, so many lives are at stake.
Thank you so much for excellent testimony.
And please tell Mr. Deutch that I did comply with his
questions. I did my homework.
Excellent witnesses. Thank you.
With that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]