- 18 YEARS LATER: THE STATE OF HOMELAND SECURITY AFTER 9/11
[Senate Hearing 116-397]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-397
18 YEARS LATER: THE STATE OF
HOMELAND SECURITY AFTER 9/11
=======================================================================
FIELD HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
SEPTEMBER 9, 2019
__________
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
38-157 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin, Chairman
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
KAMALA D. HARRIS, California
RICK SCOTT, Florida
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Gabrielle D'Adamo Singer, Staff Director
Joseph C. Folio III, Chief Counsel
Michelle D. Woods, Co-Director and Senior Policy Advisor for Homeland
Security
Caroline K. Bender, Research Assistant
David M. Weinberg, Minority Staff Director
Zachary I. Schram, Minority Chief Counsel
Alexa E. Noruk, Minority Director of Homeland Security
Roy S. Awabdeh, Minority Counsel
Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
Thomas J. Spino, Hearing Clerk
C O N T E N T S
------
Opening statements:
Page
Senator Johnson..............................................
3
Senator Peters...............................................
5
Senator Romney...............................................
18
Senator Carper...............................................
20
Senator Scott................................................
23
Senator Hassan...............................................
24
Senator Hawley...............................................
27
Prepared statements:
Senator Johnson..............................................
35
Senator Peters...............................................
37
WITNESSES
Monday, September 9, 2019
Alice M. Greenwald, President and CEO of 9/11 Memorial and Museum
1
Hon. Michael Chertoff, Former Secretary (2005-2009) U.S.
Department of Homeland Security................................
7
Hon. Janet A. Napolitano, Former Secretary (2009-2013) U.S.
Department of Homeland Security................................
10
Hon. Jeh C. Johnson, Former Secretary (2013-2017) U.S. Department
of Homeland Security...........................................
12
Alphabetical List of Witnesses
Chertoff, Hon. Michael:
Testimony....................................................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
43
Greenwald, Alice M.:
Testimony....................................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
39
Johnson, Hon. Jeh C.:
Testimony....................................................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
54
Napolitano, Hon. Janet A.:
Testimony....................................................
10
Prepared statement...........................................
50
APPENDIX
Illegal Immigrant Arrest Chart...................................
61
Minors and Families Chart........................................
62
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
Mr. Chertoff.................................................
63
Ms. Napolitano...............................................
64
Mr. Johnson..................................................
65
18 YEARS LATER: THE STATE OF
HOMELAND SECURITY AFTER 9/11
----------
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 9, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs,
New York, NY.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., at
the National September 11 Memorial and Museum, New York, New
York, Hon. Ron Johnson, Chairman of Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Johnson, Peters, Romney, Scott, Hawley,
Carper and Hassan.
Chairman Johnson. Good morning.
OPENING STATEMENT OF ALICE M. GREENWALD,\1\ PRESIDENT AND CEO
OF 9/11 MEMORIAL AND MUSEUM
Ms. Greenwald. Thank you Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Peters, and Committee Members.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Ms. Greenwald appears in the Appendix
on page 39.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My name is Alice Greenwald, and I am the President and
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the 9/11 Memorial Museum.
On behalf of everyone associated with the Memorial Museum,
I want to extend a warm welcome and express our sincere
gratitude for your steadfast commitment to securing the safety
of our Nation.
We are deeply honored to have Secretaries Chertoff,
Napolitano, and Johnson here this morning, and I want to thank
each of you for your dedicated service to the Nation.
The decision to hold this public field hearing here within
a space defined by the remaining foundational structure of the
World Trade Center (WTC) at what was 18 years ago this week the
epicenter of Ground Zero, makes today's program especially
meaningful.
I know many of you toured the museum last night, some for
the first time. The events we chronicle here, the lives we
remember and the aspirations we embrace for world free from the
scourge of terrorism are inextricably linked to the work of
this Committee and to the topics that you will discuss today.
Here at the 9/11 Memorial and Museum we testify to the
largest loss of life resulting from a foreign attack on
American soil and the greatest single loss of rescue personnel
in a single event in American history.
Our exhibitions and programs recount the collective
experience of profound shock, unprecedented vulnerability and
overwhelming grief caused by the attacks.
Yet visitors take away more than a cautionary tail to
remain vigilant to continue threats. By sharing the manifold
expressions of courage, compassion and service in response to
9/11, this Museum also affirms the best of who we can be as
human beings.
From its inception the Nine Eleven Memorial and Museum
vowed to honor and preserve the memory of all who were killed.
And 2 days from now this memorial will host as we do every
year, a solemn ceremony to mark the anniversary of the 9/11
attacks.
But in recent years, our understanding of what it means to
remember has had to evolve with the tragic recognition that,
for many 9/11 is not past history at all.
For the survivors, responders, recovery and relief workers,
volunteers and community members exposed to hazards and toxins
in the aftermath of the attacks, 9/11 is an all too present
reality.
The massive 16 acre recovery effort at this site lasted 9
months, concluding on May 30, 2002, with the ceremonial removal
of the last column now standing directly behind you here in
Foundation Hall.
During that time, as well as on the day of the attacks,
hundreds of thousands, it is estimated 400,000, responders, and
survivors, workers and residents were exposed to hazards and
toxic dust released into the air at and around the World Trade
Center following the collapse of the twin tours on 9/11.
In the 18 years since, thousands have died.
And tens of thousands more suffer from injuries and
illnesses sustained at all three attack sites including the
Pentagon and the crash site near Shanksville, Pennsylvania.
The scale of the 9/11 health crisis is almost
inconceivable. Over 97 thousand people living in all 50 States
and in 434 of 435 congressional districts, are currently
enrolled in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC's) World Trade Center health program.
This tragic situation exemplifies the longitudinal impact
of terrorism, and its ongoing human toll.
In just 2 years, we will mark the 20 anniversary of the 9/
11 attacks.
For the witness generation, it is unbelievable that two
decades will have passed, our memories of that day are still
that vivid.
But there is a new generation growing up in a world defined
in so many ways by a pivotal event they did not experience
personally, some are in college, some are starting their
careers.
If as someone recently remarked, the 21st Century started
here.
We must ensure that the next generation and generations to
come understand the significance of the events and legacies of
9/11 so that they have the tools and the perspective to
negotiate the challenges ahead.
National security, the topic of today's hearing, is among
the greatest of those challenges.
And it is a core programmatic focus for the 9/11 Memorial
and Museum. As evidenced by this morning's hearing the museum
has emerged as a vital convening space in which to explore
issues of global security, counter terrorism, crisis leadership
and public service.
We provide especially tailored training programs for
professionals in law enforcement, intelligence, and the
military and we regularly offer public programs on security,
defense, and foreign policy.
The museum also hosts an annual summit on security,
bringing together leading voices on security matters, from
across the public and private sectors.
Our next summit will take place on November 12th and 13th,
and will kick off with keynotes from former Director of
National Intelligence (DNI) director Dan Coats and our
chairman, Mike Bloomberg.
This year's summit will also offer an opportunity for
attendees to preview our next special exhibition documenting
the more than 10-year hunt for Osama bin Laden.
If you are interested in attending the summit, or would
like to visit this exhibition at another time, please let me
know.
Standing here, sitting here in Foundation Hall at the heart
of Ground Zero, we are witness not only to the remnants of what
was destroyed, but to the promise of a better future.
This is now the foundation at Ground Zero, a place to
buildup from, and create a safer world for our children, and
our grandchildren.
Thank you for being here today, and for your dedication and
service to this singularly critical goal.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Alice.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHNSON\1\
Will the Secretaries please be seated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Johnson appears in the
Appendix on page 35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This hearing on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
(HSGAC) will come to order. I would like to start with a brief
moment of silence to honor the memory of all those who lost
their lives on that terrible day, and the first responders who
continue to lose their lives to diseases that they contracted
in untold acts of heroism.
[Pause].
Thank you. I would first like to thank Alice Greenwald and
everyone involved in the creation of this special place. I
would like to thank the National 9/11 Memorial Museum for
hosting this field hearing on hallowed ground, and for
providing a sobering and moving and educational tour for
Committee Members and staff last night.
I would also like to thank everyone for attending what I
hope to be a thoughtful and informative event. In particular, I
would like to thank three of the former secretaries of the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Secretaries Chertoff,
Napolitano and Johnson, for their attendance, testimony and
especially their service to this Nation. We truly appreciate
it.
The title of this hearing ``18 Years Later, The State of
Homeland Security After 9/11,'' describes our goal: to look
back and assess what has transpired since that awful day. What
actions were taken? What has and what has not been effective?
And maybe most important, what has changed?
In 2011, the Tenth Anniversary Report Card produced by the
Bipartisan Policy Center, focused on the extent to which the 9/
11 Commission's 41 recommendations have been implemented. The
report concluded with the reminder that ``we have done much,
but there is much more to do.''
Much work remains because we are living in a world of rapid
and dramatic change. It is essential to acknowledge that as the
world evolves, enemies adapt, new threats and problems emerge.
For example, if the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
existed in 2011, it certainly was not on most people's radar.
We were worried about large scale flight attacks by al-Qaeda,
not a terror group using video and social media to inspire
lone-wolf terrorists. I doubt that the creators of the Internet
and social media platforms ever contemplated how their
innovations could be used for such evil.
In his book, ``Slouching Toward Gomorrah,'' Robert Bork
illustrated how the Internet provided an opportunity for
previously isolated deviants to connect to others. Social media
has sped up the process that Daniel Patrick Moynihan accurately
described as ``defining deviancy down.'' As a result, we have
experienced the depressing proliferation of homegrown violent
extremists (HVE), mass shootings and domestic terror attacks.
Another dramatic shift that has occurred involves the
composition of illegal immigration. In 2011, only 3,938
unaccompanied alien children (UAC) from Central America were
apprehended entering our Southwest Border illegally, and the
phenomenon of families exploiting our laws was so minor, we
were not even keeping track of them. And 11 months into this
fiscal year (FY), more than 69,000 unaccompanied children from
Central America, and 432,000 family members have been
apprehended, with most claiming asylum and being allowed to
stay.
I use these examples to highlight the evolving complexity
of the problems we face, and our inability to effectively
address them. Unfortunately, there are not many solutions as
easy and effective as hardening the cockpit doors. As Chairman
of this Committee, I have attempted to guide us through the
problem-solving process, gather information, properly define
problems, identify root causes, establish achievable goals, and
then only after completing that work, begin to design workable
solutions. Too often in the political realm, solutions are
directed towards unachievable goals and they simply do not
reflect reality.
The Tenth Anniversary Report Card details significant
implementation of the 9/11 Commission's 41 recommendations. But
those were solutions in response to 9/11.
In 2015, this Committee's then-ranking member, Senator Tom
Coburn, issued a report reviewing the Department of Homeland
Security. He detailed $544 million spent by DHS from 2003 to
2014, and criticized the Department for ``not successfully
executing any of its five main missions.''
Let me quickly, as an aside, mention what those five
missions are.
Prevent terrorism and enhance security. Secure and manage
our borders. Enforce and administer our immigration laws.
Safeguard and secure cyberspace. Strengthen the national
preparedness and resilience.
And I also have to say in that report, as harsh as it was,
it was not a reflection on the current secretary, Secretary
Johnson or past secretaries.
In fact, he calls on that report, the management skills and
Unity-of-Effort initiative.
But it is still pretty harsh assessments, and after 18
years it is necessary to ask some hard questions based on
experience. For example, is DHS too big? Does it have too many
missions? Can we expect one department to be responsible for
national disasters; preventing domestic terror attacks; cyber
security; protecting critical infrastructure; enforcing
immigration laws; securing our borders; investigation
counterfeit currency and protecting government officials? Not
only does the list go on, but in addition to its operational
responsibilities, DHS also reports to 92 congressional
committees and subcommittees of jurisdiction, plus another 27
caucus, commissions and groups.
The complex set of problems that our Nation faces will not
be solved with heated rhetoric in the midst of political
squabbling. It will require individuals working together in
good faith, as Members of this Committee have done so often in
the past. That is why I am grateful that a bipartisan group of
senators has the opportunity to be here today to learn from a
bipartisan group of former secretaries. I hope that through
this work we can fairly evaluate past successes and failures
and use these assessments to guide future actions and policies
designed to secure our homeland.
Again, I thank the Secretaries and look forward to your
testimony, and then Senator Peters.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS\1\
Senator Peters. Thank you, Chairman Johnson for convening
this important hearing, and thank you to Alice Greenwald and
the entire National 9/11 Memorial and Museum staff for hosting
us here today. I am also grateful to our former Homeland
Security Secretaries for joining us to share your thoughts as
well as your expertise.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appears in the
Appendix on page 37.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This hallowed space is quiet and peaceful today. We are
surrounded by the remnants of the Towers that were destroyed,
and the treasured memories of 2,977 lives taken 18 years ago at
the World Trade Center and at the Pentagon and in Shanksville,
Pennsylvania.
My colleagues and I had the opportunity to tour the museum
and the Memorial yesterday, and the experience--this
extraordinary tribute to the lives that were lost in the most
devastating attack on American soil, the tribute to the
families who lost their loved ones, and the first responders
who so bravely ran into danger to save the lives of others.
Behind us is the last column, the final piece of steel that
was removed from Ground Zero after the 9-month long recovery
effort had ended. Today, it stands as a monument honoring the
441 first responders, police, firefighters and rescue workers
who gave their lives in the line of duty.
This week, we remember and honor the lives lost on
September 11, 2001, we must also reflect on the lessons that we
have learned in the years since as we work to prevent a tragedy
like this from ever happening again.
In the days following September 11, our Nation felt, for
the first time, that we were vulnerable to the dangers of a
very volatile world. In those frightful days, no one knew what
the future would hold--only that we would rise from the rubble
united and resolve to be stronger than ever.
It was out of that uncertainty and determination to protect
this Nation from future attacks, that the Department of
Homeland Security was founded.
The new department, which rapidly grew to be one of our
Nation's largest Federal agencies, was comprised of nearly two
dozen large and diverse agencies, many of which had operated
for decades as independent actors. In the face of tragedy these
organizations, each with their own very unique cultures and
histories, coalesced around a very single and focused mission
and under one banner.
The Department of Homeland Security was created with one
primary mission in mind, combating the scourge of terrorism and
ensuring that we could say with confidence ``Never Again.''
However, in the years that have since passed, as the world
around us has changed, so too have the challenges facing this
great Nation, and this vital department.
Today, DHS confronts a new generation of persistent and
evolving threats, more complex and diffuse than we could have
possibly imagined just a few years ago.
With each passing day, our world becomes more
interconnected, cementing the important role that cybersecurity
plays in our everyday lives.
A rise in violence driven by racism, religious
discrimination and other hateful ideologies has altered our
perception of domestic terrorism and the threats that they
pose.
And one of the gravest threats to our national security
does not fly a flag or adhere to an ideology. Yet climate
change poses an existential threat not just to the United
States but to our entire planet.
The Department of Homeland Security is our first line of
defense against these and many other challenges, and some of
which have evolved or risen since this Department was created.
As the threats to our homeland change, so must the efforts
to protect our national security.
With nearly two decades of lessons learned, the time has
come for a clear-eyed assessment of what has worked and what
needs to be improved.
As we reflect on what the Department has accomplished to
date, we must consider whether the size and the complexity of
DHS can keep pace with the constantly evolving threats of a
rapidly changing world.
In order to build a more sustainable department and defend
ourselves from global threats we must look to the future. It is
not enough to understand the threats of the moment, we must
also ensure that DHS is prepared to anticipate and identify
those threats arising in the future.
This is a very difficult conversation, but one that we must
have to keep our country safe and ensure that we never again
face a catastrophic event like September 11th.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Peters.
As the Secretaries may be aware, it is our tradition to
swear in witnesses. So, if you will all stand and raise your
right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you will give
before this Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help you, God.
Mr. Chertoff. Yes.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Chairman Johnson. Please be seated.
Our first Secretary is former Secretary Michael Chertoff,
who is the founder and the executive chairman of the Chertoff
Group and senior counsel to the law firm of Covington &
Burling.
Mr. Chertoff was the second Secretary of the Department of
Homeland Security serving under President George W. Bush. He
led the Department from 2005 to 2009. Earlier in his career he
was a Federal judge on the Third Circuit Court of Appeals and
was head of the U.S. Department of Criminal Justice, U.S.
Department of Justice Criminal Division. Secretary Chertoff.
TESTIMONY OF HON. MICHAEL CHERTOFF, FORMER SECRETARY (2005-
2009), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Chertoff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you Senator Peters and Members of the Committee.
I deeply appreciate and am honored by the opportunity to
appear before the Committee and particularly in this setting,
which is so meaningful.
I also know that in the audience we have a number of senior
security officials from the State of New York, of the Fire
Department of New York, and the Port Authority, which of course
is the organization that houses this facility.
I also would like to request respectfully that my written
testimony be made part of the record.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Chertoff appears in the Appendix
on page 43.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Johnson. No objection.
Mr. Chertoff. I have very vivid personal memories of
September 11th.
Very briefly, I was head of the Criminal Division and
within minutes after the second plane hit the Tower, in the
World Trade Center I was at the operation center in the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), with then FBI Director Bob
Mueller, trying to figure out first who had done it and perhaps
more importantly how do we stop it from happening again.
And I have vivid memories of hearing about the plane that
went down in Shanksville, and also having heard the order
transmitted to shoot the plane down if necessary, something I
never would have imagined that I would live to hear.
Within a matters of days after September 11, I was here on
the site with the Attorney General (AG) and the FBI Director,
touring the rubble, and you could still experience the smell
and the visual sights of destruction, which were almost
unimaginable.
So, for me this is an opportunity again to remember what
is, for the whole country and maybe for the whole world a
seminal event of our lifetimes.
It is obviously very appropriate to use the impending
anniversary as a way to honor those who died, and those who
volunteered to run into harm's way to try to protect victims of
this attack--firefighters, police.
And then in the weeks and months and years afterwards,
those who left the comfort of their homes to volunteer and join
the armed forces, to continue to protect us against the enemy
that was based overseas.
But I am also mindful of what was said previously about the
fact that we are coming up on 20 years, a generation of time
that has passed since September 11th.
And I think about the fact that there are now young folks
in college for whom this is a history lesson, and not a vivid
memory.
And so, of course, the question naturally arises, when the
next generation comes on the scene, what will they be facing
and what will they remember, and will they, ``God forbid'',
have another similar event to reflect upon.
And I think that is very much to mind the value of the
importance of this hearing.
What is the next generation going to face and how do we
adapt ourselves to what that might be?
So, I have basically three brief observations about this.
One is, I regard the 9/11 event and some of the events that we
saw thereafter as what I call Terrorism 1.0. That was Osama bin
Laden's vision of high impact events with large mass casualties
and very dramatic visual seeds of destruction and death.
And I have to say that DHS and the whole U.S. Government
has been quite successful in making sure that an attack of that
scale has not been successful since September 11th.
We came close a couple of times. Some of you will remember
the August 2006 airline plot which we frustrated, which would
have blown up 12 airliners leaving Heathrow Airport, coming to
North America.
But it is important that our success not lead us to
complacency, because the enemies of this country still look to
the possibility of a mass attack, whether it is explosions,
chemical attacks, or biological attacks.
And as we saw in the months after 9/11, if you give
terrorists organizations a safe haven, they will begin to
experiment with chemical weapons, biological weapons and other
kinds of weapons of catastrophe.
And it is important that we deny them those safe havens.
And I would say, in connection with that as we look at
ongoing discussions with respect to the future of Afghanistan,
let's be sure that we do not sacrifice our ability to strangle
any plots, to shut down the labs and the training centers
before they get started again.
I will also say that we have seen a morphing of terrorism,
what I call 2.0 and 3.0. 2.0 being smaller scale attacks like
we saw in Mumbai or in the Bataclan nightclub in France, which
are coordinated and trained, but do not have the scale of a 9/
11.
And then perhaps even more alarming is what I call 3.0,
inspired attacks, where people are basically incited over the
Internet, to go out and pick up car keys, guns, or make bombs
using the materials in their mother's kitchen in order to kill
people randomly, just in order to keep a marker that the
terrorists are going to continue to attack.
And here I have to say that we have not only Jihad
terrorists, which are still networked internationally with each
other, but we are seeing other ideological terrorists also
arising, what we sometimes call domestic terrorism, whether it
is white supremacists or other kinds of ideological groups.
And even those are not purely domestic. They are reaching
across borders, using the Internet to incite each other, to
boast about the number of people that they have killed and to
continue to carry out these attacks.
And so we need to start to think about strategies to deal
with this kind of terrorism, which to my mind involves much
more involvement of local authorities, and local social
services; but also the creation of what I call off ramps, ways
you might intervene with people who are beginning to get into
that mind-set, and divert them before they wind up having to be
in the criminal justice system or worse, wind up carrying out
an attack.
And finally, we need to focus on cyber warfare.
We see ransom-ware attacks on our cities, that are shutting
down services. We have seen in other parts of the world, like
Ukraine, attacks on critical infrastructure that have shut the
lights off. We need to raise our game with respect to this. And
it has to be a public private partnership.
Along these lines we also are beginning to see the
recurrence of what used to be called active measures, which is
the use by foreign adversaries like Russia, on social media and
other tools to attempt to influence and disrupt our democracy
and our social unity.
And finally I would like to say just briefly before I
conclude, that I do think that DHS has largely succeeded in the
missions that were set out for itself, as witnessed by the fact
that we have not had another 9/11, but the organization must
continue to adapt to these new challenges and new threats.
I think that most of the recommendations of the 9/11
Commission were adopted, but I do have to say that Congress
still needs to streamline oversight, which I think is the one
major suggestion which has not really been implemented.
So, thank you very much. And I look forward to answering
questions.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Secretary Chertoff.
Our next secretary is former Secretary Janet Napolitano,
who is the President of the University of California, who got
some great rankings recently in the Wall Street Journal poll.
Ms. Napolitano served as the Secretary of Homeland Security
from 2009 to 2013, under President Barack Obama. Prior to
serving as Secretary, she was the Governor of Arizona from 2003
to 2009, the Attorney General of Arizona from 1998 to 2003, and
U.S. Attorney for the District of Arizona 1993 to 1997.
Secretary Napolitano.
TESTIMONY OF HON. JANET NAPOLITANO,\1\ FORMER SECRETARY (2009-
2013), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Ms. Napolitano. Thank you Chairman Johnson and Ranking
Member Peters and the Members of the Committee.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Ms. Napolitano appears in the
Appendix on page 50.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to thank you for conducting this important field
hearing and for inviting me to participate.
I am grateful for the work that you do on behalf of the
American people, and I am honored to be with you this morning
here at the National September 11th Memorial and Museum.
Eighteen years after the attacks, September 11th remains a
somber day on which we mourn and reflect on the nearly 3,000
lives lost in the attack on our Nation. As we honor the memory
of those whose lives were taken on that fateful morning, so,
too, we express our gratitude to the first responders, law
enforcement and volunteers, who pulled people from the wreckage
of the Pentagon, from the World Trade Center and who themselves
many later succumbed to illness or died as a result of their
recovery efforts.
I also would like to thank the men and women of the
Department of Homeland Security for the work that they do to
keep us safe day-in and day-out. They are true patriots and am
grateful for their service to our Nation.
And finally I would like to acknowledge former Secretaries
Chertoff and Johnson, who are here today, and who so ably led
the Department during their respective tenures.
From the beginning of my tenure as Secretary at DHS, we
focused our mission on terrorism, aviation security,
cybersecurity, and border management and security, as well the
security of the global supply chain, the trafficking of goods
and humans and the resilience of the Nation to natural
disasters.
To meet these challenges, we relied on intelligence to
develop and implement effective programs and operations while
working to make travel, trade, and commence more seamless for
the public. We created Transportation Security Administration
(TSA) Pre-Check, and significantly expanded Global Entry,
Customs Trade Partnership Against Terrorism, and customs
preclearance. We also transformed border security, immigration
enforcement, and disaster preparation, response, and recovery.
But as we all know, and as the former speakers have
alluded, threats against our homeland are not static, they
evolve and we in the Department must adapt with them.
So, today I would like to speak with you about three areas
that I believe the country must focus on. Cyber security, mass-
casualty shootings, and the effects of global warming or
climate change. And I will address one issue that I believe is
not a threat to the homeland, the U.S. border with Mexico.
With the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA), DHS has stepped up to its cyber capabilities, but we
have much more to do in this area. Our Nation's critical
infrastructure, its utility grid, election systems and our
public and private networks all are vulnerable. Our adversaries
and international criminal organizations have become more
determined and more brazen in their efforts to attack us, and
to steal from us. We need a whole of government and a whole of
public and private sector response to this threat, and it needs
to happen now. We can out-think, out-renovate and out-research
those who seek to do us harm, by among other things, investing
in our Nation's research enterprise, and leveraging such things
as the tremendous capabilities and intellectual resources at
the Department of Energy (DOE) National Laboratories.
The less technical threat of mass casualty shootings is no
less consequential as those posed in the cyber arena. Many in
our country have sadly grown all too accustomed to stories of
yet another mass shooting. DHS's Office of Intelligence and
Analysis (OIA) was created to evaluate the nexus between threat
and vulnerability. It needs to be aggressive in doing so with
respect to gun violence and mass casualty shootings.
I believe in the 2nd Amendment, but it did not contemplate
citizens with combat-ready assault rifles. I believe that
people should be able to use weapons for recreation, hunting
and protection, but if you cannot hit your target with 10
shots, you should not be shooting a gun. It is time for
Congress to ban high capacity magazines and assault weapons,
and it is time to enact universal background checks.
It is also time for Congress and the Department of Homeland
Security to recognize that climate change is a generational
threat to the homeland that must be addressed in a meaningful
way. The uptick in extreme weather events on land, and on our
shores clearly impacts the missions of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG). From
rescue and reconnaissance to disaster preparation response and
recovery, our changing climate requires DHS to approach those
missions differently.
Climate evolution also implicates our border and our
immigration system, thereby directly affecting U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services (USCIS), U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE). Extreme weather is destroying crop yields in Central and
South America, devastating economies, and drying up jobs and
gainful employment opportunities. With lost jobs and lost wages
the aperture toward radicalization widens as does the draw of
northward migration. There are many factors that lead to
migration to the United States, but the downstream effects of
climate change are certainly among them. If we as a Nation fail
to address climate change in a holistic and global way, as a
threat to the homeland, we will be ignoring one of the Nation's
and the world's greatest security risks.
Finally, I would like to address a topic that I do not
believe is a threat to the Homeland, the U.S. border with
Mexico. I have worked on issues related to that border for
nearly 30 years as a prosecutor, a Governor, and as Secretary
of DHS. I have walked it, ridden it on horseback, flown it in
fixed and rotor-wing aircraft, explored its tunnels, and
visited almost every Land Port of Entry (POE). There have been
times during my three decades of public service when I did
argue that the border was a threat, but now it is not such a
time.
The border is a zone where millions of dollars of lawful
commerce, trade, and travel traverse each day. It produces jobs
for citizens living along it and throughout the United States.
On its own, it is an economic engine.
Proper border management requires a blend of physical
infrastructure, manpower and technology. What we do not need
and what does not make sense is a wall from one end of the
border to the other. As Governor of Arizona I once proclaimed,
``show me a 10-foot wall and I will show you an 11-foot
ladder.'' That was more than a decade ago, and it is still true
today.
The debate about a costly and needless border wall should
come to an end. It distracts from the overall mission of DHS,
it is a red herring. I urge this Committee to consider putting
an end to the discussions of the border wall, and to return
your worthy attention to more immediate challenges of securing
our homeland.
I am grateful for the opportunity to appear before you
today and like Secretary Chertoff and Secretary Johnson, I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Secretary Napolitano.
Our third Secretary is the former Secretary Jeh Johnson,
who is a partner with the New York City based law firm Paul
Weiss Rifkind Wharton & Garrison. Mr. Johnson served as the
Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security from 2013
through 2017 under President Barack Obama. Prior to serving as
Secretary he was the General Counsel (GC) for the Department of
Defense (DOD) from 2009 to 2012, and the Department of the Air
Force from 1998 to the 2001, and an Assistant United States
attorney for the Southern District of New York from 1989 to
1991. Secretary Johnson.
TESTIMONY OF HON. JEH JOHNSON,\1\ FORMER SECRETARY (2013-2017),
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Johnson. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Peters and
Members of this Committee, good morning. Welcome to New York
City, my home town.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson appears in the Appendix
on page 54.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accompanied by my predecessors Mike Chertoff and Janet
Napolitano, I welcome the opportunity to testify at this field
hearing in lower Manhattan, in conjunction with the 18th
anniversary of the 9/11 terrorists attacks. Senators Johnson
and Carper will recall that on the 14th anniversary of 9/11,
they accompanied me to the annual observance in Shanksville,
Pennsylvania.
And like millions of others, 9/11 is painful and
significant to me. I am a New Yorker. I was in New York City on
9/11. And I personally witnessed the collapse of the two
towers. 9/11 also happens to be my birthday. Out of that day 18
years ago came my personal commitment to national security. In
the years that followed, as the Chairman noted, I served as
General Counsel of the Department of Defense, and as your
Secretary of Homeland Security for 3 years.
Three years ago on the 15th anniversary of 9/11, I presided
at the ceremony to welcome the Federal Government back to One
World Trade Center. My DHS office in New York City sat on the
50th floor of that building. As a point of personal privilege,
I would like to acknowledge someone here who was probably one
of the five best friends that I have in the world, Roger
Parrino, a retired New York City Police Detective (NYPD). And I
have known him for 30 years, we worked drug cases together when
I was a prosecutor and he was a cop. He was one of those who
ran into harm's way 18 years ago, on 9/11, and for his actions
was awarded the Medal of Valor by the Mayor of the City of New
York.
And any assessment of the today's Homeland Security must
include an assessment of today's Department of Homeland
Security.
I confess that I view today's DHS with despair and dismay.
The Department appears to be under constant siege, and constant
crisis, suffering from management upheaval and leadership
vacancies, and crippled and attacked and constantly sued for
the abrupt launch of ill-conceived controversial immigration
policies. More so than ever before, DHS is now villainized and
politically radioactive. There are public calls for a boycott
of private businesses that contract with DHS, while certain
elected officials call for the outright elimination of certain
components of the DHS, if not DHS in its entirety.
In the current environment, it is easy to forget that DHS
is responsible for the vital missions of protecting the
American people and their homeland from the land, sea, air and
in cyberspace. The Coast Guard performs vital maritime, safety,
national security, law enforcement and counterdrug functions.
The U.S. Secret Service (USSS) protects the President and
others. TSA provides aviation security to over two million
people per day. FEMA is the Nation's disaster response agency.
The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center's (NCCIC) is the U.S. government's primary information
exchange hub for the nation's cybersecurity. These are matters
in which politics should play little if any role and around
which there should be bipartisan consensus and support. Yet the
Department and its leadership appear to be overwhelmed by the
politically contentious and emotional immigration mission and
the crisis that have existed on the Southern Border--to the
exclusion, I fear, of all of these other important Homeland
Security missions.
For the nation's cabinet-level department charged with
protecting the American Homeland, and its people, it should not
have to be this way. I know that every Member of this Committee
agrees with that. Mr. Chairman, I am very appreciative that you
and the Members of this Committee have held this hearing, here
in this hallowed place, in this bipartisan spirit.
And I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Secretary Johnson.
Normally, I defer my questioning but in my opening
statement I asked a basic question, and we had what I consider
a pretty lively discussion last night in regard to it. So, I
will just throw it open to all three secretaries, because you
kind of alluded to it as well.
When you have a crisis, whether it is three hurricanes, and
wild fires, when you have as I described the flow of children,
but primarily people, family members reaching hundreds of
thousands in a year, how can an individual--and you all served
as secretaries--how can you handle it when you are overwhelmed
in one area, and you have this Department that has so many
other different missions?
So, I will open the questions, and start with the Secretary
Chertoff and just go right down the line. Is DHS too big, does
it have too many missions?Should we reevaluate how it is
structured?
Mr. Chertoff. Sir, let me say this--Mr. Chairman--I
appreciate the question. I will begin by saying first of all,
fortunately the Secretary does not have to do everything
himself or herself. And I have to stay that one of the
strengths of the Department has been the professionalism of the
career people who work in all of the agencies, and that was
something which I was able to rely upon during a very
tumultuous 4-year period.
I would say that you could tweak elements in the
Department, but honestly I think, particularly as it matured by
my two successors here, and subsequently I think that the
ability to have unity-of-effort where you bring the resources
and the skills related to prevention of terrorism, to reducing
vulnerabilities, and to response and resilience, I think that
that is much more of a positive than a negative.
In other words, there were debates at various points in
time about whether you should treat cyber as a separate agency.
I will say that from my experience, not only from government
but from the private sector, often the attacks that we view as
cyber attacks come along with the physical attack, as well.
And the ability to protect your infrastructure requires
that you have a holistic view, what we call convergence, rather
than a fragmented view.
So I would argue that the key here is to continue to build
and mature the unity-of-effort, and to again maintain a
tradition, which I think we have had through a number of
administrations, of having the nonpolitical professional
operators carrying out the important mission of protecting the
country and building resilience.
Chairman Johnson. Secretary Napolitano.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes. I agree with Secretary Chertoff.
I would note that when the Department of Defense was
created in the wake of World War II, most analysts say that it
took over 40 years for the Department of Defense to really
become integrated. And the Department of Homeland Security is
much younger than that, and it has many more missions. So, but
it is maturing, it is coming together.
And the efforts spent tweaking, moving one box here and one
box there, I think would not be worth the effort. I would
suggest respectfully that one area that could really help the
Department would be to streamline congressional oversight. And
I know that is delicate, and it requires committees to give up
some jurisdiction, but the Committee on Homeland Security has a
tradition of being--operating in a fairly bipartisan way, and
being a very good overseer of the Department and it needs to
push some of those other committees out of the way.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you.
As you know from our discussion last night you are
preaching to the choir here. This may actually pass a bill to
begin that process, establish a commission, I am completely
sympathetic with that. And again your voicing it will help to
get that accomplished. Secretary Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. So, I have the most recent experience here. My
answer is in one sentence, it is too large and one sentence and
it is not large enough. Prior to DHS, I came from being the
General Counsel for the entire Department of Defense, which is
larger than DHS by multiples. The Department of the Air Force
(DAF) or the Department of Navy (DoN) in and of themselves are
larger than DHS. And it is the third largest cabinet level
department. But it is too big in the following sense: Its
missions are very diffuse, very decentralized: the cultures
across DHS are vastly different, the culture of FEMA versus the
Secret Service, versus the Coast Guard.
And the command and control structure of DHS lacks the
maturity of the DOD. So one Christmas I set out to send an e-
mail to every person in DHS who was a direct report to me. And
I just kept going and going, thinking of people who report
directly to me, so by noon I had to stop. There were so many
people that I felt like I had to write to. And by contrast, if
you look at the Department of Defense, there is for an example
somebody in a senate confirmed Under Secretary who has the
oversight function over all of DOD's intelligence missions. And
so, except for the component leaders and there are 7 or 8 of
them, there are no middle level management really between those
people and the Secretary.
I am very pleased that Congress just before or after I left
office codified the joint task force structure that I created
so that we would have more of a DOD type model, when it comes
to border security.
The other thing that I would say is, in one respect, I
think that we actually need to go further. I would like to see
our government, and this is probably politically unobtainable,
consolidate more of Federal law enforcement issues, under one
cabinet level person.
If I could wave a wand, I would take every Federal law
enforcement agency, put it under one cabinet level official,
not necessarily the Attorney General, who is the chief
prosecutor, and deconflict all of their missions, much like
they do in ministries of the interior in other nations, but--it
is probably politically impossible to do that.
So, in that sense I do not think that we have gone far
enough consolidating our law enforcement mission.
I know that there is discussion of possibly moving the
Secret Service, the Treasury, back to the Treasury Department
(USDT). I would not do that. Secret Service essentially is a
law enforcement agency, and when you are talking about large
security operations like the General Assembly, it makes a lot
of sense to have the Secret Service as part of one cabinet
level department, with Homeland Security Investigations (HSI),
with FEMA, with the Coast Guard, and one pair of eyes and ears
looking at all of the threats and all of the different ways
someone can enter the country.
Chairman Johnson. I really appreciate those responses. I
think that it is important testimony. It can and should carry a
lot of weight. So, thank you. Senator Peters.
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
While the Department was established in 2002 in response to
an attack planned and directed by a foreign terrorist
organization, since then we know that the country and the
threat landscape as has evolved dramatically.
In recent years, domestic terrorists have killed more
people in our country than international terrorists. And most
of the FBI's domestic terrorism investigations involve white
supremacist violence.
Secretary Napolitano, during your tenure you were there
probably at a turning point when we saw the threat landscape
change, and the current wave of white supremacist violence. I
would be curious as to your assessment as to how you address
that, what more you think that we need to do, and whether
impediments?
And certainly would like to hear from the other Secretaries
as well as to how we deal with this significant threat we are
facing now.
Ms. Napolitano. So, one of the manifestations of this
threat, is the radicalization of lone actors through the
Internet and social media. We do not really have a good
understanding of what causes somebody to read something online,
et cetera, all the way up to going out and purchasing a combat
ready weapon and taking it out on their fellow citizens.
So, to me, we need to do much more in the sense of
understanding the motivation behind these violent actors. We
need to involve more local law enforcement and social service
providers, in trying to find, as Secretary Chertoff said, off-
ramps for these individuals. And we clearly need to prioritize
these kind of domestic terrorist events in the sense of the
threats facing the country.
Senator Peters. Secretary Chertoff.
Mr. Chertoff. I agree with that.
I think that first of all we need to recognize that in many
ways, what I call terrorism 3.0, which are the inspired Jihad
terrorists, that we have seen in various things, for example,
in California, are very similar to the white supremacist
terrorist who are inspired to carrying out shootings in
synagogues.
There seems to be a capability of networks of people who
are very ideological to find like-minded people who are
beginning to move in that direction, and to incite them to
carry out acts of violence.
And as Secretary Napolitano said, we need to understand
that we also need to recognize that this is a global challenge,
it is not just a domestic challenge. When you look at some of
the shootings that we have seen recently, we have seen
references to Norwegian white supremacists or the Christ Church
shooter where they essentially look for an endorsement along
that line from the network around the world. So, this to me is
not just an American issue, but it is an issue that we have to
deal with involving our partners oversees as well.
Senator Peters. Secretary Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. My first, second, and third answers are gun
safety, gun safety, and gun safety. Beyond that: Continued good
law enforcement, and initiatives to counter violent extremism
at the Federal and local level, grants from the national level
to the State and local law enforcement, which includes active
shooter training exercises, support for active shooter training
exercises, which I think are very important, and public
vigilance, public awareness, various ``if you see something say
something'' campaigns. DHS has partnered with a number of
cities, a number of professional sports teams, public
awareness, public vigilance, and it does make a difference.
Chairman Johnson. Secretary Johnson, you mentioned ``gun
safety, gun safety, gun safety.'' There are a number of actions
that we could take, but one that may be before the Congress
this week is to expand background checks. Would you support
that, do you think it is necessary? And I would like to hear
from the other two, as well.
Mr. Johnson. I support anything consistent with the Second
Amendment, that has bipartisan support, that makes it more
difficult for a deranged-violent-person to get his hands on a
gun, specifically an assault weapon.
Senator Peters. Secretary Napolitano.
Ms. Napolitano. I think that the universal background
checks is a good step toward greater security for the country,
but it is a first step.
Mr. Chertoff. I agree. We ought to have universal
background checks. And I think that, I guess in a similar vein,
so-called ``red flag laws'' when someone winds up behaving in a
way that suggests that they may be a menace, that we actually
remove their access to any firearms that they have. There are
some other things that we could do, as well, as Secretary
Napolitano said, I am not sure why they need to be selling
magazines with 100 rounds. If you can't hit the bird with the
first 10, you probably should not be hunting.
Senator Peters. Secretary Johnson and I just over a week
ago sent a letter to DHS with our Homeland Security Committee
colleagues regarding allegations that this administration has
quietly dismantled or cut back on multiple programs that were
created after the September 11th attacks--to detect and prevent
terrorism, specifically programs operated by the Department's
countering weapons of mass destruction (CWMD) office.
My question is: I would like to have each of you give a
brief opinion on your assessment of the Nation's current
readiness to prevent a chemical, biological, radiological, or
nuclear attack. We will start you with Secretary Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. I have been privy to intelligence or non-
public information obviously for the last two and a half years
on this. And my sense is that it is a threat that we have and
we should continue to monitor. Among a range of threats. But it
is obviously not the only threat. I dealt on a daily basis with
the threats of some of the things that Mike referred to in
terms, of a smaller scale, terrorist inspired attacks. This
type of threat that you described Senator is something that we
need to continue to be vigilant about.
Ms. Napolitano. Senator, I agree. We need to maintain
vigilance. We need to understand that active intelligence
sharing, real time intelligence sharing with our allies around
the world increases our security in this area, to the extent
that we are dealing with weapons of mass destruction that are
manufactured abroad but are attempted to be smuggled into the
United States. So, the intelligence sharing internationally and
globally should not be overlooked as an effective tactic or
technique to help secure the country.
Senator Peters. Thank you.
Mr. Chertoff. I agree with what both Secretaries have said.
As I said in my opening statement, when I was secretary we did
worry quite a bit about chemical, biological, and radiological
attacks. And one of the reasons that we did is because--when we
entered we found labs where al-Qaeda was experimenting trying
to develop these kinds of weapons.
The good news is that by reducing the footprint of ISIS, we
have reduced the territory in which they could carry out that
kind of work. But, I that that complacency is a real risk here.
Again, as we talked about the future arrangement in
Afghanistan, I would not want that to become a safe haven that
would seek experimentation with these kinds of weapons. I also
would like to mention Hezbollah, which to my mind still remains
the most proficient terrorist organization in the world, which
has access to a regime that certainly has moved in the
direction of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). And again we
need to be very careful in sharing intelligence with our allies
to make sure that Hezbollah does not become an attack vector
with some of these weapons.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Romney.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROMNEY
Senator Romney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you to
those who have helped organize this event in a place where we
can remember, and mourn and honor those who stepped heroically
to save others.
And we can mourn the many, many--not just those who were
killed on 9/11, but those of the years after that have been so
devastated by the effects of their heroism. I appreciate the
testimony of each of the Secretaries and your willingness to be
here with us today. You acknowledged in our discussions last
night that in some respects we play the role of a board or a
policy group..
And as a Committee we have the opportunity to help guide
the leadership at the Department of Homeland Security. The area
of cyber and cyber threats has been mentioned by each one of
you as being a major area of concern, and I would like just to
dwell for a moment on that.
Secretary Napolitano, you indicated that perhaps more
funding to Department of Energy laboratories to help develop
new technologies there would be helpful. You also referenced
public private partnerships. And there is no question that the
private sector is racing to try to find technologies that they
can sell, and make money on to protect various entities from
cyber attack.
Secretary Johnson, you indicated in your written testimony
that deterring actors from attacking us, cyber actors is also
something we should pursue. And perhaps we will begin with you
then Secretary Johnson, and have each of you respond to what we
might do to up our capabilities in deterring cyber attacks.
And specifically, I am thinking with regard to your
testimony. How can we deter those entities that attack us--
China, Russia, North Korea, Iran--they continue to launch
hundreds, thousands of attacks on technical databases,
government databases, corporations and so forth. Is there some
way we can do a better job of deterring that? And then for all
of you, how do we up our game in cyber beyond where we are
today?
Mr. Johnson. I think it is a basic equation. In my
experience, all nation-states, all organized nation-states--
whether they are democracies or monarchies or communist
regimes--are deterred if their behavior is cost prohibitive; if
the nation-state recognizes that it is just not worth the cost
in terms of the reaction of the target.
And we all know that within, between and among governments
there is a certain amount of surveillance activity that goes
on. But, we are, as I am sure you recognize, at a new level of
the theft of intellectual property, weaponizing things for
political purposes that are stolen.
And I believe that you cannot create a complete line of
defense against these kinds of attacks, and therefore we have
to put it to the bad actor and simply make the behavior cost
prohibitive. I think that a lot of good things have been done
in this administration in terms of sanctions directed at the
Russian government, and by the Congress.
But if you believe the intelligence assessments, a lot more
is necessary, both directed against Russia and the other
countries that you mentioned. Now in terms of what more we can
do on the defensive side, on my watch we really enhanced the
capability of the end kick, which is within DHS, it is the
information hub for cyber security.
But I was disappointed when I was leaving office that not
more private sector actors had partnered with DHS for
information sharing purposes. So, I recommend to Congress that
you check in on that occasionally and see what you can do, more
encourage that type of information sharing.
Senator Romney. Thank you.
Ms. Napolitano. I think that the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) is a valuable resource at the Department for
bringing together the public and private aspects of
cybersecurity. Cyber is an enormously complicated topic, it is
international in scope, the technology changes faster than we
can change laws or policy. It requires agility and nimbleness
that is really not the hallmark of government.
That is one of the reasons why it is so important to bring
the private sector in to how we deal with cybersecurity as a
country. We need a whole of government, a whole of nation
approach to this area. We need to recognize that it is among
the top three risks that we face as a Nation.
When you read the 9/11 Commission report, one of the key
critiques it makes is that there was reverse engineering, how
the 9/11 attack occurred. And the report points out all these
red flags that had arisen. And they said that a key critique is
that our government leaders suffered from a failure of
imagination. In the cyber arena, we have all these red flags
now. We should not entertain such a failure of imagination. And
perhaps it is time for the country to have a 9/11 Commission
for cyber, before we have, for example, massive ransom-ware
attacks simultaneously conducted around the country, or, where
we suffer once again a direct attack on our democracy as we saw
in the 2016 election.
Mr. Chertoff. So, let me just add this. I mean the
challenge here is that much the infrastructure is in private
hands. And even when it is in government hands, it is often
distributed in local government. Sometimes even the basics,
they do not get done. And that is a challenge because you are
really trying to ``herd the cats'' in particular direction.
I would say that there are three things though that I might
pay some additional attention to. One is I do think that the
Department has made a good step forward in standing up Cyber
and Infrastructure Agency from what used to be the National
Protection and Programs Directorate (NPPD) and becoming more
operationally involved in working with the private sector on
upping their game. One of the things that would help would be
to give private sector actors more access to classified
information.
Right now, it is very hard to pass the suitability test,
which is a requirement that you have a need-to-know classified
information. It is not to do with whether you are a reliable
person, it is just whether you have a need-to-know.
If you are a contractor, that is an easy thing to satisfy.
But if you are running critical infrastructure it gets
difficult. And I think that changing the mind-set on that and
opening up the aperture for information would be very helpful.
Second, I do agree that we need sometimes particularly with
nation-states, to be able to impose a cost, but we have to be
candid. The structure in terms of how we escalate is still very
undefined. And what we don't want to do is accidentally trigger
a war because we overreact to something.
So I think that there needs to be some serious thought and
perhaps some hearings on the question of what is the
appropriate scale of escalation in response to certain attacks.
And finally, I think that we need to look at our, what I would
call industrial policy as it relates to very sensitive
technology.
And Mike McConnell--the former DNI--and I did a piece on
this a few weeks ago. We do not have a policy to encourage U.S.
or allied businesses to invest in critical technologies that we
need to control in order to make sure that the Chinese do not
own us and eat our lunch.
And you are seeing this come out with 5G right now, where
Huawei, with Chinese government subsidies, is pushing out to
have the equipment that forms the backbone of 5G around the
world. And we go to our allies and we say do not do this.
And I have done this myself. And a lot of times what comes
back is: Well, the problem is that you cannot beat something
with nothing. What do you have that is better and cheaper?
And part of the problem is that we have not facilitated a
market in that kind of technology. We do it in a defense
business with the defense industrial base, and I would argue
that we need to now have a policy like that with what I would
call the tech national security base, and that I think would be
well worth looking at.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Carper.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER
Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman and Senator Peters, thank you
so much to you and your staff for really coming up with this
idea and for us to have been here last night and having an
incredibly moving and inspiring tour.
I just want to thank everybody who works here as part of
this team, and the volunteers who probably serve here to. It is
important that we never forget what happened here all those
years ago; and that we not just look back, but we use our
memories of those, that tragic day, but that we also look
forward and look forward in ways that we have been talking here
today.
We fortunately have three of our Homeland Security chairs,
past chairs that are here. I have had the privilege of, as a
Member of this Committee to work with all of you, the
Secretaries Chertoff, Johnson and Napolitano who I consider
friends, and just wonderful public servants in many roles.
Tom Ridge is not here, the colleagues, the freshman
Congressman, together in 1982, elected and served had a chance
to work in this venue as well. We have had also, Secretary John
Kelly, John Kelly retired as a 4 star Marine general who served
briefly, too briefly, I think, in succeeded by Kirstjen Nielsen
and now wih Kevin McAleenan.
They are all good people, I think exceptional people. And
your leadership has been a blessing not just for the
Department, but for our country.
I want to ask just a quick question about leadership and
leadership churn. When Jeh Johnson was the Secretary of the
Department and became the Secretary of the Department, Tom
Coburn and I met with him. They put the leadership structure of
the Department of Homeland Security and from, the Deputy
Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries positions and on down the
line, and there were enormous holes that looked a little like I
call it swiss cheese.
And that we worked hard to do something about that. I would
just ask Secretary Johnson would you reflect on that again in
the context of what is going on today within the Department of
Homeland Security, the leadership.
Mr. Johnson. So, that is kind of an unpleasant memory.
There were a lot of vacancies when I stepped into the
Department in December 2013, and you and I and Tom Coburn spent
a lot of time talking about that and impressed upon me during
my confirmation that we really needed to fill the vacancies.
So that was probably my top priority, as soon as I took
office. There were a number of Senate confirmed vacancies, at
the time, and I think that we benefited from filling those
vacancies in rapid fire by I think 9 months, just about every
job had been filled with a Senate confirmed person. And there
was virtue in having a Senate confirmed Presidential appointee
in a lot of these component leadership positions.
One, it is more job security. And when you go through that
process, you recognize you are accountable to the President,
but also to a degree you are accountable to the Congress. And
when you are in a Senate confirmed position--our actings are
all terrific people, as you know--but when you in a Senate
confirmed position and you have been confirmed by the Senate,
you are in a position to provide the President with honest and
candid advice, sometimes he does not want to hear. And, I
certainly got the benefit of that from our DHS leaders, once
they were in the job, and we had some terrific people as you
know----
Craig Fugate is one of the first that comes to mind, who
worked for Janet also. And Craig Fugate needed almost no
oversight from me. He was a national asset. He was first rate,
and really did a lot to restore FEMA to the position that it
now holds and occupies.
So, I believe then that, and I believe now, that filling
the vacancies in this very important agency has to be the
number one priority of the President and the Congress.
Senator Carper. Thank you so much. If you consider the
threats to our homeland, you talked a little bit about
terrorism, a huge threat, and we talked about cyber also, a
huge threat.
We talked about illegal immigration. And I agree with
Secretary Napolitano, the movement of folks coming across the
border from Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador, that is the
root cause.
The Chairman of the Committee talks about it. We address
too often what are the symptoms and the problems and we need to
address the root cause folks to come here. But whether the
issue is cyber, illegal immigration, terrorism, or climate
change, we cannot do these by ourself as a Nation, it has to be
a team.
And I always like to say that there is no I in the word
team.
Would you talk about the importance of relationships and
cooperation with our friends and allies, Secretary Chertoff,
Janet, and Jeh please.
Mr. Chertoff. When I was in office, we had great
relationships with our allies overseas, even when there was a
little bit of political tension and there sometimes was around
the war in Iraq, when the Bush administration was not so
popular with the person on the street in Europe.
On an operational level, I had very close relations with my
counterparts, we worked together. We exchanged information.
I mentioned the August 2006 airline plot.
Working with my counterpart John Reid, and we had a very
small number of people in the United States who read into this,
we were able to coordinate and stop what would have been a
devastating plot and do it in a way that was minimally
disruptive.
Likewise, even now, I travel around a lot and I meet senior
officials from foreign governments and they are hungry for
American leadership and for American values. So, I think that
it is very important, particularly that the Congress emphasize
our commitments to our allies and friends around the world.
Senator Carper. Secretary Napolitano.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, Senator, I think the name Homeland
Security in a way is a misnomer because if you wait until a
threat actually reaches our homeland, you may be too late. And
it requires the Department to have good alliances around the
world, for real time intelligence and operations.
Port security, passenger screening, cargo screening, all of
that, that happens abroad. And so, the Department really needs
to be able to look outward as well as inward to improve our
overall level of safety and security.
And it would be benefited if the country was seen as
actively engaged and welcoming of these alliances, as well.
Senator Carper. Secretary Johnson, briefly, please.
Mr. Johnson. I agree.
Senator Carper. Thank you very much.
Chairman Johnson. I appreciate that. Senator Scott.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SCOTT
Senator Scott. Chairman Johnson, Senator Peters, thank you
and your team for putting this together. I want to thank Alice
and everyone here at the 9/11 Museum and Memorial for hosting
us here.
I want to thank each of the prior Secretaries for being
here. Today, we reflect on a solemn time in our nation's
history. I was in the City on September 11 and saw the terror
and devastation inflicted on our Nation. And unfortunately, it
still impacts a lot of people, the survivors, the first
responders, and many of the families of the victims.
I want to thank each of you for your hard work. You should
be proud of the Department of Homeland Security for everything
that they do to keep us safe. I was just in the Bahamas with
the Coast Guard, and they are right now saving lives from
Hurricane Dorian's devastating aftermath. And I was just at the
border, of Mexico and California, and you should be very proud
of our border patrol for what they are doing to protect our
country from drugs, weapons and terrorism.
One question that I have for each of you, is--if you go
back, a lot of the discussion after 9/11 was about how the
Federal agencies did not coordinate their information very
well. And I just finished 8 years as Governor, and I watched
the same thing continue to happen.
We had the--Pulse terrorist attack, we had the Parkland
shooting, we had five people killed at the airport in Ft.
Lauderdale, and we had three people killed at a yoga studio,
right before I finished my time as Governor. And in every case,
the Federal Government had prior knowledge, they got tips and
they failed to follow up.
And to this day, no one has ever been able to explain to me
why, and if anybody has been held accountable. So, are we in a
better position than we were after 9/11, or do we still have
the same issues that Federal agencies specifically in the case
in those cases, the FBI are still not coordinating the
information with other Federal agencies and local governments?
f each of you could can give me your ideas.
Mr. Johnson. I will start. From my perspective, it is much
better than it used to be. I think that our intelligence
community (IC), our law enforcement community does a much
better job of connecting the dots than it used to, though I am
sure that there is more we can do to get better at this.
In my experience I have been impressed with the level of
information sharing. I think a lot depends upon the
personalities at the top of each agency. If the personalities
at the top have a good collegial relationship, that trickles
else down to the people who are sharing the information.
Particularly in the intelligence community, I will say that
originally I was not a fan of the creation of DNI, I thought it
was an extra and unnecessary layer of bureaucracy in our
intelligence community. But, I saw how Jim Clapper really made
it work, and when I would get an intelligence product every
morning, it would come from multiple intelligence agencies, it
would be coordinated opinions, there my be dissents.
And I thought that that process worked well, although there
were a lot of different agencies in the alphabet soup that were
giving us these products. And I adopted the practice that if
there was a dissent in an intelligence report, I would bring
the analyst up to see me, the one who wrote it, the one who
dissented, and we would talk it over; and very often we would
realize that there was not a whole lot of difference. But my
overall impression is that we are doing a much better job than
we certainly did on 9/11, but it depends a lot on the
personalities at the top.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, Senator, I do think that intelligence
sharing is better, it is always a goal, but it is never
perfect. I agree with Secretary Johnson that it depends in part
on leadership from the top. From a Homeland Security's
perspective, I think that one of the focuses should be
effective intelligence sharing into the State and local law
enforcement environment. And there that surely, that is a work
in progress.
Mr. Chertoff. I would agree with that. I think that one of
the challenges that we are facing is, as we are dealing with
these inspired terrorists, who are operating at the local
level, it is often being to be the local authorities that get
the first word. And just as we have a National Counterterrorism
Center (NCTC) that is first coordinated by the Federal
agencies, I think that the fusion centers, with DHS--have a
broader mission again to look at the issue of domestic
terrorists and not only the Jihad terrorists.
Senator Scott. What would you each like the private sector
to do that it is not doing today, to deal with Homeland
Security?
Mr. Chertoff. Let me begin: I would like to see more
investment and more coordination on cybersecurity--most of the
assets, that can be attacked are in private hands. Some
companies have done a very good job of stepping up, but a lot
of them just hope that someone will take care of the problem
for them.
Ms. Napolitano. I agree.
Mr. Johnson. I agree.
Senator Scott. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you. Senator Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN
Senator Hassan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
you and Ranking Member Peters for your continued attention to
the issue of Homeland Security, and terrorism and for convening
this hearing today. I would also like to thank all of today's
witnesses for their life-long dedication an attention to public
safety, and for your efforts to protect our citizens and keep
the United States homeland safe, secure and free.
Those statements also going to everybody who is here from
local and State law enforcement. Homeland Security is a team
effort, and a team mission and I am very grateful for all of
your efforts. And a special thank you to the 9/11 National
Memorial and Museum, Ms. Greenwald, to your staff, for hosting
us on this hallowed ground. It is such a moving tribute to all
of those who perished nearly 18 years ago today.
I like many people on the panel, have a lot of memories
about 9/11, but I think the most significant one for me was the
feeling that I had when I picked up my then 8 year old daughter
from school. And I realizing how much her world had changed. As
I sit here I am once again overwhelmed by our country's
profound loss that day and the sacrifices made by the first
responders, military, and civilians and by their loved ones.
In some ways 9/11 changed our country forever, but our
response reinforced who we are: We are strong, we are kind, we
are resilient and in times as places such as this one, we are
reverent. And we will fight for and protect our freedom. I
wanted to turn to all three of our Secretaries, because I have
been dealing at home in New Hampshire with members of different
houses of worship, who are now increasingly concerned for their
safety. No one of any faith should have to fear for their life
when they visit their house of worship for reflection and
prayer.
And sadly, as we have talked about over the past few years,
Americans have witnessed an increase in the number of threats
to and violent attacks on houses of worship both at home and
abroad. These threats are not confined to major metropolitan
areas.
Over the past months, I have visited with members of houses
of worship in New Hampshire and heard about the disturbing
threats that they and their communities have received. One
rabbi noted that they now only open the doors to the temple
shortly before services begin, and lock the doors shortly after
the start of services. In addition to being concerned about
that limitation, on the openness that always should mark a
house of worship, this Rabbi said that as she leads her
congregation, during the those minutes when the doors are open,
she wonders is this the night we die.
A few of these houses of worship received a small amount of
funding from the Department of Homeland Security's nonprofit
security grant program in order to help secure them against
these threats. These funds help, but not all who applied for
the grants were able to get them and there is much more to be
done to keep houses of worship in New Hampshire and across the
country safe, secure and free.
So, Secretary Chertoff, the nonprofit security grant
program was created during your time as the DHS Secretary.
Secretaries Napolitano and Johnson, the program continued to
expand under your watch, but so have the threats. Can each of
you share with me your thoughts about how the Congress, the
Department and the entire Federal Government can work to keep
soft targets like houses of worship safe from threats?
And Secretary Chertoff, why do we not start with you.
Mr. Chertoff. Well, this has always been a very challenging
issue and obviously houses of worship are very sensitive. We
have seen it in schools, and we have seen it in commercial
establishments.
And it is impossible to lock down everything and have a
free society. I do think that the grants help and I do think
that frankly I have observed during certain holidays and
various houses of worship the police are sometimes hired to do
some overtime and do some protecting.
Some of it is training, and advising people about what to
do if there is an active shooter, for example. And then the
third piece of this has to be again better intelligence
sharing.
But I would be kidding you if I were to say that there is
an absolute way to stop this. This is a question of risk
mitigation. I do not think that you can get risk elimination.
But we ought to do the best we can and not let the perfect--be
the enemy of the good.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Ms. Napolitano. There is real insight into what Secretary
Chertoff said, we cannot lock down an open society. But what we
can do is to help mitigate risk. The grant program helps,
active shooter training helps, additional local law enforcement
resources during particular holiday periods may help. And it
really requires using a menu of approaches. There is not one
single approach.
Senator Hassan. Secretary Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. The grant program that you mentioned, what I
was struck by when I would look the at grants over year is, the
program was well-known in certain communities but not others.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Mr. Johnson. And certain communities had figured out, year
after year, how to apply and how to get the grants. But it was
not well-known enough across the full spectrum of organizations
that it was intended to help.
And so, I hope that we have moved in a direction where
there is larger awareness over the last couple years, and that
is something I suspect Congress can help with in your
respective States and districts.
And, they are all competing obviously for the same fixed
pot of money. So perhaps Congress should consider raising the
level of funding for these types of things--because I agree
with your assessment of the threat.
Senator Hassan. Thank you. The other thing that I wanted to
touch on is something that others have mentioned too, on the
issue of cyber threats. But I wanted to focus a little bit on
what is happening locally. Recent ransom-ware attacks designed
to cripple government operations have targeted nearly every
level of government including a county, Strafford County in New
Hampshire, and we have seen attacks on cities across the
country.
So, is there more we can do for the Federal Government to
assist State and local governments with deterring, preventing,
and recovering from cyber attacks?
Mr. Chertoff. Well, I will begin by saying: I think one
thing that could be done would be to have localities do some
basic things to secure their infrastructure, including things
like, for example, having backups for data. It will not exactly
eliminate the problem, but it will reduce the issue.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, helping mitigate the risk is
important. And also, I think we ought to be exploring what the
Federal Government can do and is doing by way of attribution,
to help find the source of these attacks, so that an
appropriate response can be constructed.
Senator Hassan. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. I think the single best thing that anyone can
do in that situation is raise the level of awareness about
security among the people that use the system. You would be
surprised the number of people who do not know how to respond
to a suspicion e-mail, and a lot of these attacks begin with an
act of spear phishing.
Somebody opened an e-mail or an attachment that they should
not have been opened. So, simply raising the level of awareness
among people that we entrust with the system goes along way.
Senator Hassan. Thank you. I am pleased to report that our
county officials did recognize a phishing e-mail when they got
it, and they had a pen and pencil backup system in place as
they shut things down. But it is going to be something that we
need to focus on.
Thank you all again for your service and testimony here
today.
Chairman Johnson. Senator Hawley.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HAWLEY
Senator Hawley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Johnson could I just ask you one more time to
tell us about your guest, your special guest that is with you.
Mr. Johnson. His name is Roger Parrino, sitting right
there. He does not like to be the center of attention. He is a
Marine, and I met him when we worked drug cases together 30
years ago. And on September 11 2001, he was a New York City
police detective working in Midtown, and saw what was
happening, ran into harm's way and frankly was almost one of
the people that we had a moment of silence for; and was the
recipient of the Medal of Valor from the Mayor. And he went on
at my recommendation to be a appointed by Governor Cuomo, to be
Commissioner of Homeland Security for New York State.
Senator Hawley. Thank you for that.
And Detective Commissioner, I thought that it would be
appropriate that we may take a moment to honor you.
I notice as I look around here, I see men and women wearing
the uniform of the United States, I see some of New York's
Finest here. I got to talk to some of the families of the
survivors.
This building, this place is such a monument to the courage
of folks like you who put on this uniform and who protect us
every day, and who run toward danger. And here you are a living
monument to that. So, I don't want to miss this opportunity to
say ``thank you'' for what you did, and to give everybody here
a chance to say to you, and to all of you here in this building
who are wearing a uniform, who are protecting us and serving
us, ``thank you'' for protecting us.
Thank you for representing the best of New York and the
best of America. So thank you very much.
[Applause.]
I do want to raise an issue now that has not been raised
yet, but is extremely important to I believe the security of
the American homeland and certainly to the security of my
State. I represent the State of Missouri.
I spent part of my time in August when I was home in
Missouri traveling around some of the most economically
distressed communities, counties in my State--the 114 counties
in Missouri, and I chose to visit those, who do not normally
get visits from the press and the media, and so forth.
And something that every single person, every single one in
every single community that I visited told me about was the
epidemic of drug abuse that is crippling and killing entire
communities. Literally killing. Families, schools, it is
unbelievable.
And in my State it is overwhelmingly meth, and it is coming
according to the Federal Government, it is coming
overwhelmingly across the Southern Border.
And just according to the 2018 DEA National Drug Assessment
report, most of the meth available around the country,
certainly in the State of Missouri, is produced in Mexico and
is smuggled across the Southwest Border.
Missouri has seen a 52 percent increase in meth addiction
treatment admissions in the last 7 years, according to the
Substance Abuse and Metal Health Services Administration. It is
hard for me to describe to you unless you were to visit, and to
see what this epidemic of drug abuse is doing to the towns and
families and schools in my State, what a crisis this is.
And so I want to ask about what we give voice first of all
to that crisis, and ask what it is that we can do to address
this very real crisis that is being driven by what is going on
at the border.
Secretary Napolitano, let me start with you. I think that I
must have misunderstood you. I read your testimony, I heard you
say in your opening remarks that you did not think that the
border represents any threat to the homeland. I must have
misunderstood, because surely you could not have meant that the
people in my State who are losing their lives, losing their
children, losing their family members, the law enforcement who
are completely overwhelmed by this epidemic that is coming
across the border.
I mean, surely that constitutes a threat to the security of
the people of this country.
Do you not agree with that?
Ms. Napolitano. Look, I think that the border as I said it
is a zone to be managed. It is certainly an area where law
enforcement needs to be engaged in terms of drug smuggling and
gun smuggling and the like.
It requires a whole of government effort. It requires
partnership with Mexico in terms of how the ports themselves
are managed, and that is where when smuggling occurs, the bulk
of it occurs through the ports of entry.
It requires using the best available technology for
inspection of vehicles and for manifesting of cargo and the
like. But, what I mean to suggest is that the border itself is
not the number one threat to the safety and security of the
American people, despite the overwhelming public attention
being drawn to the border as the function of DHS.
Senator Hawley. You think that it is a threat. You said in
your testimony both this morning, and the written testimony,
that you did not think that it was a threat at all. It is the
number one threat or no threat. But ``it is not a threat to
homeland security.''
I cannot understand that. And what concerns me about it is,
it seems to be increasingly the position of some members of
your party who say it is also not a threat at all. And I do not
understand how that can be the case, given the threat that my
State and the people in my communities are facing.
If we do not do something to stem the flow of illegal drugs
across that border, I do not know what these folks are going to
do. I just do not understand when people say, it is just not a
threat.
Ms. Napolitano. I think that we have to look at areas of
agreement.
Senator Hawley. But is it a threat? Can we agree on that?
Ms. Napolitano. We can all agree that we deserve a safe and
secure border, that the border needs to be enforced. And you
will not get any question about that from me. The way that I
wrote my testimony, however, was to say that the border is a
zone, it is a zone to be managed in terms of threat.
But it is not the number one threat to the safety and
security of the American people. When you talk about drugs,
right, and I understand the opioid epidemic and the meth
epidemic, I was a local State prosecutor and I was a Federal
prosecutor.
I understand this phenomenon very well. I reach out and
sympathize and empathize with the people of Missouri and other
States across this country, who have experienced the
devastation caused by this epidemic.
I think what we need to be looking for is, how do we
prevent the importation of drugs, how do we deal with addiction
as a disease, as a country.
And that is really where the threat is. Not in terms of
overall border management, not in terms of a wall between the
United States and Mexico.
Senator Hawley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see that my time
has expired.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Hawley.
We really do not have time for another round of questions
and this thing could go on literally for hours. I would like to
afford all three of you an opportunity to, if there is
something that we did not talk about.
And as we discussed last night, and I think it is pretty
apparent here today, the fact that you are willing to offer
your time, your counsel, your advice--first all, this Committee
appreciates it and we would appreciate it in the future.
That is a solid offer. I mean, I would love to have you
work with us to move this country forward. But, we will start
in reverse order with Secretary Johnson, if you have a few
closing comments, please make some.
Mr. Johnson. As a former public servant, I guess that I
would plead with all of you who are today in the U.S. Congress
in positions of power, what I have observed happening over the
last couple of years is that we do not seem to have--except at
levels that the public does not appreciate--we do not seem to
have enough opportunities to reach across the aisle and achieve
something that requires political risk and is politically hard.
It was not that long ago that we came very close to
comprehensive immigration reform. The Senate passed it by 68
votes. There was a lot of Democrats and a lot of Republicans,
on the recognition that immigration reform included both a path
to citizenship, Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA)
take care of the Development, Relief and Education for Alien
Minors (DREAMers), and border security, and smart border
security.
And people on both sides of the aisle were willing to
coalesce around both those principles and a lot in between.
What I observe happening now is very few people are willing to
do that any more, and everyone is standing in their corners
screaming at each other, as the positions on both sides become
more and more absurd, to the disservice of the American people
that you were elected to serve.
And that is reflective of a lot of other issues in my
judgment. And so my plea as a private citizen is to tone down
the rhetoric. I think that this committee in particular is an
excellent place to do that, because I do know that you try to
operate in a bipartisan way.
Please tone down the rhetoric in Washington and take care
of the people's business. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Secretary Johnson.
Secretary Napolitano.
Ms. Napolitano. I think that the greatest service that this
Committee can give is to help revise a strategic oversight of
the entire Homeland Security enterprise.
What are the greatest risks facing the country; how are
they best mitigated? What resources are necessary to make sure
that we are as safe as we can be albeit, we will never be risk
free, and we live in an open society.
But I think if this Committee can occupy that overall kind
of board of directors role, it would serve the Department well.
Chairman Johnson. Secretary Chertoff.
Mr. Chertoff. Mr. Chairman, I would be delighted to accept
your invitation to continue to work with Committee on these
issues. It means a lot to have this hearing here because I
vividly remember in the days, hours and days and weeks after 9/
11 how the country came together.
And we recognized that this was not an attack on people of
one party or one religion or one national origin, but on all
Americans. And I remember being with Congress, a few days
afterwards, in the House chamber, both the Senate and the House
present, Republicans and Democrats all unified in terms of
their attitude to this.
One of the privileges that I had as Secretary, was to go to
Camp Victory in Iraq, and swear in new American citizens
wearing the U.S. Army uniform. They came from all over the
world, some of them actually were from the region--from all
religions, and they were legal, they had green cards and they
qualified for citizenship and they stood in uniforms, not far
from where there was live fire taking the oath of American
citizenship.
And to me that is what America is about. It is what binds
us together as not a national origin or religion or ethnicity,
but belief in a common set of values. And so I think that it is
important when we think about Homeland Security to recognize it
begins with unity-of-effort, not just within the Department but
within the country.
And that ought to be a requirement number one, for
everybody to reemphasize and to underscore that we are a nation
bound by common values in a common constitution, and that is
what makes us great. That is what motivated the people that we
celebrated in this hall. And that is something that we need to
continue to cherish and uphold. Thank you.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you.
Senator Peters, do you have a few closing remarks?
Senator Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for holding this
hearing, and your staff, who have done an outstanding job
putting this all together.
I also want to thank Alice Greenwald, again, as well as
your tremendous staff as well as volunteers for this amazing
place, that allows us to pay honor to those who lost their
lives here, and also to continue to educate us as to what
happened here, and why we must never forget, and make sure that
this never happens again.
I understand that your job is going to become more
difficult as the next generation comes along who looks at this
as history, and not something as vivid as, in the minds of, as
it is with all of us here today. But if we do not educate the
next generation, then that leads to the potential of it
happening again. And it must never happen again.
So, you are involved in a very important mission, with you
and your staff. Thank you for having us here, and to the
Secretaries for your testimony today.
I think that all three of you in your wrap-up said it
extremely well, and something that I take to heart as I work on
this Committee to understand that the Department of Homeland
Security has one of the toughest jobs you can possibly have in
the Federal Government.
Because you have to do two things. First off you have to
keep us all safe. And to me that is the number one job of the
Federal Government is to keep Americans safe from harm. And
that has to be first and foremost on the mission. But you also
have to balance it with the things that you all three
mentioned: the values that have built this country. That we are
a free society. What makes the United States so special is that
we are an open and free society. And we have to endeavor to
keep America safe, while also protecting Constitutional rights
to protect civil rights.
That is a balancing job that is incredibly difficult to
accomplish and one that we are going to have to constantly work
at to make sure that we can achieve that right balance. The
other thing that we must do for the Department of Homeland
Security while you are keeping it safe is you have to make sure
that the economy is robust and moving forward.
I know on the borders in Michigan, some of the busiest
borders in North America, the folks there have to keep us safe
while making sure that commerce is getting there on time and
our just-in-time deliveries for the auto companies are there
right when they go on the assembly line.
Any kind of delay ripples throughout the whole supply
chain, so they are watching that very closely. But at the same
time, you have to keep us safe. So this is a very tough job.
And I thank you for your service to the country. I thank
you for your willingness to continue to work with us. Because
as we deal with a rapidly changing world, and rapidly changing
threats, it is always important to step back and remember where
we came from, understand the lessons that we learned in the
past, so that we can apply those lessons to the future.
So thank you for your service, thank you for being here.
Chairman Johnson. Thank you, Senator Peters.
Again, I would like to start by again thanking the
Secretaries. It is an overwhelming job. It is a responsibility
that each one of you assumed and every Secretary assumes, it is
hard to contemplate. You will just get blamed for some
failures, and you do not get a whole lot of credit for success.
So, I truly appreciate your past service and again your
willingness to consult this Committee in the future.
Again, I want to thank Alice Greenwald and everybody that
has worked on this amazing and remarkable place.
If you are an American watching this hearing, come here.
You need to be reminded. It is true that we can never forget.
And the thought that went into this place--as we walked down
into this chamber, the way that those first responders did,
what really struck me were those pictures of the people that
day in New York all fixated on the exact same thing as we were
told that two billion other people around the world watched, in
real time, the tragedy of that day.
But, as others have remarked, we have the first responders,
we have the members of the military--to me we had great dinner
last night, and we all went around the table. I think it was
Senator Peters and Senator Romney's idea, let us all go and
describe what you were doing 9/11, those of us who are alive,
we all remember it.
I was in our office looking at the television, and making
probably the exact same comment that probably two billion
people made or thought, this changes everything. But then in
the days that followed that, the pictures that emerged of the
fire fighters, the Port Authority, the cops, in New York City,
``The Responders,'' walking up the steps, rushing into danger
to save their fellow Americans.
As we watched the finest among us, the men and women in the
military also respond and volunteer and go halfway round the
world to not only defend our freedom, but literally trying to
develop freedom and liberty and democracies, for people that we
had no idea who they were.
That is something pretty unique about America. We are not
perfect. But I happen to think that we are a phenomenal force
of good in the word.
In the midst of tragedy, not just 9/11, every mass
shooting, every hurricane, every national disaster always seems
to bring out the examples of the goodness of the American
people. To me that is what this hearing is about.
And this is what our responsibility is to not only preserve
this good nation for future generations, to make sure that it
thrives, that is our responsibility. That is what we dedicate
this Committee to do.
So, again I just want to thank everybody for attending. I
want to thank everybody for their service. And we will just
conclude by saying, God Bless America.
Now I have to read this statement.
The hearing will remain open for 15 days until September 24
at 5 p.m., for the submission of statements and questions for
the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]