- DRUG PRICING IN AMERICA: A PRESCRIPTION FOR CHANGE, PART II
[Senate Hearing 116-39]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-39
DRUG PRICING IN AMERICA:
A PRESCRIPTION FOR CHANGE, PART II
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 26, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-143 PDF
WASHINGTON: 2019
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa, Chairman
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
Kolan Davis, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Joshua Sheinkman, Democratic Staff Director
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Grassley, Hon. Chuck, a U.S. Senator from Iowa, chairman,
Committee on Finance...........................................
1
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon......................
3
WITNESSES
Gonzalez, Richard A., chairman and chief executive officer,
AbbVie Inc., North Chicago, IL.................................
6
Soriot, Pascal, chief executive officer, AstraZeneca, Wilmington,
DE.............................................................
8
Caforio, Giovanni, M.D., chairman of the board and chief
executive officer, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, New York, NY..
9
Taubert, Jennifer, executive vice president, worldwide chairman,
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ..
11
Frazier, Kenneth C., chairman and chief executive officer, Merck
and Company, Inc., Kenilworth, NJ..............................
12
Bourla, Albert, DVM, Ph.D., chief executive officer, Pfizer, New
York, NY.......................................................
14
Brandicourt, Olivier, M.D., chief executive officer, Sanofi,
Bridgewater, NJ................................................
15
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL
Bourla, Albert, DVM, Ph.D.:
Testimony....................................................
14
Prepared statement...........................................
63
Responses to questions from committee members................
66
Brandicourt, Olivier, M.D.:
Testimony....................................................
15
Prepared statement...........................................
134
Responses to questions from committee members................
144
Caforio, Giovanni, M.D.:
Testimony....................................................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
474
Responses to questions from committee members................
475
Frazier, Kenneth C.:
Testimony....................................................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
495
Responses to questions from committee members................
497
Gonzalez, Richard A.:
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
527
Responses to questions from committee members................
528
Grassley, Hon. Chuck:
Opening statement............................................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
704
Soriot, Pascal:
Testimony....................................................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
705
Responses to questions from committee members................
713
Taubert, Jennifer:
Testimony....................................................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
839
Responses to questions from committee members................
845
Thune, Hon. John:
Submission, 340B Health...................................... 1,053
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
Opening statement............................................
3
Prepared statement........................................... 1,054
Communications
AARP............................................................. 1,057
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists.................... 1,058
Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs...................... 1,062
George, Linda.................................................... 1,064
Huszagh, Robin K................................................. 1,065
Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility.................... 1,066
National Association of Free and Charitable Clinics.............. 1,070
National Business Group on Health................................ 1,072
National Coordinating Committee for Multiemployer Plans.......... 1,076
Oxfam America.................................................... 1,078
Patients for Affordable Drugs Now................................ 1,080
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association....................... 1,084
Raffle, Debra L.................................................. 1,089
Ricci, Laura T................................................... 1,091
Rowland, Rhonda.................................................. 1,099
DRUG PRICING IN AMERICA:
A PRESCRIPTION FOR CHANGE, PART II
----------
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Finance,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:15
a.m., in room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon.
Chuck Grassley (chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Roberts, Enzi, Cornyn, Thune, Isakson,
Portman, Toomey, Scott, Cassidy, Lankford, Daines, Young,
Wyden, Stabenow, Cantwell, Menendez, Carper, Cardin, Brown,
Bennet, Casey, Whitehouse, Hassan, and Cortez Masto.
Also present: Republican staff: Chris Allen, Senior Advisor
for Benefits and Exempt Organizations; Brett Baker, Health
Policy Advisor; Stuart Portman, Health Care Policy Advisor;
Karen Summar, Chief Health Policy Advisor; and Jeff Wrase,
Deputy Chief of Staff and Chief Economist. Democratic staff:
Michael Evans, General Counsel; Peter Gartrell, Investigator;
Matt Kazan, Senior Health Policy Advisor; Kristen Lunde,
Winston Fellow; and Joshua Sheinkman, Staff Director.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHUCK GRASSLEY, A U.S. SENATOR FROM
IOWA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Chairman. I want to welcome and to thank our witnesses
for being here. We know that you put a lot of hard work into
it, and staffs and the Senators have done the same thing.
The information that these witnesses will share will help
inform the committee as it addresses the issues of high
prescription drug prices. America has a problem with the high
cost of prescription medicines.
Whether it is about EpiPen, insulin, or other
prescriptions, in the thousands of letters that I have
received, Iowans have made clear that high drug prices are
hurting. I have heard from people about skipping doses of their
prescription drugs to make them last until the next paycheck.
Of course, I am not a doctor, but rationing one medicine
does not sound like the safe prescription for health and
wellness that Americans want. Others have told me about leaving
their prescription on the pharmacy counter because it costs too
much.
There is no question that researchers and doctors have
developed treatments and cures for diseases where there were
once no such cures or treatments. And such innovations take
time and money. I think all of us at this table--and most
people who are not at this table--if they study at all the
pharmaceutical industry and the FDA process, they know it takes
time and money. But we are all trying to understand the sticker
shock that many drugs generate, especially when some of these
drugs have been around for a long, long time.
There is a balance then between incentivizing innovation
and keeping prices affordable for consumers and taxpayers. And
the taxpayers are involved, because the Federal Government is a
great purchaser of drugs through a lot of health programs.
Like all systems, things can get out of balance. The good
news is that we are here to discuss solutions. And we thank all
of you for cooperating with us in that effort today.
In fact, we are here today thanks to a system of checks and
balances that is within our Constitution. Congress has a
constitutional responsibility to be a meaningful check on the
spending of taxpayers' money. That responsibility includes not
just holding hearings, but also holding the private sector and
the government accountable through oversight, just like a
doctor. That doctor has to properly diagnose a disease before
it can be treated. Congress needs to understand what is going
on in the drug pricing supply chain in order to respond in a
measured and effective way.
As part of that fact-finding, as of the last Friday Ranking
Member Wyden and I launched an inquiry into the high cost of
insulin. This hearing is not about scapegoating any one group
regarding high drug costs. That is why we are holding a series
of bipartisan hearings on this issue.
Without a doubt, drug pricing is a complex issue. But I
think we should also be asking whether or not it is too complex
or whether it should be so complex. We cannot allow anyone to
hide behind the current complexities to shield the true cost of
drugs. And we should not turn a blind eye to industry practices
that thwart laws and regulations designed to promote
competition and generic drug entries into the marketplace.
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, FDA
Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, and the Federal Trade Commission
have identified a number of tactics that undermine competition,
like withholding samples, pay-for-delay, product hopping, and
rebate bundling. And that just names a few. While these
agencies are taking enforcement action or looking at regulatory
changes, we here in Congress are exploring legislative options
to deter companies from engaging in these practices that keep
drug prices high for patients.
Today we expect open, honest answers from the
pharmaceutical industry to figure out how we got where we are
today and to see what ideas they have to make things better.
One of the first things that we need to talk about is
pretty simple: list price. Now you folks are probably going to
tell us it is not that simple. Secretary Azar has said that
pharmaceutical companies believe that the list price is
meaningless. In fact, some of your testimony today will echo
that.
However, for a patient taking a drug that has no
competition, the list price then becomes very meaningful. For
seniors on Part D or paying coinsurance as a percentage of list
price, then for that person, list price is very meaningful. For
people who have high-
deductible plans and pay thousands of dollars towards the list
price, then for those people, the list price is very
meaningful.
For pharmacy benefit managers, providing drugs with a high
list price can be more attractive than providing a less
expensive drug. Therefore, for the taxpayers then, the list
price becomes very meaningful.
We have all seen the finger-pointing. Every link in the
supply chain has gotten skilled at that finger-pointing. But
like most Americans, I at least--I think like most members of
Congress--am sick and tired of the blame game.
It is time then for solutions. One way or another, we are
going to get some clarity. The American people deserve straight
answers and real solutions.
On that note, I want to remind each of our witnesses that
it is a crime under title 18, section 101 to provide false
testimony to Congress. I thank you all for coming.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Grassley appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Senator Wyden?
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM OREGON
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I just want to note, at the outset, our focus on
bipartisanship. We began that with our effort to go after price
gouging with hepatitis C. Recently we have gone after
manufacturers ripping off Medicaid. You noted our investigation
to look at insulin prices that just soar and soar and soar some
more. So I just very much appreciate the fact that we are
tackling this in a bipartisan way.
Colleagues, prescription drugs did not become outrageously
expensive by accident. It is not the result of a system too
complicated for Americans to understand. Drug prices are
astronomically high because that is where pharmaceutical
companies and their investors want them. The brakes have come
off pharmaceutical pricing, and American families are hurtling
along in the passenger seat terrified about what comes next.
Today the committee is going to hear about uplifting
stories and miracle cures. Yet it is morally repugnant when
patients cannot afford those miracles. It is morally repugnant
when ailing patients are forced to choose between filling the
next prescription or putting food on the table because they
cannot afford both. It is morally repugnant when patients are
forced to skip doses.
Pharma executives, all of you who are here today, are here
because the way you have been doing business is unacceptable.
Ten companies accounted for half of all the profits in the
health-care sector last year. Nine of them were drug
manufacturers. All but one of today's witnesses represent
companies on this list.
Drugmakers behave as if the patients and the taxpayers are
unlocked ATMs full of cash to be extracted, and their
shareholders are the customers whom they value above anybody
else. So I am going to go through a short list of examples
starting with AbbVie, which manufactures the top-selling
prescription drug in America, the arthritis medication Humira.
Over 6 years, the company doubled the price of a 12-month
supply from $19,000 to $38,000. Can the patients opt for a less
expensive alternative? They cannot, because AbbVie protects the
exclusivity of Humira like Gollum with his ring--thick cobwebs
of patents and legal tricks and shadowy deals with other
drugmakers. All of them are in place to keep the cash flowing.
Now I also want to address some very troubling information
we just got from AbbVie's proxy statement. It is a document
every publicly traded company has to file with the SEC. Page 37
shows that in 2017, a portion of CEO Richard Gonzalez's multi-
million-dollar bonus was directly tied to sales of Humira. It
appears the same incentive was in place in 2015 and 2016. In
fact, the committee's review shows that all of AbbVie's top
executives have the same arrangement.
Mr. Gonzalez is welcome to respond, but the implication
ought to be clear. From top down, AbbVie's leadership had
reason to keep pushing prices and sales up.
Now Pfizer, that company gets first prize for the emptiest
pricing gesture in 2018. After stern Trump tweets, Pfizer said
it would temporarily freeze the prices. But once the President
got his flashy headlines, his gaze went elsewhere. Pfizer's
former CEO told investors it was back to normal, another round
of price hikes in 2019, including the pain medication Lyrica.
Lyrica has increased 163 percent in price since 2012. Just one
drug allowed Pfizer to pull in $4.5 billion in 2017.
Merck gets second prize for emptiest pricing gesture of
2018. They made sweet-sounding promises after coming under
criticism, but they cut prices for drugs that essentially
produce no revenue for the company. Left untouched were the
cash cows Keytruda and Januvia, which account for more than a
quarter of the company's revenue. It is like promising car
shoppers a great deal, except the only discounted model on the
lot is an Edsel.
Sanofi--this is a company wringing more and more cash out
of people with an incurable disease. In 2010, a vial of this
insulin cost less than $100. In 2018, it cost nearly $300. The
company raised prices again in 2019. Considering the landmark
breakthrough on insulin came early in the roaring 20s, nothing
could justify this sudden price hike a century later. Diabetics
who cannot afford the cost now self-ration and endanger their
lives. But you know what? Investors are happy.
AstraZeneca--a lesson in saying the quiet part out loud. In
an interview earlier, the CEO complained that his $12-million
salary made him the lowest-paid CEO in the whole industry, and
he said it was annoying to some extent. His company, meanwhile,
continues to raise the price of Symbicort, its $3-billion
asthma drug. For some asthmatics, being able to breathe costs
hundreds of dollars a month.
And Johnson & Johnson gets the record today for flip-
flopping. This January 7th at the JP Morgan Health Conference,
the CEO said the pharmaceutical industry needs self-policing on
prices. That sounded good, but 3 days later the company hiked
the prices of hundreds of its drugs, including drugs that
account for billions in Medicare spending.
And finally, there is Bristol-Myers Squibb. In 2017, the
company spent roughly $11 billion on dividends, stock buybacks,
marketing, sales, and administrative costs that roughly triple
the amount spent on R&D.
Now I am going to close by saying that I want us to compare
these concrete examples of two-faced scheming and profiteering
with the central arguments that we are going to get this
morning. The central argument from pharma is basically, the
fault is always somebody else's. The health plans are at fault,
the pharmaceutical benefit managers are at fault, regulators
are at fault. What we know for certain is the history that
pharma CEOs always say somebody else is at fault.
We are also going to hear that the list price does not
matter, that the true costs are just so complicated. But
companies do not set and raise list prices for fun. Those
prices are directly tied to the amount patients pay out-of-
pocket at pharmacy windows from sea to shining sea. They are
directly tied to what taxpayers spend on health-care programs.
Then drugmakers point the finger at middlemen, the pharmacy
benefit managers. I have said for years these pharmacy managers
are wasteful and secretive, and take their cut without proving
their worth to anybody. They are going to have their day before
the committee too. But those pharmacy managers do not set list
prices. The manufacturers do.
And by the way, the manufacturers do not offer rebates for
nearly 40 percent of Part D brand-name drugs. Those prices are
going up. That is on the drug companies, not on the pharmacy
managers.
We are also going to hear that any changes in business as
usual hurt research and development. A quick look at company
finances shows that that is a fable. Revenue generated from
American patients alone dwarfs what they spend on R&D
worldwide.
Drugmakers spend as much, if not more, on those
exhilarating TV ads and office-to-office salesmen as they spend
on research and development. And if lower prices would diminish
R&D, why don't costly dividends? Why don't stock buybacks? Is
the stock price more important than inventing that next miracle
cure? Even if you buy the specious argument that a drug's list
price at launch is driven by research costs, what could justify
arbitrary price increases year after year, long after the
research and development spending is done?
Finally, we are going to hear about how patients can get
coupons. But if this was so generous, why can't drug companies
just lower prices across the board? I believe it is just more
slick branding, branding that allows companies to keep the
status quo cash cow rolling along.
I will close with this. I was there when seven big tobacco
CEOs testified in a committee room just like this one. They
lied that day. This committee, the chairman and I, expect
better than that this morning.
Your profits are outsized compared to others in the
industry. You get a massive portion of your revenue from
American taxpayers, and you bear none of the consequences of
these skyrocketing prices. It is long past time to drop the
excuses and take concrete action to make medicine in America
more affordable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Senator Wyden appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now I will introduce our seven witnesses, but
once again, thank you for participating in this very important
hearing on a very important topic. We are grateful for your
participation and cooperation with our committee.
The first witness is Richard Gonzalez, chairman and chief
executive officer of AbbVie, Incorporated. Then we will hear
from Pascal Soriot, DVM, executive director and chief executive
officer of AstraZeneca. Then we will hear from Giovanni
Caforio, M.D., chairman of the board and chief executive
officer, Bristol-Myers Squibb; then Jennifer Taubert, executive
vice president and worldwide chairman of pharmaceuticals for
Johnson & Johnson; Kenneth C. Frazier, chairman and chief
executive officer of Merck and Company; Albert Bourla, DVM,
Ph.D., chief executive officer of Pfizer; and Dr. Olivier
Brandicourt, M.D., chief executive officer of Sanofi.
We welcome all of you, and we will start in that direction.
And you have been given 5 minutes. I do not gavel you down at
the end of 5 minutes, but I wish when the red light would come
on, you would start to summarize, if you have not finished.
So we will start with Mr. Gonzalez.
STATEMENT OF RICHARD A. GONZALEZ, CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, ABBVIE INC., NORTH CHICAGO, IL
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member
Wyden, and members of the committee.
I am Richard Gonzalez, and I am the chief executive officer
of AbbVie, a company dedicated to developing new innovative
medicines for some of health care's most challenging diseases,
such as cancer, Alzheimer's, viral infections, and autoimmune
diseases.
Since our inception in 2013, AbbVie has invested
approximately $50 billion in pursuit of that goal. However,
because we were tackling some of medicine's most challenging
problems, solutions do not come easily, nor without significant
risks.
Where we have succeeded, we have been able to provide cures
for fatal diseases like hepatitis C and significantly alter the
disease progression for certain cancers, lessening the burden
of illness on patients and on the health-care system. This is
what the 30,000 employees of AbbVie are dedicated to doing.
We agree that access to life-saving medicines is a critical
issue, and we look forward to sharing our perspectives with
you. There is no one solution to this complex issue, but AbbVie
is committed to working with the committee and others on how we
can better partner in your efforts to address pharmaceutical
pricing and access. AbbVie and the rest of our industry must
play a role in solving these issues and be prepared to work
together with the insurance industry, the administration, and
you to find a better path for American patients.
My remarks today will focus on one aspect of this inquiry,
the Medicare Part D benefit design, which, even after
pharmaceutical list prices are lowered, still contributes to
making innovative therapies cost-prohibitive for many Medicare
patients.
In general, the Medicare Part D program has worked well.
Its market-based structure and utilization of formularies
encourages competitive price discounts that have yielded
significant savings to the government since the Part D benefit
went into place back in 2006. However, despite these cost
savings, Part D patient out-of-pocket costs have significantly
increased. Some would blame that solely on high drug prices,
and we agree that price should be part of the discussion. But
it is also important to acknowledge that science has enabled us
to advance the standard of care far beyond what was possible
when the Part D benefit was originally designed.
Many of today's specialty medicines offer significant
advancements in treating or curing serious chronic or life-
threatening conditions and save significant amounts of money
for the health-care system by decreasing overall health-care
costs. Yet these therapies are also costly.
Due to the structure of the Part D benefit design, patients
are charged out-of-pocket costs on a medicine's list price,
which does not reflect the market-based rebates or discounts
that Medicare receives. We are encouraged by the proposed rule
that would reflect manufacturer's discounts in patient's Part D
out-of-pocket payments. This is an important step in the right
direction, but we believe more must still be done to help Part
D patients.
Let me give you a recent real-world example that
demonstrates the challenge with the current Part D benefit
design, and why the focus solely on list price does not fully
address the access challenges. An uninsured hepatitis C
infection leads to downstream medical costs for surgery,
chemotherapy, and radiation for patients who progress to
needing a liver transplant or having liver cancer. Today we can
cure hepatitis C with drugs. This cure is highly cost-effective
for the overall health-care system.
In 2017, AbbVie launched Mavyret, a highly effective cure
for HCV. At the time, the list prices for the competitive
alternatives were as high as $94,500 for the most commonly
prescribed treatment duration. We launched Mavyret at a list
price that was 72 percent lower. But even though we cut the
list price of an HCV cure--for most patients by 72 percent--
Medicare Part D patients' out-of-pocket obligations are still
too high for many patients to access this medicine.
We believe it is important that discussions about access
and affordability include a focus on how to alleviate Medicare
Part D out-of-pocket burdens above and beyond just lowering
list price. We are prepared to step up and discuss how
companies like ours can shoulder more of the burden of the
patient out-of-pocket expense as we do in other areas.
We believe AbbVie, the rest of the pharmaceutical industry,
and the insurance providers should come together with the
administration and you to work towards solutions that make
life-changing medicines more affordable to Part D patients. I
can assure you AbbVie is committed to doing its part, and we
look forward to working with you.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gonzalez appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Mr. Soriot?
STATEMENT OF PASCAL SORIOT, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
ASTRAZENECA, WILMINGTON, DE
Mr. Soriot. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and
members of the committee, good morning. I appreciate the
invitation to address concerns regarding the pricing of
medicines in the United States.
My name is Pascal Soriot, and I am the CEO of AstraZeneca.
Our company is dedicated to science and innovation. And in
2018, we invested nearly $6 billion in research and
development, 28 percent of our product sales, which is well
above the industry average.
In the past 2 years, our commitment to R&D has resulted in
18 significant FDA approvals and 5 breakthrough designations.
However, I know that these statistics are meaningless unless
patients can actually afford our medicines and those medicines
reduce overall health-care costs.
I am here to discuss how we can work with other
stakeholders to take specific actions that address pricing
concerns. My first proposal is that we move away from the
current rebate system while continuing to work with payers and
PBMs to ensure robust negotiations.
The current system is built on high list prices coupled
with rebates. This is not sustainable, and all of us have a
role to play. For example, the estimates for 2018 show that
across our medicines, our average rebate is nearly 50 percent
of our gross revenues in the U.S. Despite this, in recent years
in our primary care portfolio, we have seen flat to declining
net effective prices for most of our medicines. As a company
dependent upon government action for eliminating rebates in
commercial and in Part D, we are prepared to reduce our list
prices by an equivalent amount of rebates, less the appropriate
market-based fees, to those in the supply chain. This will
actually reduce overall costs not only for patients, but also
for the government.
My second proposal is that if a change of the current
system is not possible, a portion of discounts and rebates
could be used to create out-of-pocket caps for Medicare
patients. This approach is used successfully in some other
countries. Actually, it gives patients greater certainty in
their out-of-pocket cost.
Third, I believe that value-based agreements have the
potential to transform how medicines are priced and reimbursed
in the U.S. In our own value-based agreements, the price of a
medicine is directly linked to the value it provides to
patients, to payers, and to the health-care system.
For example, last month we announced an agreement for
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Medicare patients who
are prescribed Brilinta. This innovative contract directly
reduces the cost for patients, and it ties price to clinical
value, basing our payments on patient outcome. These types of
agreements can be especially effective for medicines where
there is limited competition. As an example, for one of our
oral oncology medicines we agreed to reimburse a large payer
for discontinued use because patients did not respond to
treatment. And we have reimbursed the payer under those
agreements 20 percent of the time.
To that end, I appreciate the support of Senator Warner and
Senator Cassidy for value-based agreements, as demonstrated by
their request for input on the Patient Affordability, Value,
and Efficiency, the PAVE Act.
My fourth proposal is that we must encourage biosimilars
and eliminate policy and commercial barriers to their greater
use. Biologics are actually making very important contributions
to medicine, and I believe a vigorous biosimilar market would
reduce costs like generics do for small molecules. In fact,
biosimilars have gained up to 85 percent market share in the 5
largest countries in Europe, and the average biosimilar
discount is between 40 and 80 percent.
In closing, I would like to emphasize my strong commitment
to addressing the concerns raised by the committee. I believe
that we can work together to find solutions that continue to
allow manufacturers to innovate, while creating a more
efficient and more affordable system.
There are no easy answers, it is very clear, but we want to
be a constructive partner. Thank you, and I look forward to the
discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Soriot appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Dr. Caforio?
STATEMENT OF GIOVANNI CAFORIO, M.D., CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, BRISTOL-MEYERS SQUIBB COMPANY, NEW
YORK, NY
Dr. Caforio. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and
members of the committee, good morning, and thank you for the
opportunity to be here today on behalf of the 24,000 employees
of Bristol-Myers Squibb. I look forward to working together to
align incentives to ensure all Americans have access to the
medicines they need.
I am a physician. I joined the pharmaceutical industry 30
years ago because of the impact companies like ours have on
patients.
We should all be proud that American companies lead our
industry. Our researchers have contributed to the development
of medicines that have reduced mortality from cardiovascular
disease, helped transform HIV/AIDS into a chronic disease, and
are now making significant progress with the treatment of
cancer.
Just 10 years ago, the idea of harnessing the immune system
to treat cancer was viewed with great skepticism. But our
researchers saw the promise of that approach and ignited an era
of scientific innovation that has changed survival expectations
in multiple tumors. Prior to the availability of immuno-
oncology treatments, only 25 percent of patients diagnosed with
metastatic melanoma were alive after 1 year. Today, thanks to
immuno-oncology therapies, that number has increased to 74
percent.
The potential of this approach has also been seen in lung
cancer, kidney cancer, and many other difficult-to-treat
tumors. These patients now have a chance for quality and long-
term survival.
But not all patients respond to current immunotherapies.
And so we must do more. We recently opened a new facility
dedicated to investigating what we call immuno-oncology
resistance. And we continuously seek external innovation to
augment our pipeline. In fact, in this context, we recently
announced our plans to acquire Celgene. Our goal is to bring
together the drive and dedication of two science-driven
companies to do even more for patients.
As a physician, I do recognize that medicines are only
helpful if patients and health-care systems can afford them. We
share the committee's concern with escalating health-care costs
and believe that our responsibility extends to ensuring that
patients have access to and can afford our medicines. For this
reason, the average net pricing across our U.S. portfolio of
medicines increased by 5 percent or less year-over-year for the
last 5 years. Importantly, it did not increase at all in 2018.
And we expect that it will not increase in 2019.
Despite this fact, we do recognize that patients' out-of-
pocket costs continue to increase. We believe it is possible to
work together to realign incentives to ensure patients can
afford medicines without stifling scientific innovation. So
what are the solutions? We are supportive of the proposed rule
aimed at reforming the rebate system with a focus on what is
best for patients.
We need to ensure more generics are available whenever
permissible under our system. We support value-based purchasing
arrangements that tie payments to value. These models can
reduce costs, improve access and patient adherence, and
contribute to better outcomes.
We applaud efforts by Health and Human Services and this
committee in all of these areas. We do believe the U.S. should
not adopt policies that stifle innovation in other countries.
Outside of the U.S., reimbursement of new medicines often takes
more than 2 years. For example, nearly 4 years ago our Opdivo
and Yervoy regimen was first approved to treat metastatic
melanoma in the U.S. Today, 6 of the 16 countries included in
the international price index proposal still do not provide
reimbursement for this combination, which is the standard of
care for the treatment of this cancer. This is why we do not
support the proposed international price index model for
Medicare Part B drugs.
I would like to leave you with a few thoughts. First, we
recognize the need for change. We are witnessing a historic era
in biomedical innovation. American research-based companies are
leading the way to help patients whose diseases cannot be
adequately treated with today's medicines. But we must ensure
that patients have affordable access to new innovations. And we
should work on policies that support and reward access and
these investments. I look forward to working together to
implement real change that broadens access to innovative
medicines for patients.
In closing, on behalf of my colleagues at Bristol-Myers
Squibb and the patients we serve, my sincere thanks for your
time and attention today.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Caforio appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now, Ms. Taubert?
STATEMENT OF JENNIFER TAUBERT, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT,
WORLDWIDE CHAIRMAN, JANSSEN PHARMACEUTICALS, JOHNSON & JOHNSON,
NEW BRUNSWICK, NJ
Ms. Taubert. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden,
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to be
here today. I am Jennifer Taubert, and I lead the Janssen
Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson. We focus on
discovering and developing transformational medicines for some
of the world's most challenging diseases, including multiple
myeloma, prostate cancer, HIV, schizophrenia, and Crohn's
disease, among others.
Like many of you, I know what it is like when a loved one
faces serious illness. My own mother died of lung cancer while
in her 40s, and at that time there was very little that could
be done for her. I have committed my career to bringing
families hope: hope for years of life, for the chance to be
there for a daughter's wedding or for a grandson's birth.
Janssen invested $8.4 billion in research and development
last year in the search for medical breakthroughs, making us
one of the world's top R&D investors in any industry. In fact,
our investment in R&D last year was 86 percent more than we
spent on sales and marketing. And this substantial investment
is changing lives. It has helped turn HIV from a death sentence
to a manageable disease. Our targeted cancer medicines have
helped patients with some of the most deadly cancers live
longer, in some cases for many years.
Medicines not only help patients and families. They also
help lower overall health-care costs by keeping people well,
preventing the need for expensive procedures and
hospitalizations. But medicines cannot make a difference if the
patients who need them cannot afford them. We understand the
concerns about the cost of health care.
Our approach recognizes our responsibility to patients
today and patients tomorrow. Patients today need access to our
medicines. Patients tomorrow count on us to deliver cures and
treatments for the most challenging diseases. When we price our
medicines, we balance the value to patients, the importance of
affordable access, and the importance of developing future
breakthroughs. The list price is a starting point that is
reduced by required discounts to government programs and
rebates to payers so they will grant patients access to our
medicines.
Last year our discounts and rebates amounted to $21 billion
and our net price decreased 6.8 percent. Unfortunately, while
our overall price decreased for the past 2 years, patients have
seen their out-of-pocket costs go up. One reason is increased
enrollment in health plans that require patients to pay more
for their prescriptions. As one recent analysis shows, patients
are required to pay 13 percent of overall pharmaceutical costs,
versus only 3 percent of hospital costs, even though medicine
can help keep patients out of the hospital.
Above all, we need an American solution to this American
challenge. We must ensure that today's medicines are
affordable, while at the same time preserving the innovation
that has delivered so much and promises even more. We must
maintain the hallmarks that make American health care
remarkable: access to innovative therapies, personal choice,
and doctors and patients making decisions based on what is
right for each individual.
At Janssen, we are committed to being a part of the
solution. We believe open dialogue is essential. That is why in
2016, we began issuing the Janssen Transparency Report, sharing
information about how we invest our resources, price our
medicines, and help people access them. And we recently
announced our plan to include list price and potential patient
out-of-pocket costs in our direct-to-consumer TV advertising.
In the same spirit of open dialogue, we have consistently
brought forward ideas and perspectives to both Congress and the
administration to fix what is not working while preserving what
is.
We have included more details in our submitted testimony,
but I want to touch on a few points today. First, while
Medicare Part D is working for many seniors and has been
effective in containing costs, we believe an out-of-pocket cap
is a needed protection.
Second, in Medicare Part B, we have proposed options that
would allow Medicare to continue to achieve negotiated savings
through market competition while reducing costs.
And third, we support rebate reforms that ensure patients
benefit from the negotiated rebates and discounts--$150 billion
in total in 2017 alone--and as a result, have patients see
lower out-of-pocket costs at the pharmacy.
We are on the verge of extraordinary progress that could
change our lives and the lives of our children and
grandchildren. At Janssen, we are committed to bringing that
promise to life.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Taubert appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Mr. Frazier?
STATEMENT OF KENNETH C. FRAZIER, CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, MERCK AND COMPANY, INC., KENILWORTH, NJ
Mr. Frazier. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Wyden, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear here today.
Merck's mission is to save and improve lives around the
world by bringing forward breakthrough medicines and vaccines.
Research is at the core of Merck. Last year we invested $10
billion in R&D, 23 percent of product sales. And we have
invested nearly $70 billion over the past decade.
Over the last 5 years, we have also made capital
investments of over $5 billion in the United States, and we
plan to invest more than $9 billion more over the next few
years to increase manufacturing capacity and to open two new
research centers in the United States.
We go where the science leads us, which means we do not
focus only on diseases in wealthier countries. For example, we
are proud to have deployed 70,000 doses of our experimental
Ebola vaccine in the Congo, working in partnership with the
United States government. The goal is to save lives even where
no viable commercial opportunity exists. We do all this to
serve patients.
We fully understand that U.S. patients are having a harder
and harder time affording the medicines they need. While
medicine costs are growing at the slowest rate in years, our
patients are too often being asked to pay more out of pocket. I
am here to suggest some ways that together we can address this
problem. First, we want to be clear that our industry has a
duty to be responsible in our pricing practices and to
contribute to solutions that address patient affordability.
Merck has a history of responsible pricing. We publish
information about our prices, and the rebates and discounts we
provide to payers. Last year we pledged that we will not
increase our average net prices across our portfolio by more
than the rate of inflation annually
Second, we must ensure that patients get the benefit of
these large rebates and discounts. The incentives in the
current system are badly misaligned with the growing gap
between list and net prices, creating incentives to favor
products with higher list prices. This misalignment hurts
patients because their cost sharing is often based on the list
price of a drug. We urge you to support action to ensure that
patients benefit from these discounts.
Third, we can significantly reduce drug spending for
patients in the health-care system by ensuring that we have a
viable biosimilars market in the United States. We urge
Congress to encourage and support greater biosimilar
utilization.
Fourth, we believe that prices can better align with a
drug's value, when manufacturers and payers are able to
negotiate innovative contracts that base payment on a drug's
benefit. We need to move to this type of system, but there
remain major regulatory and operational obstacles to such
value-based arrangements, which we urge Congress to address. We
agree that manufacturers should be rewarded based on the value
that our therapies deliver.
Fifth, we support efforts to encourage generic competition.
A version of Chairman Grassley's CREATES Act and similar
policies could make needed reforms to encourage generic
competition and ensure there is no inappropriate gaming of the
system. We also support eliminating coupons in cases where
brand name generic competition exists.
Finally, we would like to work with the committee to find
ways to end price gouging by some who excessively increase off-
patent drug prices where there is no competition. These high
prices hurt patients, and they do not create incentives for
research. These changes could bring real relief to today's
patients while preserving the incentives to invest in
tomorrow's breakthroughs. Decades of research investment are
now yielding life-changing discoveries. If we damage the
biomedical ecosystem that thrives on these investments, we will
surely limit what can be achieved for patients and society.
The single most important thing we do at Merck is to
persist in making large and risky investments in R&D that allow
our thousands of researchers to sit at their lab benches to try
to create something transformative despite the overwhelming
odds that their efforts will not succeed, since more than 9 out
of 10 compounds fail.
I would like to end on a brief personal note. My mother
died when I was a child, and my siblings and I were raised by
my father. He was a giant in my life, and I was devastated when
Alzheimer's took him away from us.
Last year, after spending many years and over $1 billion,
Merck had to end development of a promising Alzheimer's therapy
because it did not work. Yet we continue on, seeking better
approaches, and I truly believe that Merck or one of the other
companies at this table will find a medicine that will avoid
the pain of seeing a loved one taken away from them in this
way.
This vital work depends on having a U.S. market that is
free, competitive, and predictable. We must work together to
solve the affordability challenges of today's patients without
jeopardizing the hopes of those waiting for tomorrow's cures.
The changes I have discussed today have the potential to vastly
improve the market while lessening the financial hardships many
people face.
I am here to pledge Merck's cooperation with you in
creating such changes. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Frazier.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Frazier appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now, Dr. Bourla?
STATEMENT OF ALBERT BOURLA, DVM, Ph.D.,
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, PFIZER, NEW YORK, NY
Dr. Bourla. Good morning. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member
Wyden, and members of the committee, thank you for the
invitation. My name is Albert Bourla. I have been with Pfizer
26 years and just last month became its chief executive
officer.
I have to say that today I am particularly humbled to take
part in such an important policy discussion within the United
States Senate. When I immigrated into the United States 18
years ago, I could never have imagined such an honor.
In that frightening moment when you hear that you or a
loved one has been diagnosed with a serious disease, one
question comes to mind: is there a treatment available? The
answer to this question will change your life. Happily the
answer, increasingly, is ``yes.''
New breakthroughs are coming quickly to treat many
difficult and devastating diseases. But these breakthroughs
will not do anyone any good if patients cannot afford them. And
unfortunately, the horribly misaligned incentives within our
health-care system often make medicines unaffordable for
American patients. We need to fix this. Today, we would like to
propose four ideas to drive meaningful savings for patients.
The first idea is passing all rebates to patients. Pfizer
supports a system in which transparent up-front discounts
directly benefit patients, rather than the system where rebates
are swallowed up by the supply chain. In the current system,
for example, none of the approximately $12 billion that Pfizer
paid in rebates, in 2018, found its way to American patients.
If the proposed rule to share rebates with consumers at the
point of sale is finalized, we estimate that seniors taking
Pfizer medicines could save hundreds of dollars a year, on
average.
The second idea is less volume, less pay. Imagine a system
where Pfizer gets paid based on the number of heart attacks we
prevent, rather than on the number of pills we sell. In such a
system, if our medicines do not produce good results, we should
be paid less. And if they do, we should be paid more.
Such value-based payment arrangements, if done correctly,
can align the interests of patients, insurance companies, and
biopharmaceutical companies around one shared goal, ensuring
positive health outcomes for patients. I understand that
several members of this committee are working on legislation to
pave the way for these types of arrangements. And we applaud
this effort.
The third idea is around capping seniors' out-of-pocket
medicine costs. Patients are increasingly being required to
take on a disproportionately higher share of their medicines'
costs. Today patients pay on average 14 percent of the cost of
their medicines, but they pay only 3 percent of the cost
associated with hospital stays, for example. This is forcing
patients to forego taking needed medications or to limit their
doses. This is bad, not only for patients, but also for overall
system costs. Patients who do not take their medicines often
end up in the hospital, costing much more to the system. An
important first step is capping out-of-pocket costs seniors
experience in the medical drug program.
And the fourth idea is to knock down barriers to lower-cost
biosimilars. Others have spoken about it. Adverse incentives
that favor higher-cost biologics are keeping biosimilars from
reaching patients. In many cases, insurance companies declined
to include lower-cost biosimilars in their formularies because
they would risk losing the rebates from covering higher-cost
medicines. I cannot think of a more concerning example of a
broken system, and we need to do something about it.
In closing, Pfizer is all about breakthroughs that change
patients' lives. This is why our more than 90,000 colleagues,
many of whom work in laboratories and manufacturing plants in
States represented by members of this committee, come to work
every day. And it is why we are here today, to work with you
and all stakeholders to find ways to ensure that we can
continue to discover medicines that can change patients' lives.
The Chairman. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bourla appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. Now to Dr. Brandicourt.
STATEMENT OF OLIVIER BRANDICOURT, M.D., CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, SANOFI, BRIDGEWATER, NJ
Dr. Brandicourt. Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden,
and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before the Senate Committee on Finance to discuss
pharmaceutical pricing, affordability, and patient access. I am
Olivier Brandicourt, the chief executive officer of Sanofi. I
understand the anger about rising out-of-pocket costs for many
medicines, including insulins.
I appreciate the confusion as to why patient costs continue
to rise, even when the amount that PBMs and health plans pay
declines. This situation is unacceptable and unsustainable for
too many patients. My goal today is to have an honest
discussion about how the system works, and how it can be
improved. As you may know, 2 years ago Sanofi announced our
progressive and industry-leading principles.
First, we made a pledge to keep price increases at or below
the U.S. national health expenditure projected growth rates.
Second, we committed to providing a clear rationale for pricing
when we launch new medicines. And third, we have increased
transparency by providing each year information about our list
and net prices across all of our medicines.
In 2018, the average aggregate least-price increase across
all Sanofi medicines in the U.S. was 4.6 percent, while the
average aggregate net price--that is the price actually paid to
Sanofi--declined by 8 percent. So declining average aggregate
net price in 2018 represents a third consecutive year in which
the amount paid by payers across all of our medicines went
down.
I feel a special obligation to address the pressing issues
around access and affordability of our insulins. Insulin is a
clear example of the growing gap between list and net prices.
Since 2012, the net price of Sanofi insulins has declined 25
percent. Yet patient out-of-pocket costs have continued to
rise. If you take Lantus, for instance, our most prescribed
insulin, the net price has fallen by 30 percent since 2012. Yet
over the same period, average out-of-pocket costs have risen
approximately 60 percent for patients with commercial insurance
and Medicare. It is my belief that declining net prices should
result in lower out-of-pocket costs for patients. But clearly,
this is not always the case.
Addressing these prices alone will not be sufficient to
solve the problem of patients' out-of-pocket costs. As we look
for solutions, we must have protections for patients and link
responsible pricing to both access and affordability. Every
actor in the system has a role to play, and Sanofi takes this
call to action seriously. There are different ways to
accomplish these goals, and Sanofi could support options that
align to our core principles. First, changes to the drug
pricing and reimbursement system must be holistic, factoring in
all actors in the system. And the majority of benefits should
accrue to patients.
And second, to maintain a strong environment for innovation
in the United States, the government should not directly
control the price of medicines, either through Federal
Government price controls, or worse, outsourcing price
decisions to other countries.
To ensure that responsible pricing translates to better
access and affordability for patients, Sanofi supports the
policy solutions outlined in my written testimony, including
several policies introduced by members of this committee, such
as the CREATES Act, the C-THRU Act, and the SPIKE Act.
So thank you for the invitation to speak with you today,
and I look forward to answering your questions.
The Chairman. I thank all of you for your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Brandicourt appears in the
appendix.]
The Chairman. And I think I heard from each of you that you
are willing to work with us and people in the administration to
find solutions to these problems. I welcome that sort of
cooperation and just implore you that that cooperation will
have to go on weeks beyond this hearing, because we would not
expect to get all the information we need just at this hearing.
Now, we will go to questioning. Do not start my clock yet.
I have not asked my questions yet. [Laughter.]
Before I ask questions, if I could have--obviously, we have
a very important meeting here. We have seven witnesses. We have
24 or 25 members of this committee.
I think I am fairly liberal in letting people ask
questions. But I want to repeat something I have said before,
and that is that if you will take your 5 minutes, and if there
are a few seconds left, you ask a question then--hopefully, it
is a short question at that point, and hopefully there is a
short answer at that point.
What irritates me about that process is when somebody
thinks they can have back and forth for 3 or 4 minutes after
you ask your last question. So I am asking you, if you would
please be tolerant towards people who abide by the 5 minutes,
to be respectful of that so that everybody gets a chance to ask
questions.
Now my 5 minutes starts. [Laughter.]
I want to thank those of you who are here who said you
would be supportive of legislation that I have been backing for
a long period of time: CREATES, which is sponsored by Senator
Leahy and this Senator, and Pay-for-Delay by Senator Klobuchar
and this Senator. So those are bipartisan bills.
One other bipartisan bill that you probably do not know
about yet--it was introduced by Senator Wyden and me a couple
weeks ago--is called the Right Rebate Act, which would close a
loophole that was exploited by Mylan in the EpiPen case.
So leading to my questions, starting off, Ranking Member
Wyden and I have been working--before I became chairman of this
committee again, we investigated a lot about Gilead's pricing
decisions for hepatitis C drugs. During that investigation, we
acquired a document that listed some factors that Gilead
considered when it priced those drugs.
Those factors included the risk of ``public outcry'' or
``the likelihood of a letter from Congress'' or the
``likelihood of a congressional hearing.'' So taking off from
that point, here is a very simple question to answer, I think.
So I want a ``yes'' or ``no'' from each of you.
When your company prices its drugs, do you consider the
risk of negative public opinion in the pricing of that drug? We
will start with AbbVie.
Mr. Gonzalez. Senator----
The Chairman. Can you answer ``yes'' or ``no''?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes, we do.
The Chairman. Yes, you do. Okay.
What about AstraZeneca?
Mr. Soriot. Yes, we do, Senator. Amongst other factors, of
course, but we do.
The Chairman. Okay.
What about Bristol-Myers?
Dr. Caforio. Yes, we do, Senator, among many factors.
The Chairman. Okay.
Johnson & Johnson?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, we do, Senator, as well as affordable
access to the medicines for the patients.
The Chairman. Okay.
What about Merck?
Mr. Frazier. Yes, we do, among other factors.
The Chairman. Okay.
And what about Pfizer?
Dr. Bourla. Yes, we do, among other factors.
The Chairman. And what about Sanofi?
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes, we do, among other factors.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
Another ``yes'' or ``no'' question: when determining list
price, do you consider the likelihood of a congressional
inquiry? Let's start with AbbVie.
Mr. Gonzalez. No, we do not.
The Chairman. What about AstraZeneca?
Mr. Soriot. No, we do not, Senator.
The Chairman. What about Bristol-Myers?
Dr. Caforio. No, Senator, we do not.
The Chairman. And what about Johnson & Johnson?
Ms. Taubert. No, Senator, we do not.
The Chairman. Okay; and Merck?
Mr. Frazier. Not explicitly.
I would say we do care what the public thinks.
The Chairman. Okay.
And what about Pfizer?
Dr. Bourla. No, we do not think----
The Chairman. Okay. What about Sanofi?
Dr. Brandicourt. Same, Senator; we do not.
The Chairman. Okay.
Then I would have another ``yes'' or ``no'' question. When
your company prices its drugs, do you take into account the
fact that a key player is the Federal Government?
Let us start with AbbVie.
Mr. Gonzalez. We evaluate all the channels when we make
determinations on price and affordability.
The Chairman. Okay.
So that obviously would include the Federal Government.
Mr. Gonzalez. Correct.
The Chairman. AstraZeneca?
Mr. Soriot. Yes, we use the same approach, and of course
the Federal Government is a very key aspect of our
deliberations.
The Chairman. Okay.
Bristol-Myers?
Dr. Caforio. Yes, Senator, because the Federal Government
is a large part of our----
The Chairman. Okay.
Johnson & Johnson?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, we take into account the value to
patients, the health-care system, and society, and the
government is a key part of that.
The Chairman. Okay.
And Merck?
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
The Chairman. Okay.
And Pfizer?
Dr. Bourla. Absolutely.
The Chairman. And then Sanofi?
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes.
The Chairman. Okay.
My last question. ``Yes'' or ``no'': some of you have
voiced support for the recent rebate rule proposed by the
administration. Should the administration finalize this rule,
will you commit to lowering your drug prices?
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Chairman, we are supportive of the rule.
We would like to see it in its final form, obviously, to make a
final decision. But we are supportive of taking the discount to
the patient at the point of sale.
The Chairman. Okay.
AstraZeneca?
Mr. Soriot. The same for us, Senator. I would go one step
further: if the rebates were removed from the commercial sector
as well, we would definitely reduce our list prices.
The Chairman. Okay.
And Bristol-Myers?
Dr. Caforio. We have the same position, sir.
The Chairman. Okay.
And Johnson & Johnson?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, we are supportive, and that definitely
would be my goal. We would just need to see the final
legislation, provided that there are not additional fees that
are added into the system to compensate for the rebates.
The Chairman. Okay.
Merck?
Mr. Frazier. I would expect that our prices would go down
if we change the system, again, on the commercial side as well
as the Medicare side.
The Chairman. Okay.
Pfizer?
Dr. Bourla. It is our very clear intention that we will not
keep a single dollar from these rebates. We will try to move
every single penny to the patients. And we think if this goes
also to the commercial plans, that would be even better for
more patients.
The Chairman. Okay.
Sanofi?
Dr. Brandicourt. Lowering list price has to be linked to
better access and affordability at the counter for the
patients.
The Chairman. Okay.
I want fellow colleagues to know that I stopped at 5
minutes and 26 seconds.
Senator Wyden?
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start, if I could, with you, Mr. Bourla, on this
list price question. And I want to see if we can do a couple of
``yes'' or ``no'' questions.
Is it correct that your company, and nobody else, sets the
starting price for all drugs sold by Pfizer? That is a ``yes''
or ``no.''
Dr. Bourla. It is a negotiation with PBMs, and they are
very powerful.
Senator Wyden. But you still get to set the list price?
Dr. Bourla. Yes, but we set----
Senator Wyden. Okay.
Dr. Bourla [continuing]. The list price and the rebates
based on----
Senator Wyden. Is it correct when a hypothetical patient--
let us call her Mrs. Jones--goes to pay for her drug at the
pharmacy counter, her coinsurance is based on the price of the
drug you set?
Dr. Bourla. It is correct in many cases.
Senator Wyden. Okay.
I just want you all to know that the number one reason
consumers are getting hammered is because these list prices--
and you have the last word with respect to where they are--are
unaffordable. And the high prices are tied to what the consumer
pays at the pharmacy counter. And all this other stuff you talk
about--the rebates and the discounts and the coupons--all this
other stuff is window dressing, all of it. And the fact is on
Part D, 40 percent of the drugs do not even have a rebate.
So I want it understood--particularly, because I have asked
you, Dr. Bourla--I think you and others in the industry are
stonewalling on the key issue, which is actually lowering list
prices. And reducing those list prices is the easiest way for
American consumers to pay less at the pharmacy counter.
Now, Mr. Gonzalez, I want to ask you some questions
relating to the international pricing situation. Drug prices
are much higher in the United States than in other developed
countries, on average 40 percent higher. In 2017, AbbVie made
$9.9 billion in revenue outside the United States.
So my first question to you is, do you make a profit on the
drugs that you sell in Germany or in France?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes, we do.
Senator Wyden. So if you do, and you have said that that is
the case, if you can turn a profit in a country with
dramatically lower prices, you can do the same thing in the
United States. How is that not gouging the American consumer
with high prices, even though you are giving other people in
Western industrialized countries a better deal?
Mr. Gonzalez. Senator, it is a great question. And the
reality is--and I do not think it is just unique to AbbVie--
that prices vary dramatically around the world. There is no
question, at least in AbbVie's business for the most part, the
U.S. has some of the highest prices in the world.
That is not universally true. The government has some
relatively low prices in comparison. But I think the
fundamental issue is this: our system is built around a variety
of pricing around the world, but that overall system supports
our R&D model.
If a market the size of the United States were to collapse
to the lower end of that pricing model, then I can just tell
you AbbVie would not be able to invest the level of R&D that it
invests today. So that is the reality.
Senator Wyden. Well, I think time is short.
As I noted in my opening statement, global R&D spending is
far less than the revenue you make in America. American
patients bring in more than enough revenue to cover your R&D
costs.
I mean, I am going to have town meetings in a few days at
home, and people will say, ``Ron, this is ridiculous that we
are getting gouged when people around the world are getting a
better deal.'' And what you have told me today is: (a) they are
getting a better deal and you can make a profit; and (b) it is
somehow tied to research and development. And the fact is that
research and development is less than the revenue that you are
making in this country, and that is why people are so angry.
And I would also like to note that a Humira biosimilar was
launched in Europe last year, and due to AbbVie's anti-
competitive behavior in the United States, that same biosimilar
will not be available here until 2023. You have a double
standard. You are willing to sit by and hose the American
consumer and give the breaks to people overseas.
So I am going to wrap up and stick to the chairman's time
limit by asking you for a response in writing. So that we can
better understand the situation for the drugs you sell in other
countries, I would like to know, for the drugs you sell in
other Western industrialized countries--just the Western
industrialized countries--does your company make or lose money?
Can you get that to me in writing within 10 days?
Mr. Gonzalez. I can give it to you right now.
Senator Wyden. Okay.
Mr. Gonzalez. We make money in any country that we sell in
unless we choose to donate the product into those countries.
And we do that in certain countries that cannot afford it, but
not the Western----
Senator Wyden. I would like it in writing.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay.
One thing I would like to point out that I do not think is
totally accurate that you described, at least for AbbVie, is we
spend $5.2 billion dollars in R&D. We make $5.6 billion dollars
in earnings.
So our R&D is almost equivalent to what our earnings are.
Senator Wyden. Well----
The Chairman. I am going to----
Senator Wyden. We will continue that.
The Chairman. I am going to list four names at a time.
Roberts will be next, and then Stabenow, and then Enzi, and
then Cantwell. So if you are irritated about how you might be
on this list, take it out with one of your colleagues on the
committee, because I am reading it just the way the staff gave
it to me.
So, Senator Roberts?
Senator Roberts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to be
timely.
This whole situation reminds me of when Mark Twain, i.e.,
Samuel Clemens, went to Missouri--that was his first mistake--
and made some remarks to a small town. The mayor afterwards
said, ``Well now, we have the tar and the feathers and a rail.
We would like to ride you out of town on a rail.'' He said,
``If it was not for the honor of it, I'd just as soon not do
that.''
And I think in some ways that is where you are sitting
right now. I worry about the cost. I worry about the access. I
worry about the value. I worry about the fact that when I go--I
did just last night, and all of a sudden I found out that the
prescription I had cost twice as much. I still have not quite
figured that out. I do not know which one of you to blame.
But at any rate, I worry about HHS. I worry about CMS. I
worry about the Federal Government taking over with regards to
the decisions that you make. I also worry about what the
distinguished Senator from Oregon described as a terrified
public, and certainly we do not want any liars.
I want to ask you one simple question. Staff has arranged
about seven good questions. I will submit them for the record.
Under the banner of certainty and predictability, what
keeps you up at night? In other words, if in fact we invited
you back and you could come back--well, let me put it another
way. What would happen if you ran into some things that were
unprecedented and you would not be here? We would not have the
Magnificent Seven, if in fact that's why we won a ``W.''
What I want to know is, what is the thing that keeps you up
at night, so you could be a viable company now and down the
road to achieve what we all want in terms of access and cost?
And I am going to start with Dr. Brandicourt, because I want to
go from right to left for a change.
Dr. Brandicourt. Thank you, Senator. What keeps me up at
night is ensuring that I have a pipeline of new products which
is innovative enough to alleviate, you know, some of the
disease burdens in the countries where we are. So it is making
our company meaningful and delivering what we are supposed to
do best.
Senator Roberts. Thank you.
Dr. Bourla. Mr. Senator, the reason we exist is to bring
breakthroughs that change patients' lives. And this is what
keeps me up, and this is the reason why our employees come to
work. This is the reason why our investors invest in us.
If our pipeline will not deliver on the promise--and this
is very challenging, because you are dealing with very
difficult diseases to crack--then we will not be able to
fulfill our promise to society and will not be able to fulfill
our promise to investors.
Senator Roberts. Mr. Frazier, thank you for your five-point
plan. What say you?
Mr. Frazier. I would say, Senator, the thing that keeps me
most up at night is the concern that we will not have a viable,
predictable market that will allow people to continue to put
the very large amounts of money at risk for a long period of
time in an attempt to find solutions to some of the hardest
problems, like Alzheimer's, that have evaded solutions.
And what really concerns me is when we do not treat these
issues as systemic issues and the public thinks that they have
to have outrageous solutions to the problem where, in the
future, we will not get these drugs.
So I would hope that we could talk about these things
systemically and try to come up with the kinds of solutions
that will, in fact, make patients have access to medicines
today while allowing tomorrow's breakthroughs to happen. Thank
you.
Senator Roberts. Thank you.
Ms. Taubert?
Ms. Taubert. Senator, the easy diseases have largely been
solved. It gets harder and harder as we go after new treatments
and new cures for ever more challenging diseases.
So from our perspective, what keeps me up at night is that
investment in innovation and the ability to continue to invest
to be able to go after the cures and the diseases that we
really want to solve.
Senator Roberts. Thank you.
Dr. Caforio?
Dr. Caforio. Mr. Senator, I am a physician, as I said
earlier. What keeps me up at night is our patients who still do
not have an opportunity for their cancer to be treated. And as
a result of that, I am really focused on, first, continuing to
invest in R&D together with the 7,000 scientists at Bristol-
Myers Squibb, and also making sure that every patient who needs
one of our medicines has access to it.
Senator Roberts. Mr. Soriot?
Mr. Soriot. Senator, two things, actually. One is making
sure we have the best science, the best scientists, and an
environment that stimulates their innovation. The second is
really to come up with ways to demonstrate the value of our
products. I believe that medicines are actually part of the
solution, not part of the problem. And it is sad that we are
talking about those difficulties patients are facing.
In the last 15 years, the mortality for cardiovascular
disease has declined by 35 percent. Most of this is due to good
treatments for hypertension, cholesterol. And in fact, it is
cost-effective. We keep patients out of the hospital.
So the one thing that really keeps me up at night is, how
do we demonstrate the value we bring, and how do we reduce
overall health-care costs?
Senator Roberts. Mr. Gonzalez, I am out of time.
The Chairman. No, he can answer. You asked your question.
Go ahead.
Senator Roberts. Thank you for being so liberal.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Senator.
There are two things that keep me up at night. The first is
we, like many around this table, are working on some of the
toughest diseases that are out there, which takes on tremendous
amount of risk--I am sure you heard that many, many times.
But the reality is, when we work on these diseases, like
Alzheimer's as an example, when someone comes up with a
beneficial treatment for Alzheimer's, it is going to change the
lives of patients, families, and it is going to reduce
dramatically health-care costs. But not necessarily the cost of
medicine.
The cost of medicine is going to go up. The cost of nursing
homes is going to go down. And systems have a very difficult
time trying to measure that benefit, but the reality is, when
you are working in these areas with these kind of intractable
diseases, that is the ultimate payback that the system has to
be able to evaluate.
Senator Roberts. Thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Stabenow?
Senator Stabenow. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member.
Thank you for being here. I will tell you what keeps people
in Michigan up late at night. It is the cost of life-saving
medicine for themselves, their children, their parents. And so
that is why it is important that we are here, and I am glad we
are talking about research, because I would like to step back a
moment and talk about who basically is funding research, and I
hope you will say ``thank you'' to the American taxpayer,
because American families fund the National Institutes of
Health.
A recent report found that NIH-funded research contributed
to every single one of the 210 new drugs approved by the FDA
from 2010 to 2016, and that American taxpayers contributed more
than $200 billion in grants--$200 billion in grants to your
companies and others. Grants, not loans; grants to develop
these drugs.
That is about 200,000 years of accumulated research. And I
support that, because the basic research is something that I
believe we all need to share in. At the same time, when you
then go from there and are doing R&D, you can write that off
your taxes, so American taxpayers subsidize you again.
Now, according to the most recent SEC filings, the seven
companies--all of you here today--have spent about $80 billion
on selling, marketing, and administrative expenses last year,
which was $22 billion more than you spent on R&D.
So let us just be clear on this: American taxpayers, we are
happy to help you be able to develop these drugs, but I can
tell you, people in Michigan just feel that the bargain ought
to be that they ought to be able to afford the medicine after
they have helped to develop it.
Between 2006 and 2015, the largest 25 drug companies
enjoyed an average annual profit of between 15 and 20 percent.
Most other large Fortune 500 companies saw between 4 and 9
percent.
I know the auto industry would love to get the kind of
profits that you have. But the reality is that, if people do
not buy a car, they do not buy furniture, their life is not
threatened. If they cannot buy your product, it may be. So that
is why this is so important today.
And, Mr. Gonzales, I want to specifically start with you,
because Humira is the world's best-selling drug. It treats
arthritis, Crohn's disease as we know, also ulcerative colitis.
And you introduced the drug in 2003, and in 2017 it generated
$18.4 billion in revenue. And if Humira was its own company, it
would be among the Fortune 500 companies all by itself.
So let us talk about this, because the average person on
Medicare is earning $26,000 a year. The price of your drug
started high and has gone higher, to a point now where it is as
much as $50,000 a year.
So, Mr. Gonzales, your primary patent expired in the U.S.
in 2016. Is that correct?
Mr. Gonzalez. That is correct.
Senator Stabenow. And you have more than a hundred other
kinds of patents for processes and techniques and so on. In
fact, according to a report, ``Broad U.S. Humira Patent
Estate,'' some of the patents go up to 2034, which gives you
about 31 years of patent protection. That is a pretty good deal
on this successful drug.
When we look at what is happening around--well, let me
first ask this. Has the drug itself gotten any better with all
the new patents?
Mr. Gonzalez. I think as you look at the evolution of the
patent portfolio that is around Humira, it is important to keep
in perspective that that patent portfolio evolved as we
discovered and learned new things about Humira, in particular,
as we discovered that this particular molecule could be
utilized across a large number of different disease states.
Senator Stabenow. And I am going to, unfortunately, in the
interest of time--I appreciate that and would want to follow up
in writing, but as I understand it, the chemical formula is the
same. And so it is a question of how we use the patent system.
But to look at, in Europe, when your patents expired in the
fall of 2018 and biosimilars came out on the market, your
prices there were already lower than in the U.S., but now you
are offering, I understand, up to 80 percent discounts to be
able to continue to compete in Europe. Why do you not--with all
of the support from American taxpayers on this drug, why do you
not offer the same low price to American families?
Mr. Gonzalez. Because Humira plays a very important role in
AbbVie's overall funding of R&D. And I think it is
fundamentally underpinned by the fact that if you look at these
inventions that we have created, that were patented, as I said,
they included a number of different diseases for which Humira
was effective, and they evolved over time.
We think we have struck a reasonable balance. We have now
licensed seven biosimilar players to the entire portfolio. So
they can use that portfolio to go out and copy Humira. We have
given licenses to them, and they will all enter the market in
2023.
The earliest patent to expire in that portfolio is June of
2022. So, literally seven biosimilars will come within a year.
Senator Stabenow. Mr. Gonzales, I know my time is up. Let
me just say, I think that you charge more here because you can.
And American taxpayers are subsidizing all of you to be able to
have incredibly high profits, the fastest-growing part of the
health-care system. And I think the people in Michigan and
across the country deserve better. They need to be able to
afford the medicine and not have to go to another country to
get it.
The Chairman. Senator Cantwell?
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to get feedback on the market-type mechanisms and
whether they would drive down costs to purchasers and to
consumers. So concepts like allowing States to negotiate on
behalf of a population for health-care plans, like the basic
health plan in New York--do they drive down cost?
[No response.]
Senator Cantwell. No one wants to take that on?
Mr. Frazier. Thank you, Senator. I did not know who the
question was addressed to.
I think first of all, it is important to recognize that
there is no single market for drugs in this country. So for
example----
Senator Cantwell. We are on limited time, and I appreciate
the chairman's great efforts. No, I am just trying to get
``yes'' and ``no'' answers whether these concepts drive down
costs--whether you believe they do. If it is a hard question to
answer, it just tells me something about how willing you are
going to be to help us with this problem.
So my point is this. States negotiating on drug prices on
behalf of a group of citizens, does it drive down prices for
consumers in your opinion, ``yes'' or ``no''?
Mr. Frazier. I would have to say, depending on the system,
it could very well do that. But I think it will do that at the
expense of a system, for example, our Medicare system that has
come in at 50 percent of what it was projected to be.
I want to come back to an issue that was raised at the
beginning about the affordability, if you will just allow me. A
significant issue in our system is that patients pay 13 percent
against the list price for drugs when they pay 3 percent
against a lower negotiated price for other medical services.
I think the primary issue in our country now is out-of-
pocket costs--13 percent is much higher than 3 percent. And if
we were designing a system, we would never design a system that
actually taxes the sicker people to pay for the healthy people.
Senator Cantwell. Okay.
I am asking a really basic question. Like the VA's ability
to negotiate on drug prices, do you think that States having
that same ability drives down price?
Mr. Frazier. I would say that the VA would get a lower
price and the States would get a lower price if you are willing
to go into an environment where that could be imposed by
States.
Senator Cantwell. Well, or the Federal Government. But in
one example--which I think you are familiar with, because I do
think you are involved with hepatitis C drugs--Washington's
Medicaid program is continuing to think about a Netflix model
where you buy the best, the lowest per-unit costs, and cover
more people. Do you think that model works in driving down
costs to consumers?
Mr. Frazier. I think that could work to drive down cost to
consumers, no question, as long as you have the State
``negotiating.'' I would object to the word. Very frequently,
when we deal with governments outside the United States, people
use the word ``negotiations.'' Those prices are imposed.
Senator Cantwell. Well, someone who is negotiating on
behalf of the patients they are trying to cover negotiates with
you or other drug companies on whether they are going to meet
that discount. They are using market forces of bundling up and
leverage. I call it a Costco model. If you buy in bulk, you get
a discount. We are clearly doing it with the VA.
The question debated here is whether we should spread that
out to cover more Federal programs, which is what is being done
in Canada, and whether we should use those same market forces
in allowing States to negotiate, at least for the working poor
in this country, a better deal than they can get because they
work for employers that do not cover them.
So I think if you guys cannot even agree that these basic
market functions that allow people to buy in bulk and get a
discount are good ideas for consumers, then I do not think you
are going to come up with anything we are going to agree on
here, because these are market functions, basic market
functions.
Does anybody else want to add whether they believe in these
market functions?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes, Senator. I would just illustrate one
point.
I think your point is a valid one for the overall system
costs, but I think what Mr. Frazier was describing is a
critical issue.
There are two affordability issues here. There is the
affordability to the system, and there is the affordability to
the patient. Both have challenges, but the affordability to
patients now has really gotten out of hand.
I will give you an example, my HCV example. We cut the
price by 72 percent, the list price by 72 percent. The out-of-
pocket cost in Medicare is $3,250. The same patient who could
not afford the out-of-pocket cost at $7,000, unfortunately
cannot afford $3,250.
Senator Cantwell. Well, I will tell you what is absurd is
the fact that you got a $6.3-billion tax break in the last tax
bill and you cannot even say that you are for basic market
functions like giving people discounts when they are bundled
and you get volume.
So I guess we will have a tough time coming to something--
but I know people here are going to want basic market functions
to drive down costs for consumers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cornyn?
Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gonzalez, I want to focus on Humira. Obviously it
generates about $18 billion of revenue for your company each
year. Is that right?
Mr. Gonzalez. That is correct.
Senator Cornyn. Please understand that I get it. We want to
make sure that we maintain the most innovative pharmaceutical
drug companies in the world, because we want to provide
lifesaving cures for our people. And I get the idea that that
is the purpose of the patent system, which is to protect the
exclusivity of that drug that you have sunk a lot of money into
the research and development for. And I support our patent
system. I think it is very important.
But what I do not understand is, according to my
information here, Humira has 247 patents. And some of those
patents do not expire until 2034. As Senator Stabenow pointed
out, Humira first was sold to patients in 2003.
So is it your company's position that it should have an
exclusive monopoly on that medication for 31 years?
Mr. Gonzalez. Senator, no, it is not. It is essentially
that the patents cover innovations that we created. And I think
one of the things that has been lost here is, it does not
matter how many patents you have--and those are applications
that you described, not actual patents. But there is a large
portfolio of patents. It has 136 patents, and together----
Senator Cornyn. So you have 247 patent applications, but
you have 61 patents? How many patents do you----
Mr. Gonzalez. No. I am sorry. A hundred and thirty-six
patents.
Senator Cornyn. A hundred and thirty six patents on one
drug?
Mr. Gonzalez. But well, remember, Humira is like 9
different drugs or 10 different drugs. So----
Senator Cornyn. I thought you said to Senator Stabenow it
was the same molecule.
Mr. Gonzalez. It is the same molecule, but it treats
different conditions. And if you look at that patent
portfolio----
Senator Cornyn. So you use the same molecule to treat
different conditions, and you can get a patent on that
treatment?
Mr. Gonzalez. Certainly. Now, an example of one of the
areas that got a significant number of patents is inflammatory
bowel disease. After we developed it for RA, we realized that
Humira might work in that area. That was an area that was
under-treated. Most drugs had failed.
We did 20 clinical trials to determine how to make Humira
work in those patients. And we were issued a large number of
patents for the discovery work that we did in that area.
But in the end, the number of patents is not something that
protects a product. If a competitor wants to make a generic
version of a product--there are patents everywhere. The
question is, does the invention stop the biosimilar player from
making the product? If the invention does not, the patent is
meaningless. If the invention and----
Senator Cornyn. The patent gives you an exclusive right to
produce a drug.
Mr. Gonzalez. No, we do not block any biosimilars.
Biosimilars can make the product----
Senator Cornyn. No, no. Maybe you misunderstood. A patent,
during its term, gives you exclusive rights to produce a drug.
Correct?
Mr. Gonzalez. No.
Senator Cornyn. No?
Mr. Gonzalez. No. The composition-of-matter patent would
give you exclusive rights to produce the drug. But the patents
that are covered in this portfolio are for individual
innovations that were created. And in many cases, when we go
into an area, there are always patents. The first thing you do
is, you look to see, can I design around those patents?
If ultimately you determine you cannot design around those
patents, then you go to the player who has the patent and you
negotiate a license. And we have now given license to virtually
every single biosimilar player--with the exception of one--and
we have done it literally 10 years before the last patent
expires in that portfolio.
So we have tried to strike what we think is a reasonable
balance. I realize it may not be popular, but I think it is a
reasonable balance. Those----
Senator Cornyn. But what I am concerned about is--as I told
you at the outset, I support drug companies covering a profit,
based on their R&D and their development of innovative drugs.
But at some point, that patent has to end, that exclusivity has
to end so that the patients get access to those drugs at a much
cheaper cost.
It is true that you, your company, blocked Amgen for a
number of years from seeking to produce a Humira biosimilar or
equivalent; correct?
Mr. Gonzalez. Amgen has a license in the United States
right now to be able to produce----
Senator Cornyn. But you blocked them for 5 years, right?
Mr. Gonzalez. No, we did not block them.
Senator Cornyn. You sued them.
Mr. Gonzalez. They came to us, and they wanted access to
the portfolio that we had. And we licensed them.
Senator Cornyn. Did you sue them?
Mr. Gonzalez. We did, yes.
Senator Cornyn. And you entered into an agreement with them
that accommodated both your needs and their needs, I assume.
Mr. Gonzalez. We licensed them a patent portfolio. They pay
us a royalty on the patent portfolio when they come to market,
and that is essentially just like any other license.
Senator Wyden. Mr. Chairman, I do not want to interrupt.
Senator Cornyn is dead right, and that is exactly the same
point I was going to make.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Chairman, could I just make a
suggestion that----
The Chairman. Go ahead.
Senator Cornyn. I know this topic is within the
jurisdiction of the Finance Committee, but those of us like you
and me who are also on the Judiciary Committee, which has
jurisdiction over the patent system, I think this is an area
that we need to look into through our Judiciary Committee
authorities as well.
The Chairman. Why don't you take that up with Senator
Graham, and I will make sure that I back you up on it.
Senator Cornyn. I will look forward to your back-up.
The Chairman. And let me know what your conversation
produces.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you.
The Chairman. The next four would be Menendez, Thune,
Carper, and Isakson.
Senator Menendez?
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me say a few words before asking some questions. To the
New Jersey companies here today, thank you for coming. I am
proud our State is at the forefront of innovation.
But even in New Jersey, where the pharmaceutical industry
and related fields like medical research employ hundreds of
thousands of people, the overwhelming majority of the more than
9 million New Jerseyans believe drug prices are too high. And
so I think we all have to be responsive to that challenge
collectively.
Americans everywhere reject the notion that reducing
prescription drug costs means reducing innovation. They are
uniting around this issue. And it is not a Democratic or
Republican priority. It is bipartisan. Maybe it is for
political reasons, but President Trump is talking more and more
about executive action.
A Republican chairman of the Finance Committee, Senator
Grassley, has convened this hearing today, the second of two on
prescription drugs. And reducing prescription drug prices has
become a focal point of virtually every Democratic presidential
campaign.
So consider it a friendly warning from someone who believes
in the hope that you provide patients in need of new cures and
treatments: it is time to be proactive, because if you do not
make the meaningful action to reduce prescription drug prices,
policymakers are inevitably going to do it for you. So I just
hope you will take that to heart.
Let me ask you, many corporations--not just pharmaceutical
ones--received a huge windfall from the Trump tax bill. Your
companies spent well over $40 billion buying back your own
stock in the past year. Going down the row, can you just give
me the ballpark number? Did any of you use your tax breaks to
lower the costs of any of your prescription drugs?
Mr. Gonzalez. We did not use our tax break to lower the
cost of prescription drugs. We used it for other aspects of
trying to stimulate the economy and invest further in the
United States.
Senator Menendez. No, you did not use it to lower the cost.
Mr. Soriot. Senator, the tax break for us, being based in
the UK, had a very marginal impact on our profitability. So I
think the question is----
Senator Menendez. The question is--it is a simple ``yes''
or ``no.'' Whatever the tax break was, did you use any part of
it to lower the cost of prescription drugs?
Mr. Soriot. Well, the cost of our prescription drugs on the
net basis has been declining for many years now. Senator Wyden
took----
Senator Menendez. I am sorry to interrupt you, Mr. Soriot.
It is a simple question. Did you use any part of the tax break
that you got to lower the cost of your prescription drugs?
Mr. Soriot. In a roundabout way, yes, we did, because the
minimal tax benefit we got helped us sustain our profitability
at the same time as our prices were declining.
Senator Menendez. Dr. Caforio?
Dr. Caforio. We did not.
Ms. Taubert. Hello, Senator. It provided us the opportunity
to invest an incremental $30 billion in R&D and capital
investments in the U.S. over the next 4 years. We think that
that is the best way for us to be able to deliver for patients.
Senator Menendez. Mr. Frazier?
Mr. Frazier. Senator, our effective tax rate went up from
19.1 to 19.8 percent.
Dr. Bourla. We did use this tax break to do many things,
among them reduce our prices. Prices in 2018, for the first
time since I remember, went down at Pfizer.
Dr. Brandicourt. As a French company headquartered in
Paris, we did not get much from the tax break. On the GAAP
basis, we lowered our global tax rate by 1.5 percent.
Senator Menendez. All right.
Now, in November 2017, FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb
called on pharmaceutical companies to ``end the shenanigans
when it comes to the ability of potential competitors to
purchase branded doses at full market price.'' He stated, ``I
see this clearly, for example, in steps branded companies
sometimes take to make it hard, or altogether impossible, for
generic firms to get access to the doses of the branded
companies needed in order to complete bioequivalence studies
that the FDA requires for a generic approval.''
I have co-sponsored legislation called CREATES that ends
the gamesmanship by certain companies, where they prevent
generic manufacturers from accessing the necessary samples they
need to develop generics. Last year the FDA published its first
list of medicines that generic companies have had trouble
accessing. That list includes more than 170 complaints covering
50 medicines.
So can you go down the line and tell me, ``yes'' or ``no,''
does your company in any way restrict access to, or block the
purchase of samples at full market price?
Mr. Gonzalez. No, we do not.
Mr. Soriot. No, we do not.
Dr. Caforio. We do not. We support the current version of
the CREATES Act.
Ms. Taubert. No, we do not.
Mr. Frazier. No, we do not.
Dr. Bourla. No, we do not, and we support CREATES.
Dr. Brandicourt. No, we do not, and we support CREATES too.
Senator Menendez. I have other questions. I am going to
submit them for the record. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Carper?
Senator Carper. Thanks to each of you for joining us today.
My wife lost her mother when she was 11 years old. My wife said
it put a hole in her heart. She has never gotten over it. My
own mother, her mother, and her grandmother, by the time they
were 80, they did not know who they were, or where they were,
or who we were.
For all of us this is personal, and it is political, and it
is economic. When we have a hearing of this nature, one of the
things I like to do with disparate witnesses like these--you
are all from the same industry, but you have different views,
come from different parts of the world. But I am going to, in a
minute, give you--what I am looking for is consensus. What I
think we are looking for is consensus agreement on what is the
right thing to do to make sure that what we are producing is
effective and affordable for us, for the government, for our
constituents.
I am going to give you three items and ask you to tell us
what you think. If we do nothing else, those three items, we
can all agree on those. Okay, and I will give them to you right
now.
The first is eliminating rebates to PBMs. That is the first
one: eliminating rebates to PBMs. The second is value-based
arrangements. And the third is increasing transparency
industry-wide on how you set your prices--increasing
transparency industry-wide on how you set your prices.
If you would like to take a moment--and we would just start
with you, Mr. Gonzalez. We will just start with this question
first and see if we have time to get it done. I hope we do,
those three.
Mr. Gonzalez. I would say that we clearly support providing
the discount at the patient level, so eliminating rebates,
essentially.
We absolutely support value-based pricing, because that is
the business we are in and the kinds of diseases we are trying
to treat and cure.
And we absolutely support transparency. And I would say
transparency even more broadly across the entire system,
including everyone that is in the supply chain. And that would
also include where government rebates are, such as the 340B
program. We would support total transparency across that.
Senator Carper. Thank you. I would ask each of our other
witnesses to also keep your responses short.
Mr. Soriot?
Mr. Soriot. Senator, I would give the same responses. We
support all three items.
I would go one step beyond, which is if the rebates--as I
said earlier--were to be removed from Part D and the commercial
sector, we would actually reduce our list prices by the
rebates' amount, less the fees that are probably single-digit
type fees to be paid to wholesalers and other stakeholders in
the system.
Since you talked about a disease that is very common and
becoming more common and a tragedy for people who suffer from
it, Senator, I would just like to say that, as Mr. Frazier said
a bit earlier, his company spent a billion dollars on
developing a drug for Alzheimer's. Our company together with
Lilly, we spent $900 million to try to develop an Alzheimer's
drug that failed.
And that is a really good reminder of the risks that we
take as an industry. We spent $900 million, many years of work,
and at the end of the day, nothing.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Dr. Caforio?
Dr. Caforio. Yes, Senator. First of all, I am very sorry--
--
Senator Carper. Please be very brief.
Dr. Caforio. I would say that not only do we support all
three elements that you mentioned, but I do believe those three
elements together with the continued effort to develop a
generic and biosimilar market would mean significant change,
and would clearly alleviate the concerns that patients have
today.
Senator Carper. Great. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Taubert?
Ms. Taubert. Senator, first of all, I am very sorry for
your wife's family and also for your family. It underscores----
Senator Carper. While I said that, everybody in this room
could probably point to similar experiences. All of us have had
them.
Ms. Taubert. Absolutely.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Ms. Taubert. We are very supportive of all three elements
that you outlined. So the elimination of----
Senator Carper. That is all I need.
Ms. Taubert. Perfect.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Mr. Frazier?
Mr. Frazier. We too support all three.
Senator Carper. Thank you.
Dr. Bourla. Senator, all three elements are
transformational for our industry, will disrupt it. However, we
do agree that these are the three things that need to be done,
and also I believe that they will have significant, meaningful
results if we do them.
Senator Carper. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Brandicourt. We strongly support the three, Senator,
but we want to keep in mind at the end of the chain, the
patient has to benefit. So if rebates are removed, it has to be
to the benefit of patients.
Senator Carper. Good. Thanks.
Mr. Chairman, I am going to do a follow-up question in
writing, asking your responses, your reaction to what is going
on in Germany on this front--what do you like about it, what
concerns you might have about it. But that is a different
question, but it relates to this discussion.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Before Senator Thune goes, can I ask Dr.
Caforio, did you say you support the CREATES Act as well?
Dr. Caforio. I did, Chairman Grassley.
The Chairman. Thank you. As sponsor of that, I appreciate
that very much.
Dr. Caforio. Thanks for your work in that area.
The Chairman. Senator Thune?
Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to insert for the
record a one-page document from 340B Health that shows that
manufacturer discounts account for less than 2 percent of the
total drug market.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The document appears in the appendix on p. 1,053.]
Senator Thune. Thank you.
Each of you has referenced the recently proposed rebate
rule, which outlined several different scenarios of how drug
companies and others would react, as well as the impact on Part
D premiums.
Mr. Frazier and Dr. Bourla, if the rule were finalized,
could you please discuss how you would set list price and how
your negotiations would work with others in the supply chain?
Mr. Frazier. Okay, assuming that--as I said when I answered
the question before, assuming that we do change the systems on
the commercial side and the Medicare side so that no one
company faces a disadvantage, we would be lowering list prices.
We have been asked to lower list prices. We have lowered
list prices in the past and found that it creates a financial
disadvantage for the company, and it does not get us more
volume because of the incentives in the system. So if we change
all the incentives at one time, then list prices can come down.
Senator Thune. Dr. Bourla?
Dr. Bourla. Fifty percent of the American people are in
commercial plans, and these rebate rules apply to Medicare. If
the rules apply to all, definitely the list price will go down.
But also, during the Medicare-only application, we pledge
and we commit that every single dollar will go to the patients.
As the chairman said, the list price is not irrelevant. It
is very relevant for a lot of people, because they have to pay
list price during the deductible period. However, if the rebate
rule is applied, then it becomes irrelevant because the
patients will not be paying the list price at the purchase
point. And this is a significant win.
What I want to say is that, even if we do not move it to
commercial, which I overwhelmingly support, I think it is a
significant win for the American people if we do it even in
Medicare only.
Senator Thune. So Medicare-only would be an improvement,
but you pointed out in your testimony the challenges associated
with the bifurcated market with respect to rebate reform. So
how would manufacturers respond if the rebate rule were
finalized for government programs? I mean, what does that mean
for the commercial market?
Dr. Bourla. Senator, as I said before, all these proposals
we are discussing, including eliminating the rebate rule, are
transformational and will disrupt the way we do business. I do
not know exactly how the system will evolve, and I really do
not favor a bifurcated system. I would like to have a
transparent, single system across both parts. So we need to see
how the whole thing will evolve.
Senator Thune. Okay.
You have each expressed support, and this was alluded to
earlier by Senator Carper, for paying for value as well as the
value your medicines bring to the health-care system. I am a
believer in value-based insurance design as a way to lower the
overall health-care costs, and I have worked on legislation to
advance this principle.
As we drive toward paying for value, how do we make sure
that you as drug manufacturers still have the incentives to
keep your prices low and that we are not just shifting money
around in the system?
Dr. Bourla. I think by definition that a value-based
arrangement will align the incentives, not only of us, but
those of the insurance companies, around one common goal: the
good for the patient, clinical outcomes, measurable clinical
outcomes for the patient and the health-care system.
In this case, if we fail to produce drugs through our
research efforts that will have meaningful clinical benefits
for the patients, yes, we will not be paid. And this system
also will ensure the medicines that do not add value will be
paid much much less. So to create space for medicines that do
create value is the best way of aligning the incentives of
everyone around the interest of the patients.
Senator Thune. Does anybody else want to react to that?
Mr. Soriot. Yes, Senator, if you allow me.
We have an example that I quoted before. We have a product
that is used for the treatment of patients who have experienced
a heart attack.
If you experience a heart attack, when you are discharged
from the hospital, your chance of getting a second heart attack
is pretty high. So we contracted with an organization and
committed to reducing the percentage of patients who have a
second heart attack.
In return, the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, for
these Medicare patients, committed to ask these patients to pay
a very low co-pay to make sure they were complying with their
treatment. And that actually delivers value to the system,
because patients are kept healthy. Of course, good for them,
but also they do not go back to the hospital. This is how we
deliver value.
Senator Thune. Okay. Thanks.
Mr. Gonzalez. Senator, I would just add one point. I think
your point is a valid one. Look, an innovative pharmaceutical
cannot capture 100 percent of the value that it saves. It has
to capture less than that.
And I think the way that will evolve the best is if there
is strong market competition. I remember back in HCV, if you
look at the health economic data around that drug, it would
have suggested that you could justify a price well north of
$100,000 per patient. And the prices were relatively close to
that when there was one player in the market. Today prices have
gravitated down to about $25,000-$26,000 per patient.
It is the market force that created that, the market
competition of more than one player being in that market and
competing on an active basis. We were obviously part of that
competition that drove those prices in that direction.
So I do not think it is realistic to assume that a
pharmaceutical, just because it can save $150,000, as an
example, that it can charge $150,000. It has to charge less
than that so that the overall system can benefit from the value
of that medicine. But it has to be able to charge a price that
is reasonable enough to be able to achieve and continue to fund
the programs going forward.
The Chairman. Senator Isakson, and then Senator Cardin.
Senator Isakson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank all of you for being here. This is a terrific
hearing, and we are going to have a lot of hearings on this
subject. I told my staff a couple of weeks ago, I said, ``You
know, I have been a solid supporter of the pharmaceutical
industry all my career,'' and I have, and I appreciate all that
you do.
I go to work every day because of levodopa. I would not be
able to be here today if it was not for the pharmaceutical
industry, and I have Parkinson's disease. But I can function
every day and do my job because of that, and I appreciate it
every day.
My first chief of staff called me Sunday night from
Children's Hospital in Atlanta to say his youngest son had just
been diagnosed with juvenile diabetes. His first child, a
daughter, had juvenile diabetes 12 years ago. But the thing he
said was, ``At least I know that you can live a normal, happy
life because of insulin and because of pharmaceutical care.''
So I am not softening you up, but I am softening you up,
because those are good stories that we cannot forget. And that
is the value of innovation and research development, and we
appreciate it.
However, when you cannot explain it and you are elected to
the U.S. Senate--and I appreciate your comment about how
honored you are to be in the U.S. Senate, Dr. Bourla--but the
fact of the matter is, when I cannot explain it, it is tough.
And I cannot explain the cost increases I have seen a lot of
recently.
One medicine I take--I take eight a day--one of the ones I
take every day went up. When I went to get my new prescription
in January, it was $90 more than it was at the end of last
year.
I just said, ``How can that be?'' And the guy said this and
that and the other. But he said, ``Let me call you back.'' He
said, ``I will call you in the next hour and see if I cannot
find a better price.''
In an hour's time he had four prices for the same
pharmaceutical. If I did not use insurance, it was one price.
If I used cash, it was another price. If I took discounts, it
was another price. If you had coupons, it was another price.
I do not remember the name of all of them, but I know it
was very complicated, and it reminded me of my business. When I
sold real estate, the price of a mortgage was not just the
interest rate that you paid and the sticker price, but you take
the effect of discount points and rebates and other things that
go into the annual percentage rate return of the product, and
that is what you are doing with discounts and with rebates, I
assume. And it is going into the cost and ultimately into your
product, which caused me to ask this question: who sets the
discount and who sets the rebate?
Pardon my finger. We will start with you, Mr. Gonzalez.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Senator.
I think the best way to illustrate what you are describing
is to give you an example.
Senator Isakson. A short example, please.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay.
Humira--we raised the price in 2019 6.2 percent. The actual
fall-through to the company, the realized increase in 2019,
will be .9 percent. So the part in between there is rebates
that have gone up and channel mix, primarily. But it does give
you some idea of the massive change that can occur between list
and realized price.
We raised the price to try to offset inflation, merit
increases that we give our employees, and increases in R&D----
Senator Isakson. So you set the discount or the rebate?
Mr. Gonzalez. Well, we negotiate with payers. So managed
care----
Senator Isakson. You are a supplier, though. So you
negotiate with the PBMs and those people? Is that right?
Mr. Gonzalez. Correct, and they negotiate aggressively.
Senator Isakson. Is that pretty much true, everybody, that
they are the major component between the end retail consumer
price and the origin of the product?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes, Senator.
Senator Isakson. Well, that seems like some place we ought
to focus, because that is where the distorted numbers come in.
Johnson & Johnson--and I'm sorry. Janssen, is that right?
Is that the subsidiary?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, Janssen; correct.
Senator Isakson. In your testimony you talk about your
average list price of 8.1 percent up, but an average net price
change of only 4.6 percent. So, while your gross went up 8.6,
your net went down 4.6 in the same pricing period.
How does that happen? How does it not go up on the bottom?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, and in fact in 2018, our net price
actually declined 8.6 percent, so even more than that. So the
intermediaries in the system are very very effective
negotiators.
Senator Isakson. Tell me who the intermediaries are.
Ms. Taubert. Those would be the PBMs and the insurers.
Senator Isakson. And the insurance companies?
Ms. Taubert. Right, and they set the formularies for
patients.
Senator Isakson. And they are not the same, because they
are two different people?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, correct.
And so what they do----
Senator Isakson. Excuse me for interrupting Ms. Taubert. I
want to make sure I get all of this in. And I apologize. You
are a nice lady, and I am being ugly to do that. But I am
sorry.
Ms. Taubert. I am fine.
Senator Isakson. All right. We have the PBMs and we have
the insurance companies.
Ms. Taubert. Yes.
Senator Isakson. Is there anybody else between the
wholesale price by the manufacturer at the beginning and the
retail price it is sold for at the end, at the drugstore? Is
there anybody else that contributes to the cost, other than the
discount and the rebate?
Dr. Brandicourt. Several actors, Senator, in the supply
chain are rewarded on the listing price: wholesalers
themselves, and----
Senator Isakson. Is that a consumption bonus? Is that a
sales bonus? They are rewarded for doing what?
Dr. Brandicourt. Well, to be a wholesaler and distribute
our products. What we need to do in order to realign the
incentive is to get rid of the reward being based on a listing
price.
Senator Isakson. I have to stop, because the chairman is
mean and he will cut me off the next time.
So I will end by saying this. You answered my question, but
it does point out that the one person who is not benefiting
from the rebates, not benefiting from the cost negotiation, is
the customer. And we are here for the customer today. We
represent them. So we have to get to the bottom of this so we
can have something we can explain, and they can experience.
I apologize, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I let the Senator go because he was echoing
my beliefs.
Go ahead, Senator Cardin.
Senator Cardin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me thank
all of our witnesses. I also want to say how proud I am of the
results of the pharmaceutical industry and the discoveries that
you have made, innovations that you have brought to market, the
impact you have had on quality of life and on cost, overall
cost of health care, by the discoveries that you have been able
to advance.
The challenge that we all have is, why should Americans be
shouldering the lion's share of the cost and burden of research
and development and bringing new drugs to market? You talk
about burden-sharing, you talk about the fact that there should
be a fair allocation on the global market--and by the way, also
within our domestic market, we know that a lot of people are
being denied access to these innovative drugs because of the
pricing mechanisms within the United States.
So let me try to drill down on those points. Really, am I
defending an administration policy? So let me break with my
normal tradition and talk about the international pricing
mechanism that the Trump administration is proposing that would
set target prices or international pricing indexes over a 5-
year period for Part B drugs pinned to the price in comparable
industrial nations, phasing it in over a period of time and
allowing a cushion for even higher prices in the United States.
So if, in fact, these drugs are already priced
competitively, that should not be a problem. But as I
understand it, there are so many drugs that we pay, American
consumers pay, a lot more for than consumers in other
industrial nations. So why not move towards a process in which
American consumers share a similar price as consumers in other
industrial nations in the world, particularly on the Part B
program? I think it could also be extended to Part D.
The only explanation I have heard is that in some
countries, it takes a little bit longer to get new drugs
admitted. We are not talking about new drugs. We are talking
here about drugs that already have an existing price mechanism.
Or do you support it?
Dr. Caforio. Senator, thanks for your question.
I did mention this in my opening remarks. So I am happy to
elaborate further. I think it is a very important point.
So we take the perspective that we should always start from
patient access to medicines.
Senator Cardin. I am going to try to drill down, because I
only have 2 minutes.
Dr. Caforio. Thank you.
Senator Cardin. So what is wrong with a model of comparing
U.S. prices to prices in other industrial nations?
Dr. Caforio. So 55 percent of new cancer medicines that are
available to American patients are not reimbursed in at least--
--
Senator Cardin. We are talking about where there is a
market price in another country, because if there is no target
price, there is no price to compare it to. So there has to be a
price in another country. So we are talking about drugs that
are commonly available.
Dr. Caforio. I believe, Senator, many of the most recently
introduced drugs are not available in----
Senator Cardin. Then that would not apply. If I understand,
it only deals with prices where there is a target price that
already exists. If the drug is not on the market, it is not
going to have a target price. But if the drug is on the market,
you have a target price, and as I understand it, that would
bring down the cost here in the United States.
Dr. Caforio. I believe, Senator, it would be very important
for us to be thinking about policies that continue to reward
innovation.
We do need your support to make sure that----
Senator Cardin. So you are basically saying we overpay on
available drugs so that you can make more profit from the
American consumer to underwrite R&D which benefits the global
community. That is basically, as I understand that point--to me
that is a disconnect in the pricing mechanism.
I want to ask, Ms. Taubert, you are the one who mentioned
the advantages of the free market in negotiations under Part D.
So let me just change the equation. Suppose you were on the
other side of the table. Why not allow the Health Secretary to
combine the entire Medicare market in order to negotiate a
larger market share to bring down costs for Medicare?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, so we really believe that open
competition and a free market are the right way to go for
patients.
Senator Cardin. But isn't market share that you can offer,
as a person seeking the cost, a driver for bringing down costs?
Ms. Taubert. So the PBMs and the insurers are
extraordinarily effective negotiators. And they do negotiate
now on behalf of Part D members quite aggressively.
In fact, I mentioned our $21 billion----
Senator Cardin. And my question is, is it not true that the
larger the market share, the better the price you are going to
get?
Ms. Taubert. The larger the market share, the better the
price? It depends on a number of factors, including the number
of competitors and the companies that are bidding to try to
get----
Senator Cardin. If you control more of the market, isn't
that going to bring down your price? I learned that in
Economics 101.
The Chairman. Answer the question, and then we will go to
Senator Hassan.
Ms. Taubert. Yes; I am not sure I understand the last piece
of that question.
Senator Cardin. With a larger consumer base on a drug,
because you represent all the Medicare market, are you not in a
stronger negotiating position? Yes, you are.
Ms. Taubert. I think conceptually you could be. I would say
that the PBMs and insurers are pretty darn effective right now.
The Chairman. Senator Hassan?
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want
to thank you and Ranking Member Wyden for this hearing today.
I want to thank all of the witnesses for being here today
as well. A couple of observations; one is that breakthroughs
are not breakthroughs if people cannot afford the medicine that
produces the breakthrough.
Secondly, as you have all mentioned the importance of a
viable and predictable system, it has to be a viable and
predictable system for patients. And right now it is so
convoluted and so non-transparent that my constituents cannot
figure out what the price of their medication is going to be
day to day. And despite a wonderful staff, I feel like I need a
Ph.D. in prescription drug pricing to understand how the heck
this industry works. And that should not be the way we proceed
in this country to get these breakthroughs to people.
But I want to talk about a slightly different aspect of
your industry right now. We have been talking about drug
pricing, which is one part of how drug companies make money.
The other part is how you maximize sales.
So, Ms. Taubert, I would like to focus on how your company
maximizes sales for a particular class of drugs--opioids. Can
you define for me please, Ms. Taubert, what pseudo-addiction
is?
Ms. Taubert. I am sorry. I am not sure. I am not familiar
with that term.
Senator Hassan. Let me fill you in, then. Pseudo-addiction
is an unproven and dubious concept that asserts that certain
patients present signs of addiction because they were
prescribed insufficient doses of opioids. Those peddling this
pseudo-addiction concept say that instead of providing
addiction treatment when somebody shows the signs of addiction,
the doctor should increase their opioid doses. Even one of the
original doctors who pushed this theory now admits it was ``an
excuse to give patients more drugs.''
He has told us that Janssen promoted this made-up concept
of pseudo-addiction on a website that it approved and funded
that was called ``Let's Talk Pain.'' Since then, your company
has repeatedly said that your action ``in the marketing and
promotion of our opioid pain medicines was appropriate and
responsible.'' So, Ms. Taubert, how can you possibly claim that
promoting the theory of pseudo-addiction--the doctor should
prescribe more opioids to patients showing signs of addiction--
was appropriate and responsible?
Ms. Taubert. Senator, thank you so much for that question.
Abuse and addiction, particularly opioid abuse and addiction,
are very serious public health concerns, and we recognize the
impact on the American public.
Senator Hassan. So then the question is--and again like
everybody else, I have only a few minutes here. The question
is, looking back at what your company did promoting pseudo-
addiction--an unproven theory that was just used to maximize
sales of a deadly drug--why is that something that you are
calling appropriate and responsible?
Ms. Taubert. So, I am sorry. I am not familiar with the
term.
What I can say is, on behalf of our company, opioids
represent less than 1 percent of our product.
Senator Hassan. All right, let me stop you right there,
because my constituents do not care about the percentage. They
care about the behavior to maximize sales in an industry.
Do you know how many Americans died from drug overdoses in
2017?
Ms. Taubert. Far too many.
Senator Hassan. It was 70,237. In 1 year, more Americans
died from drug overdoses than died fighting the entire war in
Vietnam. And the vast majority of those overdose deaths, about
50,000, were from opioids.
My constituents are dying. Nearly 500 people in New
Hampshire died from overdoses last year. And nearly 500 the
year before that. And companies like Janssen and Purdue Pharma
fueled this epidemic, employing deceptive and truly
unconscionable marketing tactics despite the known risks so you
could sell more drugs to maximize your profits.
And now you are refusing to take responsibility for your
company's role in this crisis. So one more time, do you truly
think that Janssen's opioid marketing practices were
appropriate and responsible, or will you finally take
responsibility for your company's role in helping create this
crisis that is killing more than 100 Americans every day?
Ms. Taubert. Everything that I have seen leads me to
conclusively believe that everything that we have done with our
products, when we promoted opioid products, which we stopped
marketing a long time ago, was very appropriate and
responsible.
However, that being said, we do believe that we have a
leadership position to take in helping with this. And so we are
doing a number of things in terms of mothers and babies, and
physician and patient education to help----
Senator Hassan. So let me--again----
[Simultaneous speech.]
Ms. Taubert. We recognize we all play a part in trying to
help this, because we realize that----
Senator Hassan. Our time is done, but right now it is hard
for me to take the industry's goal here as promoting good
health seriously when its behavior to maximize sales of opioids
created an epidemic.
The Chairman. Senator Lankford?
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here. And there are people alive in
the United States, around the world right now, because of your
companies and the work they have done with R&D along with the
National Institutes of Health. And I fully acknowledge that,
and I am grateful to the people who are researching and working
right now, who are not watching this hearing because their face
is in a microscope actually going through things to be able to
research today and what they are doing.
With that said--it is all of us who acknowledge that. We
are trying to figure out the issue on drug pricing, because
people in my State, whether they are on insulin or whether on
Parkinson's drugs, or whether my own family or other people in
my neighborhood, it is a very significant issue for them to try
to figure out how to be able to manage this. So we have to get
to the bottom of how we manage this.
All of you have mentioned that the rebate issue has been a
problem and that insurance companies and PBMs are very
effective negotiators. Part of the challenge of this is, health
insurance companies pay their PBM based on the quality of their
negotiation skills, cutting a price off the list price. And so,
if a list price is higher and a rebate is higher, that also
gives preference to them. So the difficulty is, as you raise
list price and the rebate gets larger, the insurance company
gives that preference, making it harder for biosimilars. Am I
tracking this correctly?
So the challenge that we have with this is, how do we
figure out how to break this down? Because we have insurance
companies, PBMs, your companies that are creating the list
prices, and then the biosimilars trying to be able to get into
this.
So, Mr. Frazier, you mentioned this, in particular about
biosimilars and the difficulty of trying to be able to break
into the market. Would you identify why it is hard for
biosimilars to get into the market, which are inherently less
expensive?
Mr. Frazier. I would make two suggestions very quickly,
because I know you only have a little bit of time here. One is,
I think we have to educate physicians and other health-care
providers about the value of biosimilars. I think, secondly, it
would be very helpful if we could relieve patients of their
obligation to pay copays for the cheaper biosimilars.
Those would be two specific recommendations that I would
make.
Senator Lankford. Thank you. I appreciate that. For the
Part B drugs, those physicians are paid a percentage of the
drug costs. So a biosimilar, when it comes into the market in
the Part B world, is, on its own, less attractive to a
physician because a physician gets a higher percentage amount
prescribing the more expensive drug, which then feeds down to
the patient and the taxpayers, right?
Mr. Frazier. That is correct.
Senator Lankford. How do we break that chain?
Mr. Frazier. I think that we--there are many ways that we
would have to look at it. I do not have a specific suggestion
here.
I do think educating physicians is important here, and I
think relieving patients, but we also have to look at the
incentives.
Dr. Bourla. Maybe I can----
Senator Lankford. Dr. Bourla, please jump in, because you
had mentioned this in your testimony as well.
Dr. Bourla. I did, Senator, and thank you for giving me the
opportunity.
Let me give you a statistic that I think will present the
magnitude of the problem. Here in the U.S., the penetration of
biosimilars is much lower than in other places, but it is
disproportional to different parts of the U.S. health-care
system.
For example, in open systems, systems where the decision-
maker is a PBM, one biosimilar or two has a market of 5 percent
in the U.S. In closed systems, in systems like Kaiser, for
example, with their integrated health-care systems--where the
one who decides has the whole cost of the health-care system in
its interest--we have 73 percent. Five percent versus 73
percent for the same product.
I agree with what Mr. Frazier said, that we need to create
incentives, but I would add also that we need to break this
rebate trap that creates significant disincentives for
providers, and the health-care system, and insurance companies.
Senator Lankford. Does anybody else want to jump in on
that?
Dr. Brandicourt. I can give you an example, Senator.
The insulin market has a reputation of not being very
competitive. In fact, it is, and we have biosimilars which have
reached the market and have grabbed a very significant market
share.
We believe that when insulin will not be treated as a drug,
but will be considered a biologic and can be submitted to
biosimilar regulation in 2020, the biosimilar market share and
penetration will be even higher.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
My State, in particular, is working very hard on our
Medicaid side, working on value-based pricing. I know that is
something that several of you have mentioned before. It is the
grand challenge of not pricing a drug based on the fact that it
would be more expensive to do surgery and so we want to be
slightly under the cost of surgery.
We do have to be able to break through that model. Of
course surgery would be more expensive than most of our
treatments, but I think there is a benefit that we continue to
experiment with if the drug is effective and we have a reducing
price on it. And we can get a chance to be able to work through
that, as we have done in our State.
Mr. Frazier. We would support that.
Senator Lankford. Well, we will continue to be able to work
through other creative mechanisms. At the end, we cannot just
have the taxpayer pay more and the consumer pay less, because
that is really the consumer still paying. It just moves it to
another spot.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Cassidy?
Senator Cassidy. First, think of innovation. As a doctor, I
have seen cures for hepatitis C and therapies to control HIV,
other inflammatory conditions, cancers that 30 years ago, when
I graduated from medical school, were either death sentences or
were a ticket to a lifetime of morbidity and complications. So
I thank you for that. But I also say that some of my patients
could not afford the medicine. And for them, it is as if the
innovation never took place. And that is one concern.
Secondly, another concern is, I think in some cases we do
not have value. Now, Ms. Taubert, you suggested that PBMs are
very effective negotiators. One drug that I want to bring up is
Duexis, which is a combination of over-the-counter generic
ibuprofen and Pepcid. Now, if I were to take this--and this is
not the cheapest I could find it--in the doses that are used
for Duexis, it would cost me 200 bucks a month. But it lists at
over $2,400 to $2,600 a month.
Now, that does not seem like very good negotiations on
behalf of the PBM. And if the taxpayer is paying that money for
something which over the counter is 200 bucks a month, and we
are paying $2,600 a month, it is almost as if the taxpayer has
``stupid'' written on their face, which they should not. That
is unfair.
This is not your medicine, but I use it to make the point
that, right now, Medicare has a very limited ability to
negotiate based on marginal value. And I think that is one of
the fundamental problems in this.
So that said, all things considered, since Medicare does
have this very low ability, Ms. Taubert, do you think that
Medicare should have the ability--if the PBM's negotiation does
not work--should Medicare have the ability to negotiate based
on value?
Ms. Taubert. So we are very supportive of the notion of
value-based contracting and results and----
Senator Cassidy. This is a little bit different though,
because we have been describing, on value-based contracting, is
the cancer cured or not, is the hepatitis C cured or not? This
is, my gosh, you are taking two generic medicines and charging
ten times what they would cost over the counter.
Ms. Taubert. Yes, and I agree that that example does not
make any sense.
Senator Cassidy. So is it reasonable then to ask that
Medicare would have the ability to make some sort of judgment
based upon relative value of a therapy?
Ms. Taubert. I think, as we have talked about, if the PBMs
are very effective in negotiating, we do not know that the
government would be as effective in negotiating as the
professional negotiators.
Senator Cassidy. We do not know. I agree with that, but on
the other hand it does--I have limited time. I do not mean to
be rude. I do apologize. But there is this kind of shining
example of where the PBM is not an effective negotiator. Yes,
sir, Mr. Frazier?
Mr. Frazier. I think this is where Chairman Grassley's
opening statements about transparency come in. I think one of
the keys of transparency is, it empowers patients and it
empowers other payers to actually make informed choices about
which of those two medicines makes sense.
Senator Cassidy. Now, let me ask, because someone brought
up the fact that Humira is now sold at an 80-percent discount
in Denmark. And there is a Bernstein analysis which states that
AbbVie still makes a profit because marginal cost in
manufacturing is only about 5 percent of the manufacturing.
So would this same entity have the ability to look not just
at value, but at comparable drugs and at that which would bring
value, because clearly biosimilars have had a much greater
penetration in Europe, and the United States continues to pay
top dollar for the same class of drugs. Something is
fundamentally broken in our system when the Danes get an 80-
percent discount and we do not.
Yes, sir?
Mr. Frazier. I think we have to look at the way in which
generic penetration happens outside the biosimilars market.
When a drug goes off-patent----
Senator Cassidy. Well, hang on, Mr. Frazier. I am sorry. I
just get limited time, and I am going to hold you on that.
Okay, I do not mean to--one of the things I have heard is that,
if there is some limit on that profit, it may have a negative
impact upon R&D. I think that has been a message here.
But, Dr. Brandicourt, France has a committee on
transparency which evaluates the relative added clinical
benefit of a new drug. Price is then negotiated based upon that
added benefit as well as other drugs in the market.
Is it safe to say that your company has found that it still
pays to innovate and to do R&D in France and to offer them
access to the best cutting-edge drugs?
Dr. Brandicourt. As a global company, we do have R&D in
France. However, I would not use the French system as the
benchmark of a good system.
Senator Cassidy. But they do have access to these--I have
limited time. I am sorry. They do have access to these drugs?
Dr. Brandicourt. Well, that is a very good point. Some
drugs are not put on the market because you do not get to the
right pricing and therefore the right----
Senator Cassidy. But if I am--I will finish with this. I do
not mean to be rude. I apologize.
In the international pricing index, we may quibble about
the details, but if the U.S. would be paying 1.3 times a market
basket of developed countries--a Germany, a France, a Canada,
not smaller countries--we would still be paying more than they,
but it would still have some relationship to reasonableness.
And right now, it seems as if Medicare--in the absence of the
ability to judge value--is almost a price taker when it should
not be, as the largest purchaser.
Dr. Brandicourt. You would ask countries where there is no
negotiation, where prices are imposed, to set up your U.S.
pricing. And I do not think that would be good policy.
Senator Cassidy. It is imposed now, but it is imposed from
the other side.
The Chairman. Of the people who are still here, Bennet
would be next, and then Whitehouse, and then Cortez Masto.
Go ahead, Senator Bennet.
Senator Bennet. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much
for holding this hearing.
There is not a town hall in Colorado where I do not hear
how expensive drugs are forcing people to choose between life-
saving treatments or food and utilities. In our last hearing
here, we heard from a mother whose son ate once a day in order
to ration his insulin, because the full cost of the monthly
treatment was $1,700. I do not think anybody here understands
how that could be the case, but it is the case.
And there has been a lot said here today about the
important research and development that is going on in this
country. And I, for one--and I know others share this view--
want to keep that in the United States. Having said that, I am
trying to understand how Federal spending goes into
prescription drug development, distribution, treatment, and
pricing and yet Americans cannot afford their medications.
The estimates of annual spending on prescription drugs
range from $320 to $480 billion a year. The fact that we cannot
even get a more precise number than that tells you something
right off the bat, but those numbers include almost $100
billion in Medicare Part D spending never paid for. Of that,
$25 billion is in Medicare Part B. Medicaid spends almost $60
billion on prescription drugs. This is what the taxpayer spends
every year on prescription drugs.
DoD and VA spending is about $11 billion. That number alone
dwarfs the R&D budgets of some of your companies. Over 6
years--slightly different point--but over 6 years between 2010
and 2016, more than $100 billion was spent in NIH funding
toward research that contributed to drug patents. Between $1
and $2 billion is claimed annually through the orphan tax
credit for drugs that treat rare diseases. Another $1 billion
is annually claimed through the research and development tax
credit. About $12 billion dollars is claimed annually through
the direct-to-consumer advertising tax credit.
I would ask you guys if I missed anything, but I think that
is a pretty complete list of what we have. Yet notwithstanding
that almost $500 billion, half a trillion dollars--by the way
Medicare, you know, to spend all that money in Medicare, we are
spending $2 for every dollar we are collecting. That delta is
largely because of drug prices in the unfunded part of Medicare
Part D.
And here is what Coloradans have recently reported. In a
recent survey on high drug prices, 22 percent did not fill a
prescription, and 20 percent reported cutting pills in half or
skipping doses.
Seventy-four percent believe drug companies are charging too
much money, and 91 percent believe the government should
authorize the Attorney General to take legal action to prevent
price gouging or unfair prescription drug price hikes--over 90
percent.
And that does not necessarily give you their legal
judgment, but that is how keenly they are feeling the problem.
And 90 percent believe the government should require drug
companies to provide advance notice of price increases and
information to justify those increases.
So, I would ask all of you, or anybody who would care to
answer, this question: how do we explain to our constituents on
the one hand that we have this massive outlay of Federal funds,
it is their taxpayer funds, and the on the other hand, the
drugs they are buying are not affordable?
And I realize there are all kinds of layers to this. I
accept that. You know, there are the higher co-pays that you
guys mentioned earlier from the insurance companies. That is a
huge issue too.
But I think that in a world where opacity or opaqueness has
been, from the public's point of view, a business model for
everybody in health care, whether it is the Federal Government
or drug companies or insurance companies or doctors, nobody
knows what anything actually costs. Nobody knows what anything
will pay.
My question, I guess, is, how do we better align the
incentives here so that that huge outlay of money every year
comes with affordable drugs at the end of the process?
Mr. Gonzalez, thank you.
Mr. Gonzalez. Senator, I can just tell you there is
probably not anybody at this table who does not agree not a
single American should go without drugs that they need. And I
can tell you, that is the case at AbbVie.
We do a lot of things to try to provide drugs for patients
who cannot afford them. But there are certain patients whom we
are unable to do that for based on the laws and the
regulations, and in particular, most of Medicare Part D falls
into that situation.
And so I believe fundamentally we have to do two things.
There are substantial discounts or rebates that are going into
this system. Take Humira as an example. In the United States,
there are rebates or discounts on that product that range from
87 percent down to 26 percent. Okay, and it is the Federal
Government that gets the highest form of discount or rebate on
Humira, even though it represents a relatively small percentage
of the volume, less than 20 percent of the overall volume.
Now that does not mean that we could not do more. But what
we are asking is, we do believe that there is a situation now
where the co-pays for patients are such that it is extremely
difficult for them to afford it. And what we are asking for
is--``we,'' meaning AbbVie and I am sure others here, would
like to do more. There is more we can do to help patients
afford their medicines, but we have to eliminate some barriers
that are blocking that.
Today we give away to 81,000 patients free drugs; half of
those are Humira. Of those Humira patients, half of them are
Medicare Part D. They are patients who make less than 500
percent of poverty, so they make less than $128,000 per year
for a family of four.
Those patients we can provide free drug for. Anybody above
that, we cannot. It is considered an inducement.
And when you look at the copay for a drug like Humira,
commercial patients, Medicaid patients, the low-income subsidy
patients in Medicare, pay less than $100 per year of copay for
Humira. A standard Part D patient pays $5,500. They make
$26,000, so they cannot afford it.
Senator Bennet. I apologize. I know I am out of time. Thank
you.
The Chairman. Senator Whitehouse?
Senator Bennet. Could I, Sheldon, just make one point,
which is, I think what we ought to be doing is figuring out how
people do not have to cut their prescription drugs in half, and
that would be a worthy goal for this committee and the people
on this panel.
The Chairman. Senator Whitehouse?
Senator Whitehouse. I would like to ask about a particular
segment of the pharmaceutical market. Chairman Grassley opened
his remarks by talking about patients taking a drug that has no
competition as being a cause for concern.
Mr. Frazier, your testimony included the statement that
price gouging by those who jack up the prices of off-patent
drugs that have no competition is a problem. Let me ask if
there is anyone on this panel who disagrees, who disagrees that
there are de facto off-patent monopolies now in the
pharmaceutical market? Does anybody disagree with that as a
fact?
Mr. Frazier. I do not disagree.
Senator Whitehouse. In fact it is true.
Mr. Frazier. There are.
Senator Whitehouse. There are.
Mr. Frazier. That is what I was saying.
Senator Whitehouse. And indeed, is it also not true that
sometimes these off-patent monopolies are used to impose
monopoly pricing?
Mr. Frazier. It is true, and I think the most egregious
examples that we have seen recently have been exactly in that
situation.
Senator Whitehouse. Does anybody disagree with that?
Everybody agrees.
Now are there, among those entities that are in that
category with off-patent monopolies that are extracting
monopoly pricing by virtue of that, entrants who are not even
really in the pharmaceutical industry?
Mr. Frazier. Absolutely there are.
Senator Whitehouse. They invest nothing in R&D.
Mr. Frazier. Exactly.
Senator Whitehouse. They do not even come from the
pharmaceutical industry.
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
Senator Whitehouse. They are more or less corporate raiders
who have bought something in order to jack up prices and take
advantage of monopoly rents. Correct?
Mr. Frazier. There are many people like that.
Senator Whitehouse. There are many people like that. Does
anybody disagree that that is a feature right now within the
pharmaceutical market? Everybody agrees?
Dr. Bourla. And I would add also, Senator, that they are
not allowed to be part of the Pharma Association.
Senator Whitehouse. So here is the problem: it is not
difficult, in my view as a lawyer of many years and a
prosecutor of many years, to prove the existence of a monopoly.
We have been proving the existence of de facto monopolies in
courtrooms and in regulatory proceedings for decades.
So we can identify where these monopolies exist, even if
you let all the ties go to the runner so that, wherever there
is a real question, you throw that one out. There still would
remain a significant population of entities where it is beyond
dispute that they are pricing based on monopoly power. And as I
look around, there is no place to address that. There is no
organization in the Federal Government that is taking an
interest in that, and it is the scandal, I view, of the
pharmaceutical industry. And you guys take a hit for it.
Here is the problem: when we try to do anything about that,
the people you pay to lobby us here in Congress come out and
say, ``Nope, we cannot do anything like that. That might look
like price control.'' We are not interested in taking any look
at this monopoly problem in your industry. I should not even
say it is in your industry, because I think a lot of these
people are raiders into your industry who are not really part
of your industry. They do not really develop drugs.
I see a lot of head-nodding here. So help us solve at least
that problem. You know, there are lots of other problems that
we are going to have to look through with your pricing. Help us
solve at least that problem. Turn off your lawyers and your
lobbyists as antagonists when we try to solve that problem.
Mr. Frazier. We will. Senator----
Senator Whitehouse. In fact, switch them on and say, let us
figure out how we deal with these modern monopolists who are
not even really in the pharmaceutical industry.
Mr. Frazier. I could not agree more. These people are at
best tone-deaf, at worse abusive.
I would also point out that there are companies here--I
know, for example, my company. There is a very important cancer
drug called TICE BCG. It was an invention of Merck. It has been
off-patent for many many years. It is an incredibly essential
drug for bladder cancer patients.
A number of companies that were making it went out of the
business. And so now we have had to double supply. Over the
last nearly 12 years the cost of that drug has increased by
$16. That is not how we make money at Merck. We make money at
Merck by inventing new drugs that did not exist before.
It is those people, I think, that contributed to the
villainizing of an industry. The public cannot distinguish
those people from the research-based companies.
Senator Whitehouse. You all say that here. There is a lot
of head-nodding here. There is a lot of agreement here.
When your lobbyists come, everybody is in and they are not
going to let anybody lose in all of this. We have to at least
cut off these people.
Mr. Frazier. Thank you for telling me that, because I never
knew that our lobbyists were opposed to that.
Senator Whitehouse. We have no support for working against
these monopoly raiders.
Dr. Brandicourt. Well, Senators, the message is very clear.
And we are going to take that very seriously as a task.
The Chairman. Senator Brown came back. So you will go ahead
of the Senator from Nevada.
Go ahead.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for doing
this hearing.
Thank you all for joining us. I want to thank Senator
Hassan for her questions on opioids. Eleven people a day die in
my State from opioid addiction, and there is a responsibility
shared more widely than we sometimes say.
I so appreciated Chairman Grassley's ``yes'' or ``no''
questions, and I appreciated the seven of you going along with
his ``yes'' or ``no.'' And I would like to ask a series of
``yes'' or ``no'' questions, and please keep it to ``yes'' or
``no.'' They really are ``yes'' or ``no'' questions.
Mr. Gonzales, let's start with you. Is it true that the
pharmaceutical industry benefits from U.S. taxpayer-funded
research? ``Yes'' or ``no''?
Mr. Gonzalez. It is, yes.
Senator Brown. Across, each of you.
Mr. Soriot. Yes.
Dr. Caforio. Yes.
Ms. Taubert. Yes.
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thank you.
Is it true that no other nation invests more taxpayer
dollars in basic research that directly and indirectly benefits
the industry?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Mr. Soriot. Yes.
Dr. Caforio. Yes.
Ms. Taubert. Yes.
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
Dr. Bourla. I am not sure I understood the question.
Senator Brown. Is it true that no other nation on earth
invests more taxpayer dollars in basic research?
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Dr. Brandicourt. Is it proportional to GDP, Senator?
Senator Brown. I am not asking that, but that is close
enough. Thank you.
Is it true that the U.S. Government allows drug companies
the longest period of exclusivity on biologics?
Mr. Gonzalez?
Mr. Gonzalez. I believe that is true.
Mr. Soriot. I believe that is true.
Dr. Caforio. I believe that is true.
Ms. Taubert. Yes.
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes.
Senator Brown. We know Medicare limits prices with doctors
and hospitals. Is it true that Medicare cannot negotiate to
lower prices with drug companies?
Mr. Gonzalez. That is true directly.
Mr. Soriot. Yes.
Dr. Caforio. Yes.
Ms. Taubert. Yes; other agents work on their behalf to
negotiate, but they do not negotiate directly.
Mr. Frazier. Yes, they cannot negotiate directly.
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
Is it true U.S. taxpayers subsidize pharmaceutical
advertising and marketing activities through the tax code's
business expense deduction?
Mr. Gonzalez?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Mr. Soriot. Yes.
Dr. Caforio. Yes.
Ms. Taubert. Yes.
Mr. Frazier. Yes, no different from any other advertising,
but yes.
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
We note the United States is the world's largest market for
pharmaceuticals. Is it true that we pay the highest--in the
overwhelming number of cases, is it true that we pay the
highest drug prices in the world?
Mr. Gonzalez?
Mr. Gonzalez. The average government price would--that
would not be the case.
Senator Brown. No, that we as Americans individually pay
the highest drug prices in the world?
Mr. Gonzalez. As an average, that would be true.
Mr. Soriot. I am not sure that it would be true, Senator,
because the generic prices are some of the lowest in the world,
and government prices, for many of our drugs even before patent
expiry, are sometimes as low as Europe or lower.
So on average, probably it is true, but there are many many
different kinds of----
Senator Brown. I know there are exceptions. I am looking
for an average.
Dr. Caforio?
Dr. Caforio. Yes, on average I would say.
Senator Brown. Ms. Taubert?
Ms. Taubert. I would say that the list prices are higher,
but the net price in the United States is more comparable to
much of the pricing outside the U.S.
Senator Brown. Mr. Frazier?
Mr. Frazier. Yes, outside Medicaid and other things, yes.
Senator Brown. Okay.
Dr. Bourla. Nine out of 10 products in the U.S. are
generics. So the pricing of the generic products is much lower
in the U.S. than other countries.
Senator Brown. Yes, but generics----
Dr. Bourla. But you are right about branded----
Senator Brown. Do not confuse generic numbers of drugs sold
with cost in the aggregate? Your answer?
Dr. Bourla. But nine out of 10, I am telling you--you are
right that in the innovation, the prices outside the U.S. in
many cases are much higher.
Dr. Brandicourt. So I would agree with that: patented
drugs, yes, generics, no.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thank you. Last question.
Is it true that drug manufacturers set the--what Ms.
Taubert talked about--list prices? Is it true that you, the
drug manufacturers, set those list prices?
Mr. Gonzalez. That is correct.
Mr. Soriot. That is correct, but of course, there is a
negotiation that takes place with PBMs and insurers about the
price and the rebate level.
Senator Brown. Dr. Caforio?
Dr. Caforio. It is true for list price, but the delta
between list and net price is the highest in the U.S.
Senator Brown. Ms. Taubert?
Ms. Taubert. Correct. Yes, we set the list price.
Senator Brown. Mr. Frazier?
Mr. Frazier. Yes, we set list price.
Senator Brown. Dr. Bourla?
Dr. Bourla. Actually, I would not agree that we set the
list price. It is the result of a major negotiation. And I have
to say that the problem in the U.S. health-care system it is
that everything is geared around list price, a lot of
incentives, which creates a hydraulic effect for the list
prices to go down.
I would be very happy to have much less list prices and the
same net.
Senator Brown. Dr. Brandicourt?
Dr. Brandicourt. Ultimately, we set the listing price.
Senator Brown. Okay. Thank you.
So taxpayers subsidize your research, subsidize your
marketing, and you continue to raise drug list prices on them.
The median income of a person on Medicare is $26,000 a year,
while the average annual cost for a single specialty medication
was more than $52,000 in 2015. Americans cannot afford to pay
for prescription drugs that cost more money than they make in a
year. We cannot continue to give big pharma the blank check
that you have had to pay for high-priced prescription drugs.
But I guess it is not surprising that big drug companies
take all the taxpayer money they can. What is so troubling is
that this Congress continues, because of the lobbyists that
Senator Whitehouse talked about and other pressures, that this
Congress continues to allow you to do so.
Thank you for answers.
The Chairman. The Senator from Nevada.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you for being here. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for this important hearing,
one of four.
Let me follow up on Senator Brown's line of questioning. Do
any of you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? If we could start ``yes'' or ``no'' to the
right here.
Dr. Brandicourt. No.
Dr. Bourla. No.
Mr. Frazier. Spend more on R&D versus marketing?
Senator Cortez Masto. More in R&D than you spend on
marketing and administration. Do you invest more in R&D than
you do on marketing?
Mr. Frazier. On marketing, but not if you include general
administration, facilities, and all of that stuff. But yes,
more than marketing.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Dr. Bourla. I would correct my answer also if it is only
marketing. Yes, we spend more on R&D.
Senator Cortez Masto. Let us just do marketing.
Dr. Brandicourt [indicating agreement with Dr. Bourla].
Ms. Taubert. Yes, we spend 86 percent more on R&D than we
do on sales and marketing.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Dr. Caforio. Yes, we do more on R&D.
Mr. Soriot. Same, more than marketing, but excluding
administrative costs.
Mr. Gonzalez. Significantly more in R&D than sales and
marketing.
Senator Cortez Masto. But if you included administration
with the marketing, that would be the reverse. Is that correct?
Mr. Gonzalez. That is correct.
Senator Cortez Masto. Yes from the rest of you?
Mr. Frazier. It is about tied at Merck.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
So let me just ask this question. Apart from New Zealand,
nowhere else in the world will you see drug ads on television--
and I have asked this question for some of you. My
understanding is--the answer that I have been given is that you
maintain that television ads are a critical public health tool
that helps patients identify their symptoms and seek treatment.
Would you all agree with that? Is that a ``yes''? ``No''?
Why do we have television ads when it----
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes, you are right.
Senator Cortez Masto. Is that why? Is that a ``yes''?
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes.
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
Ms. Taubert. Yes.
Dr. Caforio. Yes.
Mr. Soriot. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay. So if you maintain that
television ads are a critical public health tool, then how can
that be if our health outcomes are not significantly better
than in those countries where it is outlawed?
Dr. Bourla. Thank you, and you are raising a very good
point.
I think that the health-care outcomes and life expectancy--
there are a lot of factors that influence them. For example,
exercise, diet, lifestyle, and I feel that our Nation needs to
improve a lot in many of these cases. But I can assure you,
Senator, that if you get cancer or another serious disease, you
want to be treated in this country.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Dr. Bourla. There is no comparison.
Senator Cortez Masto. All right. So let me jump back then
to this discussion on authorized generics. And I am trying to
understand this, I think, along with all of my colleagues, to
address how we reduce the cost and get the drugs in the hands
of the people who need them--where the R&D came in, where they
were created--for individuals who actually need the drugs.
I want to ask about the concept of authorized generics.
Those, as you know, are the drugs that are identical to the
brand, manufactured by the brand, but marketed without the
brand on its label.
Yet the companies, my understanding is, keep selling the
higher-cost brand drug to consumers who, according to press
reports, do not realize that the same product from the same
company is available at a better price.
All of you manufacture authorized generics to maintain your
market share once your patent expires. Is that true?
Dr. Brandicourt. No.
Senator Cortez Masto. That is not true?
Dr. Bourla. We do have authorized generics.
Dr. Brandicourt. We do have authorized generics, but do not
do it with the goal that you just highlighted.
Senator Cortez Masto. So you do have authorized generics?
Do all of you have authorized generics?
Mr. Frazier. For some brands.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Ms. Taubert. Very selectively.
Dr. Caforio. Very selectively.
Mr. Soriot. We do not.
Senator Cortez Masto. You do not?
Mr. Gonzalez. I do not believe we do.
Senator Cortez Masto. You do not have authorized generics?
So for those of you who have authorized generics, explain to
me, if you do have those, why do you continue selling the
brand?
Mr. Frazier. Okay, so in our case when we have had
authorized generics, we have allowed a third-party to bring a
generic product to market. The issue that you are really
getting to, again, is the issue that Senator Cassidy talked
about, which is transparency.
At the end of the day, if patients really understood what
their options were, they would not make these choices. But we
have an opaque system, which is something that I think we have
to change. We have to empower patients to be able to choose the
cheapest medication. And Merck strongly supports generics.
What I said in my introduction is, we will never use
coupons when there is a generic.
Senator Cortez Masto. What are you doing to empower the
patients? What are you doing to empower the patients to
understand that the generics are out there?
Mr. Frazier. It is very hard. We do not connect with the
patients in all those situations. That is why there is
legislation saying, for example, that pharmacists must tell
patients at the counter what the cheapest alternative is for
them at the counter. We do not----
Senator Cortez Masto. So you rely on others to tell----
Mr. Frazier. Yes. We do not meet them at the counter,
Senator.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay. Let me ask one final question,
because I am running out of time here. I want to get a sense
from all of you what types of policies you could support. I
have heard some of those, but let me ask you this. Democrats
have proposed to require manufacturers to submit advanced
justification for price hikes that outpace inflation and make
that information public.
Given that many of you have already committed to tapering
price hikes, is this something you could support, ``yes'' or
``no''?
Dr. Brandicourt. We can support such legislation, yes.
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Dr. Caforio. Yes.
Ms. Taubert. We are very supportive of increased pricing
transparency. Advance notification can cause problems in the
supply chain and could cause outages for certain States. So we
are very supportive of the notion of transparency. Advance
notification can be problematic.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Dr. Caforio. We disclose our price increases.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Mr. Soriot. We support it.
Mr. Gonzalez. We support it, but we would like to see
consistency. As you probably know, California has that right
now, but if we had a consistent standard that we operated with,
that would certainly be helpful.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Senator Daines?
Senator Daines. It is very clear from what is going on
today that there are ultimately not any silver bullets to cure
the high cost of prescription drugs. I am pleased that we can
have this discussion. My hope is that we can truly find some
ways to incentivize the system here to deliver a lower price,
ultimately, for the consumer as well as incentivizing
innovation.
As manufacturers, you are responsible for setting this list
price, this ethereal list price. But the more I hear what is
going on here today, I am convinced we probably should call
this the asking price. I am sure ``list price'' is a bit of a
misnomer, because after hearing all about coupons, rebates,
discounts, the pricing volatility--yes, I spent 13 years at
Procter and Gamble, and once upon a time we drove a business
with a lot of coupons, with rebates, pricing incentives. It was
a very elastic pricing model. Oftentimes, we had a high-margin
business. There is elasticity in the pricing, and you are an
example of that.
I spent 12 years in the cloud computing business after
that. The margins were even higher. We saw great volatility in
pricing and elasticity in pricing. We eventually, years ago of
course, went to the everyday low price, EDLP, model. It, again,
may or may not apply to Pharma. But it was just trying to take
out all of that in between the manufacturer and the consumer
nonsense that was going on, that was lacking transparency.
And ultimately, I think the consumer was not winning in
that equation, because the prices--they were not seeing really
the true everyday low price. There are a lot of perverse
incentives in the system today, as best I can tell. So my
question is, who pays list price?
Dr. Brandicourt. Unfortunately, the patient at the end, at
the pharmacy counter, is probably one of the few paying the
list price.
Mr. Frazier. There is a small percentage of people who have
no insurance who could actually be charged the list price.
Senator Daines. So the people who can afford it the least,
arguably, are paying list price.
Mr. Frazier. Senator, that to me is what I meant by saying,
in some ways the reimbursement system here is regressive. The
people who can least afford it are paying the most.
Senator Daines. Do you think that that is a good system?
Mr. Frazier. I do not. I can tell you that is, to me, the
biggest problem that we have as a country, that we now have a
system where the poorest and the sickest are subsidizing
others.
Senator Daines. Okay. So with insurance companies that now
own the PBMs and the supply chain from the time you list the
price until the consumer eventually gets it, is it fair to say
the list price is really a starting point for, then, a
negotiation?
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
Senator Daines. Does anybody disagree with that premise?
Ms. Taubert. No.
Senator Daines. So what are some of the incentives? And
maybe we will start with Mr. Frazier. What are the incentives
that contribute to high list prices that are being paid by
those who can afford them least?
Mr. Frazier. The real answer, Senator, is, if you went back
a few years ago when we negotiated to get our drugs on
formulary, our goal was to have the lowest copay for patients.
Today the goal is to pay into the supply chain the biggest
rebate. And so that actually puts the patient at a
disadvantage, since they are the only ones who are paying a
portion of the list price. The list price is actually working
against the patient.
Senator Daines. So why do we have a system today where you
all are setting--I will just say very very high list prices,
which is our starting point for negotiation? Why?
Dr. Brandicourt. Senator, we are trying to get formulary
position with those high list prices, high rebates. It is a
preferred position. Unfortunately, the preferred position does
not automatically ensure affordability at the end of the day.
Mr. Frazier. And, Senator, if you bring a product to the
market with a low list price in this system, you get punished
financially and you get no uptake, because everyone in the
supply chain makes money as a result of a higher list price.
Senator Daines. Chairman Grassley, if I could just ask a
follow-up question here. And that is, the GAO report said that
generics might fall 20 percent for each new generic entrant
into the market.
I appreciate the chairman's efforts here with the CREATES
Act. It is going to crack down on some of these bad actors who
block or delay competing generic drugs from entering the
market. I have co-sponsored the bill, and I think that will
help us provide better access to low-cost generics.
Here is my question: has your company ever withheld samples
from generic manufacturers?
Dr. Brandicourt. No.
Dr. Bourla. No.
Mr. Frazier. No.
Ms. Taubert. No.
Dr. Caforio. No.
Mr. Soriot. No.
Mr. Gonzalez. No.
Senator Daines. Right. Do you believe the CREATES Act would
be a positive step forward, ensuring generics enter the market
in a timely fashion? I would love to poll the team here.
Mr. Frazier. I said in my testimony, legislation like the
CREATES Act would be positive in that regard.
Dr. Bourla. Yes.
Dr. Brandicourt. Yes.
Dr. Caforio. Yes.
Mr. Soriot. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. We are supportive.
Ms. Taubert. We are supportive of efforts to make sure that
there are no abuses of that sample system.
Senator Daines. All right; I am out a time now. Thank you.
The Chairman. Senator Young?
Senator Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to move to the issue of Medicaid best price. In the
Trump administration's blueprint, they suggest that because
drug manufacturers have to give Medicaid the best price drugs,
there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers, both government and commercial, than what is already
offered under the Medicaid drug rebate program.
So first of all, I would ask each of you, is the Trump
administration's assessment accurate?
Mr. Gonzalez. In concept, I would say I understand the
concept. In other words, if you have best price, you obviously
have to be conscious of where that price is going, because it
is going to be compared against that.
I would tell you in practice, because of the negotiation
that occurs in the formula around Medicaid, I do not believe
that that is actually, today, resulting in higher prices in the
Medicare program.
Senator Young. You have anticipated my follow-up question.
So I appreciate that.
So the best price requirement does not encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices? You have thoughts on
that?
Mr. Gonzalez. I would say it does not necessarily encourage
you to set a higher list price. I think what happens with list
price is this negotiation you have heard of, going forward,
where you are looking for a certain amount of impact to fall
through, but the rebates and the other aspects of the value
chain in between absorb a large chunk of that, which drives
list prices, increases up higher.
Senator Young. Okay. Others?
Mr. Frazier. I think where best price really is an issue
is, again, it is a barrier to the kind of value-based pricing
that we want to have within the marketplace, where if, for
example, a drug did not work, you might reimburse that payer
for that unit, where that becomes a problem for value-based
pricing.
Dr. Brandicourt. Another example, Senator, is when you want
to put on the market a second NDC, like we did recently where
it had a much lower list price, then the best price potentially
becomes a problem because it is calculated with the other
version, the higher list price version, which has stayed on the
market. So that is something to pay attention to.
Senator Young. What changes, if any--if I could pivot a
bit--would you suggest making to the program?
Dr. Caforio. Senator, I believe that flexibility with
value-based arrangements is really important, because I think
we have all expressed a strong support for a system where we
are paid based on the clinical results that our medicines
produce in patients and having greater flexibility to do that.
It would be very, very important. It would be very valuable
for patients. It would reduce health-care costs overall.
Senator Young. General agreement?
Ms. Taubert. Yes, we agree.
Mr. Frazier. Yes.
Senator Young. Okay.
So would you be willing to work with the administration on
a different model, one you regard as more optimal?
Ms. Taubert. Absolutely.
Senator Young. Very good. Thank you.
With respect to reducing drug prices and the subsidies that
U.S. payers provide with respect to research and development to
much of the rest of the wealthy world, the President and the
administration have gone so far as to issue proposals, like the
international pricing index, which we all are familiar with, to
bring down prescription drug prices.
So with the increased scrutiny of the industry and of the
drug supply chain as a whole in the U.S., have any of your
companies re-evaluated your business strategy in foreign
countries?
Mr. Frazier. That is a common question that we get asked.
And the answer to that question is, we do everything in our
power to ensure that there is less freeloading by governments
outside the United States. But the reality of the world is, the
greatest opportunity we have is to walk away.
And that is really challenging when you have the kinds of
essential medicines that make a big difference to people's
lives. And frankly, they know that. They know that they can
establish a price, and that ultimately what we have is an
option to walk away, leaving patients behind.
I would also make the point that has been made several
times here, that in the course of negotiating for
reimbursement, often those countries take a very deliberate
approach, such that these medicines are available many years
later than they are here.
So they not only negotiate on a low price, but they
actually provide very few of these medicines early on to their
populations. If you look at, for example, lung cancer, where in
this country now, there is data showing that certain medicines
can reduce the risk of death by 50 percent in newly diagnosed
lung cancer patients, compare that to the UK, where people die
regularly of lung cancer because they do not have these
medicines.
Mr. Soriot. Senator, I think it is important to keep in
mind that all these investments, number one, create a lot of
very good jobs in the U.S. and economic value that really
benefits the country. And second, they allow patients to get
access to important new medicines much, much, much earlier than
in Europe, for instance, sometimes 3, 4 years before.
And I share Mr. Frazier's comment here. I have many
examples that I could share where medicines that save lives are
available here. We are still waiting in Europe.
The Chairman. Just three more questions. One from--if some
of you want to answer yet, I did not mean to interrupt you. Go
ahead.
Mr. Gonzalez. The only thing I would add is, if we could
develop a model where, as in the early days of HIV when
countries ultimately shared the burden, knowing that you would
have to provide HIV treatments at a very low cost in certain
countries, there was a tiered pricing system that came through
where, yes, the U.S. paid the highest price, but the Europeans
paid a fairly significant price for very important specialty
medicines. If we could negotiate through trade or other
mechanisms, we would be able to get a more balanced sharing of
the investment that is made, not keeping all of that burden on
the U.S., because the U.S. does bear the bulk of the burden of
innovation in our business. That is absolutely true.
Senator Young. So that is a really interesting idea. If you
or your team are aware of any academic paper you might bring to
my attention----
The Chairman. Okay. That is the end.
Senator Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Yes.
Now we have three questions, one from Senator Wyden, then
Senator Cassidy, then me. And then that will be it.
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
This is going to be one question and then a very brief
closer. And the question is for you, Mr. Gonzalez.
I have the company's proxy statement here. And financial
disclosures show that you were paid $22.6 million in 2017, and
that included a $4.3-million bonus. That is what I want to look
at.
On page 37 in this proxy statement, it says your bonus was
tied to the financial performance of Humira. And it seems that
was the case in 2015 and 2016. That strikes me as problematic,
since AbbVie reported that the higher prices in the U.S. were
responsible for increasing sales of Humira.
Would you make a smaller bonus if you dropped the price of
Humira?
Mr. Gonzalez. Humira was one element of a set of financial
factors that were evaluated as part of my compensation. It is
obviously a very significant product for us. So it is clear
that it would be a part of that evaluation.
Senator Wyden. I would like that in writing. It looks to me
like you would be making a smaller bonus if you dropped the
price of Humira. I would like that in writing within 10 days.
My last point--Mr. Chairman, I appreciate being able to do
this for a closer--is that I have heard a lot of happy talk
this morning, things like, well, if you get rid of rebates,
drug prices are going to go down. But what people are taking
away from this hearing is--I have seen it said and reported--
well, no firm commitments have been made to lower list prices.
So I am just going to tell you what I would like in writing
is, I would like an answer in writing to the question, if
rebates go away, will you support a black letter law that
requires that you reduce list prices by the amount of the
rebate?
I am going to get that to you right away. I would like an
answer within 10 days, because that is right at the heart of
this issue, and after the ``happy talk'' is over, that is what
is really going to help people at pharmacy counters from sea to
shining sea.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cassidy?
Senator Cassidy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, again. This has been incredibly provocative. And
if there is a tension here, the tension is, how do we support
innovation, but at the same time make it that the patient can
afford that innovation?
Mr. Frazier, you may have guessed that--it seems like we
have a mirror image, in my mind. Either the plans impose a
price or the government imposes a price. But either way, the
side having it imposed upon them is not very wild about that.
And you just mentioned to Todd Young that you can walk
away. If France offers you too low a price, you just walk away
from France. The UK does not have a deal right now. But in some
areas, Medicare cannot walk away. So it is back to that mirror
image. And you started to say something and I was out of time.
But my question is, in the six protected classes--and if there
is a new drug, like Sovaldi was at the beginning, right now the
commercials can walk away, the commercials can delay, but
Medicare cannot.
So help me resolve this. How do we give the patient, the
taxpayer, the same sort of tools that--and by the way, CBO says
unless you can walk away, negotiations will not lower prices.
Mr. Frazier. So my point was, for all practical purposes,
we cannot walk away from our European colleagues, even though
they give us low prices, because we think it would be immoral
to leave those patients----
Senator Cassidy. Now some of your colleagues have, because
there are drugs not yet available in the UK.
Mr. Frazier. Well, the problem with the UK is that they
delay. Just like they can set the price, they delay when they
put the drug on the market. It is the UK's delay, it is not our
delay. So I want to clarify that point.
But coming back to your six protected classes, those
protected classes are there because many, many sick vulnerable
people need medicines in those classes. And we believe that
there are ways of lowering the prices, stimulating innovation,
without violating the compact that was around those six
protected classes, because patients are particularly needing
those medicines.
Senator Cassidy. Well, we will have to leave it there, but
I am not sure that is--you know, that seems almost status quo.
And status quo is kind of not working.
But again, thank you all very much, and I thank you again
for your innovation.
Dr. Bourla. I would add, Senator, I believe the
administration should try, through trade agreements, to protect
the American innovation, because by and large the
pharmaceutical innovation is happening in this country. And
right now, I think rightly, these price control mechanisms are
for multiple well-developed countries. It is in reality free-
riding on American innovation.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
Well, thank you.
The Chairman. My last question is very general, but I would
like to know if there are any policies affecting Medicaid or
Medicare that are in your control to change? In other words,
from the company level, is there anything in your control that
you could change on Medicare or Medicaid?
I will start with you on my right here.
Dr. Brandicourt. I do not think we can change directly any
policy, Senator, on Medicare or Medicaid. We can talk about
different solutions, but I do not think we can change. We have
no power to change.
The Chairman. But if you lowered your list price, it would
help. That is one thing you could do.
Dr. Brandicourt. If we were able to lower our list price,
that would certainly help, again, the patient at the end, at
the pharmacy, to have a copay which they could afford.
However, we could not do that independently of a major
reform because we would lose formulary placement if we were
doing that in isolation, and especially in very competitive
areas where you do have, you know, brands and generics. And
again, I am referring to the insulin market, which has become
extremely, extremely competitive. That would not work.
The Chairman. Do you have anything?
Dr. Bourla. Mr. Chairman, I think the most impactful thing
I can do right now it is to make the pledge that, as leader of
this company, Pfizer, I would be taking very seriously the
responsible pricing of our products. This is something that we
have already started.
Pricing at Pfizer in the past was growing in the mid-single
digits, even more in some cases. This is not something that we
continued doing. Pricing at Pfizer went down last year, went
down this year.
And when I spoke to our investors, not to the Senate, to
our investors, I made it very clear that pricing will not be a
growth driver for this company now or in the years to come. Why
do I think this is the most important? Because I think the tone
is set from the top.
The Chairman. Mr. Frazier?
Mr. Frazier. Senator, I understand the dissatisfaction with
our industry. I understand why patients are frustrated, because
they need these medicines and they cannot afford them.
I would pledge to do everything that we could, but I would
urge you to recognize that the system itself is complex, and it
is interdependent. And no one company can unilaterally lower
list prices without running into financial and operating
disadvantages that make it impossible to do that. But if we
bring all the parties together around the table with the goal
of doing what is best for the patient, I think we can come up
with a system that works for all Americans.
Thank you for giving us the time today.
The Chairman. I did not mean to--for the rest of you,
before you answer, I did not mean to say list price. I just
said, well, that is kind of obvious. Yes, I did not want to
concentrate just on that.
Ms. Taubert?
Ms. Taubert. We really want to be a part of the solution,
and we want patients to be able to access and pay for the
medicines that they so desperately need. So we do strongly
advocate for rebate reforms that would allow us to lower our
list prices that would then end up helping patients get access.
The Chairman. Dr. Caforio?
Dr. Caforio. Mr. Chairman, I would echo. Our perspective is
that it starts with a very responsible and thoughtful approach
to pricing and price increases. That is what Bristol-Myers
Squibb does.
The second point that I would like to make is that, today
we have discussed a number of very concrete policies, from
addressing the issue of rebates to value-based pricing to
supporting the development of a generic and biosimilar market.
And you have my commitment that our company is looking forward
to working with this committee and the administration to make
sure that many of those policies can be enacted, because they
would make a very big difference for our patients.
The Chairman. Mr. Soriot?
Mr. Soriot. Senator, we actually cannot influence policy.
What we can do is, indeed, apply reasonable pricing and also
continue pushing for value-based pricing. But I would like to
make a general comment, which is that hopefully--you know,
hopefully my colleagues will share this. This view is that I
really do not think we are blaming anybody in the system. In
his introduction, Senator Wyden thought that we were placing
the blame on PBMs and others. I really do not think we are
doing this.
I think what it is is that we are in a system that used to
be fit for purpose and really drove enormous savings over the
last few years but is no longer fit for purpose. And it is one
of those situations where nobody in the system can do anything,
can fix it by themselves. The government has to step up and
change the rules, and those rebates have to go.
The Chairman. Mr. Gonzalez?
Mr. Gonzalez. I think I would agree with many of the points
that were already raised. We as an industry have to continue to
do everything we can to be responsible about pricing in both
how we set pricing and price increases over time. I think we
have seen a positive trend in that area. But ultimately, the
final fixes here to realign the system appropriately would
require legislative-type changes.
The only other thing I would say is, as I mentioned a
moment ago, we are absolutely committed that no patient goes
without medicine of ours that they need. And we have an
extensive patient assistance program, but we are talking about
how we more broadly ensure all patients understand they can get
that support from us if they cannot afford their medicines.
The Chairman. I want to inform all members of the committee
that I will set a deadline of March 12th if you have questions
you want to submit to the panel for answers in writing. And
then for you folks, after you get those questions, I hope you
can get back to us very quickly.
And so, all of the people besides the witnesses who have
attended either here or off-site for this hearing, I thank you
for your interest in this issue. And I want to once again thank
our witnesses for being here today and sharing your knowledge
and expertise. And I indicated that this is the start of a
dialogue I hope to have with you so that we can correct some of
these things that have been pointed out at this committee
meeting that we think need to be corrected.
Thank you all very much.
Meeting adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:25 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]
A P P E N D I X
Additional Material Submitted for the Record
----------
Prepared Statement of Albert Bourla, DVM, Ph.D.,
Chief Executive Officer, Pfizer
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. My
name is Albert Bourla. I have been with Pfizer for 26 years, and just
last month had the honor of becoming its chief executive officer.
Today, I am pleased to take part in such an important policy
discussion within the United States Senate. Pfizer shares an important
goal with this committee: to ensure that America remains the leader
when it comes to innovative medicines, and that our citizens have
affordable access to these modern miracles when they need them.
In that frightening moment when you hear that you or a loved one
has been diagnosed with a serious disease, one question comes to mind:
``Is there a cure or treatment available?'' The answer can change your
life. And happily, the answer to that question increasingly is ``yes.''
Breakthrough medicines are coming quickly across a wide range of
conditions. Most of them are discovered here, by the American
Biopharmaceutical Industry, which is the crown jewel of innovation. Let
me share a few examples. In 2015, Pfizer launched a life-changing new
treatment for metastatic breast cancer that can delay the progression
of the disease two times longer than previous treatments. Thanks to our
meningitis B vaccine, parents can send their teens to college confident
in the knowledge that being vaccinated helps protect them in the event
of an outbreak on campus. In 2018, we brought 4 new cancer treatments
to the market to treat varying forms of breast cancer, lung cancer and
leukemia. And we are currently working on a non-opioid alternative with
the potential to address the serious unmet needs of the more than 27
million Americans living with osteoarthritis and the more than 33
million suffering chronic low back pain.
But all of these breakthroughs won't do anyone any good if patients
can't afford them.
That's why at Pfizer we are so committed to our purpose:
breakthroughs that change patients' lives. Pfizer's more than 90,000
colleagues around the world come to work every day focused not only on
creating breakthrough medicines, but also on making sure those
medicines get into the hands of the patients who need them.
To create solutions that make medicines affordable for patients and
our entire health-care system, I believe that all players in the
industry must come together and play a part. Whether it's hospitals or
providers, pharmacy benefit managers or insurance companies, or
biopharmaceutical companies, we all have a role to play. The series of
hearings being held by Congress can be a catalyst for this much-
needed collaboration.
There are two indisputable truths that make this the exact right
moment for change:
1.
Medicines alleviate human suffering and reduce overall
system costs.
2.
The horribly misaligned incentives within our health-care
system often prevent medicines from getting into the hands of
patients.
Our health-care system is broken, and we need to fix it. The system
needs to be simpler and more transparent. It needs to incentivize
innovation while simultaneously ensuring access. Simply put, it needs
to put patients--and their health--first.
How will we know when the health-care system is fixed? When
patients feel real relief at the pharmacy counter--the kind of relief
that means cost will no longer be a determining factor in whether
someone picks up, and adheres to, their prescription. Too often,
Americans are forced to choose between buying a medication that will
improve, extend or save their lives or paying their bills. Too often,
they fill their prescriptions, but take less than the prescribed dose
in an effort to save money. Too often, lower-cost, FDA-approved generic
and biosimilar alternatives are not made available to patients who
desperately need them.
We must take bold actions to ensure these scenarios do not play out
time and time again across America.
Pfizer intends to be a productive participant in this policy making
and has come to the table with solutions. As such, we would like to
propose four ideas to drive meaningful reductions in costs for
patients.
passing all rebates to patients
Today's current drug rebate system is good for two things: driving
up both drug list prices and consumer out-of-pocket costs. In fact, in
2018, the average net price of Pfizer's medicines in the United States
declined 1 percent. However, I am certain that patients using our
medicines had a very different experience at the pharmacy counter since
their costs in the current system are more closely related to the list
price than the net price. This is impactful when patients pay a
coinsurance or are in the deductible phase of their benefits coverage.
In these instances, patients are being asked to pay an average of 10
percent to 20 percent or more out of their own pockets for many Pfizer
products.
There are two reasons for this disconnect: changes in benefit
designs are pushing more and more of the medicines' cost to the pockets
of the patients, and none of the close to $12 billion of rebates that
Pfizer paid in 2018 found their way to American patients. As long as
rebates serve as profit drivers, we will continue to see a major
disconnect between list prices and prices people pay at the counter.
Pfizer supports reforms that would create a system in which
transparent, up-front discounts benefit patients at the pharmacy
counter, rather than a system driven by rebates that are swallowed up
by companies in the supply chain.
The way to alleviate sticker shock at the pharmacy counter is by
changing the incentives in the supply chain so that more of the $150
billion in negotiated rebates and discounts actually reach patients.
This can be accomplished by applying the discounts paid by the
pharmaceutical manufacturer to the price actually paid by patients at
the pharmacy. In 2019, Pfizer expects to pay billions in rebates to
ensure patients with pharmacy benefits coverage in Medicare Part D and
patients in commercial plans have access to our medicines. If the
proposed rule to share rebates with consumers at the point of sale is
finalized, we estimate that seniors taking Pfizer medicines could save
$270 on average per year, and up to $574 per year for certain Pfizer
medicines, through lower cost sharing--and that would outweigh any
premium increases.
Research also shows that sharing discounts at the pharmacy counter
could reduce total health-care spending, and that reductions in overall
out-of-pocket costs would outweigh any premium increases.
We realize that the transition away from rebates toward a point-of-
sale discount model will result in a lowering of our net prices.
Despite this potential negative financial impact, we support efforts to
eliminate rebates because we believe the new model will be good for
patients.
Importantly, we believe any reform should apply to all market
segments as this will also lead to further reduction in list prices. A
bifurcated market in which we eliminate rebates in government programs
but maintain rebates for commercial plans will make it difficult for
manufacturers to reduce list prices because it applies to all markets.
We will work with other leaders in the healthcare sector to advance
these reforms, and we're committed to lowering list prices if the
rebate rule applies to the commercial market.
less value, less pay
Pfizer supports the move to value-based health care and is prepared
to stand behind the benefits that our medicines deliver to patients and
to the United States health-care system.
Medical science is advancing so rapidly that payment models simply
haven't been able to keep up. That's why Pfizer is focusing not only on
scientific innovation, but also on commercial innovations that will
allow us to get breakthrough medicines into the hands of patients,
while simultaneously holding all participants in the system--including
Pfizer--accountable for the health outcomes they help produce.
This will require a fundamental shift in the way we think about the
value that medicines deliver and how all participants in the system are
reimbursed with regard to that value. It will also require the
evolution of insurance designs to advance value-based insurance plans
that removebarriers to high-value treatments.
Imagine a system in which hospitals are rewarded for keeping
patients from being readmitted; where physicians get paid more to
prevent disease than they do to simply treat it; and where companies
like Pfizer get paid based on the number of strokes we prevent or the
number of cancer patients who go into full remission, rather than the
number of pills we sell.
In such a system, if our medicines do not produce results, we would
be paid less. And if they do produce results, we would be paid more. If
done correctly, these arrangements--focused on the appropriate
therapeutic areas--can align the interests of patients, health plans
and biopharmaceutical companies around one shared goal: ensuring
positive health outcomes for the patient.
To make this a reality, we need Congress's help to remove the
roadblocks in the current system for the good of patients. I understand
several members of this committee are drafting a legislative effort to
pave the way for broader adoption of outcomes-based arrangements, and
we applaud these efforts.
capping seniors' out-of-pocket medicine costs
Patients are increasingly being required to take on a bigger share
of their medicines' costs, and that is particularly true when it comes
to innovative and expensive treatments. Today, patients are made to pay
on average 14 percent of the cost of their medicines, but only 3
percent of the costs associated with hospital stays.
This is forcing patients to forgo taking needed medications, to cut
their pills in half, or to limit their doses in ways that are not
medically prescribed. In fact, there is evidence that at least a
quarter of new Medicare Part D prescriptions are abandoned at the
pharmacy counter if beneficiaries are asked to pay $50 or more, which
unfortunately is often the case. This number can exceed 50 percent for
new prescriptions.
This is bad not only for patients, but also for overall health-care
system cost. Patients who do not take their medications often end up in
the hospital, costing the health-care system much more. This needs to
be fixed.
Excessive cost-sharing is one of the greatest barriers to patient
adherence and leads to more frequent discontinuation of therapy. While
spending on medicines has been growing at a slower rate than in prior
years, the number of patients with high deductible plans and high co-
insurance are growing rapidly. Since 2009, enrollment in high
deductible plans has grown 250 percent, and since 2010 the number of
patients exposed to high specialty tiers has grown 60 percent. In fact,
I've heard from several members of this committee that their
constituents--or they themselves--have recently gone to the pharmacy
counter only to be shocked by an excessively high co-pay. That's why
the time is now to review cost-sharing burdens in the Medicare
prescription drug program and to take steps to ensure seniors don't
have to make the difficult decision of forgoing their needed
prescription.
We commit to working with the committee on meaningful policy
solutions that remove the burdens seniors face in paying for their
medicines, and we believe an important first step is capping the out-
of-pocket costs seniors experience in the Medicare drug program.
knocking down barriers to lower-cost biosimilars
Medicines are the only segment of the health-care system with a
built-in cost containment mechanism. When a medicine's patent expires,
lower-cost generics are made available, often at just 5 percent of the
cost of the original branded product.
This system is working well for generic drugs. In fact, nine out of
10 drugs sold in the U.S. today are lower-cost generics. However, the
system is not yet working in the biologics space where the adoption of
biosimilars is facing resistance.
Establishing a robust biosimilars market can help to lower the
overall health-care costs in the United States, and Pfizer is committed
to bringing these more affordable treatment options to patients. That's
why we must incentivize the use of biosimilars, which can be as much as
40 percent less expensive than the branded biologic for Medicare
patients.
Unfortunately, adverse incentives that favor higher-cost originator
biologics are keeping biosimilars from reaching patients. In many
cases, payers decline to include lower-cost biosimilars or generics in
their formularies because they would risk losing the rebates they can
get by covering higher-cost medicines. I can't think of a more
concerning example of a broken U.S. healthcare system that is directly
impacting the pocketbooks of Americans.
We have also witnessed exclusionary contracting or misleading
marketing practices that mischaracterize important elements of
biosimilar criteria. This creates doubt and confusion among patients,
and it must end. Interestingly, the rebate reform I referenced earlier
would go a long way toward removing the perverse incentives that lead
to such exclusionary contracts.
At Pfizer, we believe there are several solutions that could help
patients and providers share savings associated with biosimilars and
reduce costs to the Medicare program. Let me touch on two:

A Shared Savings Biosimilars Model: Congress could direct
the CMS Innovation Center (CMMI) to test a biosimilar ``shared
savings'' approach in which Medicare savings associated with
prescribing a biosimilar, as compared to a reference
biological, would be shared with providers.

Reduced Patient Cost Sharing for Biosimilars: CMS could
provide reduced or zero-dollar cost sharing for biosimilars for
patients for a certain period.
closing
In 2018, we estimate \1\ that Pfizer vaccines protected more than
65 million babies and elderly patients; our medicines helped reduce the
risk of heart attack or stroke for more than 48 million cardiovascular
patients; and oncologists used our therapies to treat more than 1.2
million people battling cancer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Patient counts are estimates derived from multiple data
sources.
Overall more than 784 million people around the world used a Pfizer
medicine or vaccine to improve their health and, in many cases, save
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
their lives.
These are staggering and humbling numbers. More important, they
represent real people; real people who rely on our innovations. They
also serve as a reminder that we--like our industry peers--are among
the biggest contributors of good to humanity.
This is why we come to work every day. It's why the researchers in
our labs in California, Connecticut, Massachusetts and New York work
day-in and day-out to perfect a formula. It's why our manufacturing
colleagues in Georgia, Kansas, Michigan, Missouri, North Carolina,
Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin--many of whom are represented by
members of this committee--work to ensure the reliable supply and
highest standards of quality of our products.
And it's why we are here today to work with our peers, other
participants in the healthcare system, and Congress to find ways to
ensure the patients who need our medicines can access them so our
industry's breakthroughs can continue to change patients' lives.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Albert Bourla, DVM, Ph.D.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. At the hearing, you testified that Pfizer does not
withhold samples from generic manufacturers in order to block generic
versions of your drug from entering the market. You also expressed your
support for the ``Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent
Samples Act,'' also known as the CREATES Act.
However, the FDA has a list on its website which identifies
reference listed drug (RLD) access inquiries where brand manufacturers
may have prevented generic companies from obtaining samples of products
necessary to support FDA approval. Pfizer is on this FDA list. This
would appear to contradict your testimony at the hearing that Pfizer
has not withheld samples of their products to delay generic
competition.

Could you please explain in detail why Pfizer is on the FDA
list?

Could you please explain in detail the discrepancy between
your testimony and the FDA list?

Has Pfizer ever blocked access to samples?
Answer. As a patient-focused company and leading manufacturer of
innovative, generic, and biosimilar medicines, Pfizer supports
innovation and a strong, competitive marketplace. Consistent with these
values, Pfizer does not block generic manufacturers from purchasing our
products, and it has never been our policy to do so. Generic
manufacturers are treated the same as any other customer seeking to
purchase our products. Pfizer is not aware of any current, unfulfilled
requests from a generic manufacturer to purchase a Pfizer product.
Generic manufacturers seeking to purchase Pfizer products should
request the product from Pfizer's authorized distributors or, if the
product is not available at a distributor, from Pfizer directly, the
same as any other Pfizer customers. Pfizer's website includes a list of
our authorized distributors, from which customers (including generic
companies) may purchase most Pfizer products (see https://www.
pfizer.com/products/medicine-distributors). For products that are not
available via our authorized distributors and that are not in extreme
drug shortage or unavailable due to a recall, customers can contact
Pfizer's Customer Service center at 1-800-TRY-FIRST (1-800-879-3477) to
purchase product directly from Pfizer. The telephone number for
Pfizer's Customer Service center is also included on our website at
https://www.pfizer.com/contact. Pfizer makes its products available for
sale to appropriately licensed entities at Pfizer's listed price and on
Pfizer's standard terms of sale. We do not have any agreements with
authorized distributors that block the sale of Pfizer's products to
generic manufacturers.
Regarding the FDA List (the List), while Pfizer supports FDA's (the
agency) goal of providing transparency, Pfizer is concerned that the
List lacks certain key information and context and, as currently
presented, may create the misleading impression that all products on
the List are the result of bad faith attempts to block generic
manufacturer access to samples. The appearance of a product on the FDA
List means only that a generic manufacturer informed the agency at some
point in time that it was having difficulty purchasing the listed
product. FDA's own disclaimer states that the agency has not
independently investigated or confirmed whether a generic manufacturer
actually made a request to purchase product, and to whom.\1\ The FDA
List also lacks several important pieces of information that would
enable a New Drug Application (NDA) holder to investigate its
appearance on the List. The List does not include: (1) which generic
manufacturer made the request; (2) when and to whom the generic
manufacturer made the request (e.g., to a wholesaler or directly to the
NDA holder); (3) whether the generic manufacturer that made the inquiry
was thereafter able to obtain product; and (4) any reason(s) why a
generic manufacturer may not have been able to obtain product (e.g., a
recall). Finally, Pfizer notes that FDA does not currently inform an
NDA holder in real time when a generic manufacturer notifies the agency
that it is having difficulty obtaining product. Had the agency informed
Pfizer at the time it received the inquiries noted on the FDA List,
Pfizer could have then undertaken its own efforts to resolve the issue.
Pfizer communicated its concerns about the FDA List to the agency in
May 2018. For your information we have included Pfizer's letter to FDA
on this topic and the agency's response (see Exhibits 1 and 2 in the
Appendix).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ (https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandAp
proved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm).
There are three new drug applications owned by Pfizer on the FDA
List: Embeda (NDA 022321), Tikosyn (NDA 020931) and Hemabate (NDA
017989). Embeda offers a good example of the List's shortcomings.
Pfizer acquired King Pharmaceuticals (the previous NDA holder of
Embeda) in March 2011, and two weeks later determined that Embeda
needed to be recalled from the U.S. market due to stability issues.
After diligently addressing the issues that led to the recall, Pfizer
relaunched Embeda to the U.S. market in January 2015, and it is
available for purchase via Pfizer's authorized distributors. However,
one consequence of the recall was that Embeda was not available in the
U.S. market for almost 4 years which may explain why a generic
manufacturer had a problem obtaining it during those years. The FDA
List does not specify when the generic manufacturer's inquiry regarding
Embeda was made nor does the FDA List indicate that several generic
applications for Embeda had been submitted to FDA in 2010 (which means
that before the recall, several generic manufacturers were successfully
able to purchase Embeda, conduct the necessary testing, and file
Abbreviated New Drug Applications (ANDAs)). Pfizer has not identified
any recent inquiries from generic manufacturers seeking to purchase
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Embeda that have not been fulfilled.
The circumstances around Tikosyn also illustrate the List's
shortcomings. Pfizer was able to identify a single inquiry made by a
generic manufacturer directly to Pfizer to purchase Tikosyn in 2014. At
that time, Tikosyn was subject to an FDA imposed Risk Evaluation and
Mitigation Strategies (REMS) with Elements to Assure Safe Use
(``ETASU'') that restricted distribution, so Pfizer responded by asking
the manufacturer to obtain written confirmation from the FDA that
Pfizer's provision of the product to the generic manufacturer would not
be considered a violation of its REMS. The generic manufacturer did not
contact Pfizer further, and Pfizer never received any written
correspondence from the agency. FDA subsequently removed the REMS for
Tikosyn in 2016, and multiple generic versions of Tikosyn are now
approved, the first generic approval occurring in June 2016. This
context is not reflected in FDA's List.
Finally, with respect to Hemabate, this product was previously
subject to certain restrictions on distribution (i.e., it was sold only
to customers with medical and surgical intensive care centers) to
ensure its safe and appropriate use. This distribution approach was
established by the previous NDA holder (Pharmacia) and it continued
following Pfizer's acquisition of Pharmacia in 2003. Pfizer
discontinued this approach in early 2018 after determining that it was
no longer necessary, and this product is now available through our
authorized distributors. During the time when Hemabate was under
restricted distribution, it was not available at Pfizer's authorized
distributors, but had a generic manufacturer approached Pfizer's
Customer Service center directly, we would have been able to address
the inquiry. Pfizer's Customer Service was not able to identify any
specific requests from a generic manufacturer to purchase Hemabate that
have not been fulfilled.
We hope that this information explains the apparent discrepancy
between Mr. Bourla's testimony and the appearance of these Pfizer
products on the FDA List, and demonstrates Pfizer's diligence on these
issues and commitment to a competitive marketplace.
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' proposed
rule, ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates
Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees,'' envisions that drug manufacturers will offer up-front
discounts rather than the back-end rebates that are now commonly
provided. Some observers argue that a 1996 court case called into
question whether manufacturers could offer up-front discounts,
resulting in today's rebate-based system. I've heard differing opinions
as to whether the issues related to the initial court case are still
relevant. If the HHS proposed rule is finalized, can you assure the
committee that your company will offer up-front discounts? If not, why?
Answer. Yes, if finalized, price concessions negotiated with
intermediaries, including Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs) and plan
sponsors, will be provided as discounts that will be applied at the
point of sale. These discounts will lower patient out-of-pocket costs
since the net price will be used to determine the cost to the patient
when they are in the deductible, co-insurance, and coverage gap phases
of their benefits.
Question. Please describe how you expect your company to respond to
the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor protection for back-end
rebates in Medicare Part D that is referenced above if it is finalized.
Assuming you are confident that antitrust laws do not prevent your
company from offering up-front discounts, specifically, do you envision
that your company lowers the list price of a drug to the current after-
rebate net price, offer discounts equal to the current rebate amount,
or a combination of both?
Answer. If finalized, the rule will result in lower out-of-pocket
patient costs at the pharmacy counter and help address the perverse
incentives in the system that have been contributing to higher list
prices for medicines. We realize that the transition away from rebates
toward a point-of-sale discount model will result in a lowering of our
net prices. Despite this potential negative financial impact, we
support efforts to eliminate rebates because we believe the new model
will be good for patients.
As currently written, the proposed rule only applies to the
Medicare and Medicaid managed care segments of the market. It will be
important to have any rebate reform apply to both government programs
and the commercial market as that will also lead to a lowering of list
prices as well. A bifurcated market will make it more challenging for
manufacturers to reduce list price since the commercial market covers
more than 50 percent of Americans with insurance and represents over
half of the business for most manufacturers.
If the proposed rule is modified to apply to all market segments,
we would evaluate the best options to arrive at a net price that
ensures patients have access to our medicines. Decisions would be made
on a product by product basis given that each therapeutic class has its
own set of competitive and access dynamics. As such, we expect to use
both list price reductions and up-front discounts to achieve these
lower net prices. To ensure these benefits reach patients, it will be
important for Congress to ensure that plans do not create new barriers
or restrictions that hinder patient access and undermine the spirit of
the rule.
Question. To what extent are the back-end rebates your company
currently offers contingent on the amount of market share realized for
your drugs as a result of Part D plan formulary placement and other
techniques?
Answer. Pfizer's contracts with Part D Health Plans and PBMs
negotiating on their behalf do not make rebates contingent on market
share.
Question. Please provide a breakdown of percentage of sales that go
to each payer (including Medicare, Medicaid, private pay, other) and a
similar percentage by volume of the total number of each drug compared
to total volume. Please provide this data for the most recent year
available.
Answer. Pfizer's prescription pharmaceutical products are sold
principally to wholesalers, and therefore the Company does not have
sufficient visibility into wholesaler distribution at the channel level
to provide responses as requested. We welcome the opportunity to
discuss with your committee staff the confidential information
requested and what we maintain in the ordinary course of business.
Question. Do your companies hire consultants or lobbyists to
promote products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committees?
Answer. No.
Question. To whom do you disclose advocacy activities surrounding
State Medicaid programs, if at all?
Answer. Pfizer is committed to the principle of transparency--the
disclosure of activities reflecting participation in efforts of public
interest. These activities include such areas as funding for
educational activities, the status of Pfizer's U.S. pharmaceutical
post-marketing commitments, Pfizer's pipeline of experimental
medicines, the registration and reporting of results of clinical
trials, political contributions in the United States and payments to
U.S. health care professionals. The information we report includes
grants to support independent medical education, support for
fellowship, scholarship and visiting professorship programs, grants to
patient organizations, medical and scientific associations, and
academic or other medical centers, charitable contributions, health
care-related support to civic organizations and health care-related
non-promotional sponsorships to organizations. For descriptions of
types of support, please visit https://www.pfizer.com/purpose/
independent-grants/transparency-in-grants. Any Medicaid specific
advocacy funding we provide would be captured in these reports.
Question. Please describe how the costs of programs are accounted
for within your company's financial statements. Please also describe
the types of market information, such as prescribing and use patterns,
that your company collects from different types of patient assistance
programs and patient hub services.
Answer. Pfizer's patient assistance program is a charitable free
drug program that provides commercially available Pfizer medicines free
of charge to financially eligible uninsured and underinsured patients.
Separate from the Pfizer patient assistance program, Pfizer also offers
patient support programs, which are limited access reimbursement
support offerings to patients to assist with obtaining access to and
coverage of a prescribed Pfizer medicine.
The product and administrative costs for the patient assistance
program are charged against Pfizer's Selling, General and
Administrative Expenses line in the income statement.
Pfizer gathers data in the course of providing free drugs to
patients via the patient assistance program. We can bucket data
collection in several ways:
(1)
Transactional data--Utilized to determine patient
eligibility to receive free access to a physician-prescribed
therapy.
(2)
Operational data--The operational data is utilized to
provide free access to medicines to the eligible patient and
the following is reported at an aggregated level: (i) program
utilization trends; (ii) application processing trends; (iii)
patient coverage trends; (iv) channel utilization (distribution
versus pharmacy); (v) fulfillment and order processing days;
and (vi) call metrics.
Pfizer gathers the following two categories of data when providing
patient support programs:
(1)
Transactional--Utilized to assist in accessing prescribed
therapy and to determine insurance coverage for the patient.
This information contains data such as the outcome of a
benefits investigation, information to determine the financial
need and eligibility for patient support, and disposition of
the patient case (i.e., sent to a specialty pharmacy for
fulfillment, sent to Pfizer patient assistance program, triaged
to other financial options, or rejected/denied).
(2)
Operational--These fields could include primary and
secondary payers, out-of-pocket costs borne by the patient,
turnaround time to obtain insurance approval, prior
authorization requirements, number of cases requiring appeals,
and other data elements on access dynamics. In addition to
these elements, Pfizer will collect relevant adverse events as
required by Pfizer drug safety.
Question. Please provide a list of all contributions since January
1, 2014, that your company has made to any tax exempt organizations
working on issues related to drugs within your product lines, including
but not limited to patient groups, disease awareness groups, medical or
professional societies, universities or hospitals, industry
associations or leagues. For each contribution, please provide the name
of the organization that received the donation, the date the donation
was made, the amount of the donation, and a description of the purpose
of the contribution (i.e., was the contribution for the general fund, a
specific purpose to a specific program, or continuing medical
education). Please also note whether the contribution was unrestricted
or restricted; if it was restricted, please explain all restrictions.
Finally, if your company maintains a foundation or other separate
charitable arm, please provide the name of all such entities, and list
all donations made from that entity or entities.
Answer. Information about Pfizer's charitable giving is listed on
Pfizer.com. Please see the annual reports dating back to 2008 available
at https://www.pfizer.
com/purpose/independent-grants/transparency-in-grants, which include
the recipient name, the contribution amount and the annual quarter in
which it was made, and a description of the relevant program or
project. This data is updated each quarter. Data from Q4 2018 is
currently being analyzed and will be available at the end of March
2019. The annual reports include various funding types and recipient
types. However, in collating this data, Pfizer does not characterize
the organizations as working on issues related to drugs within product
lines, or contributions as restricted or unrestricted. Consequently,
the requested data is not available in that format.
Note that information regarding charitable contributions from the
Pfizer Foundation is not included in these reports, so Pfizer has
included a Pfizer Foundation Grant Summary as Exhibit 3. The Pfizer
Foundation has been working to expand health-care access to people
around the world for nearly 65 years. The impact of this work is
significant and far-reaching, helping underserved individuals from
diverse backgrounds in remote corners of the globe. Through the Pfizer
Foundation's global health strategy, we provide grant and investment
funding to support organizations and social entrepreneurs in an effort
to improve health care delivery in low-and middle-income countries and
increase access to health care for underserved communities.
Question. Pay for delay agreements cost consumers and taxpayers
billions in higher drug costs every year. The FTC has gone after drug
companies that enter into these settlements where the brand pays the
generic company to keep its lower cost alternative off the market. I'm
the lead Republican sponsor of S. 64, the ``Preserve Access to
Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act,'' which would help put an end
to these deals.
Do you agree that these pay-off agreements keep drug costs high for
patients because they delay competition?
Answer. Pfizer wants to work with you on this issue because we
agree that gaming the patent system is unacceptable. The company's
patent settlements do not involve ``pay for delay.'' On the contrary,
when Pfizer settles patent litigation with generic firms, it does so on
terms that generally enable entry of generic competition earlier than
the expiration of its patents and that do not involve unlawful reverse
payments. Pfizer's patent settlements thus involve lawful compromises
that accelerate patient access to lower cost generics relative to the
expiration of its patents.
Question. Has your company ever entered into these kinds of
settlements with a generic company?
Answer. No. On the contrary, when Pfizer settles patent litigation
with generic firms, it does so on terms that generally enable entry of
generic competition earlier than the expiration of its patents and that
do not involve unlawful reverse payments. Pfizer's patent settlements
thus involve lawful compromises that appropriately resolve patent
disputes and accelerate patient access to lower cost generics relative
to the expiration of its patents. While Pfizer has been the target of
plaintiff lawyer driven class action lawsuits challenging certain of
its settlements with generic companies, we believe these lawsuits are
without merit and are vigorously asserting the pro-competitive nature
of these settlements in court.
Question. Do you support the pay for delay bill?
Answer. Pfizer agrees that gaming the patent system is
unacceptable. We hope to work with you on legislation that prohibits
anticompetitive patent settlements that is prospective, clearly defines
violations and what is deemed to be an improper settlement and does not
presume all patent settlement agreements are per se illegal and
anticompetitive. Laws or actions to restrict certain kinds of
pharmaceutical patent settlements could prevent some pro-consumer
settlements that bring generics to market prior to patent expiration--
patent settlements often include an agreement that enables generics to
enter the market earlier than the date of patent expiration, speeding
patient access to more affordable generic options.
rebate traps/walls
Question. I'm increasingly concerned about the effect of so-called
``rebate traps'' or ``rebate walls'' on patients' access to quality,
lower cost medicine. I understand there is ongoing litigation
challenging these practices as anti-competitive.
Does your company engage in the bundling of rebates over multiple
products? If so, why? And what benefit does the consumer gain from
that?
Answer. Pfizer does currently bundle rebates over multiple
products. Pfizer does offer bundling arrangements to obtain formulary
positions that allow patients to access our medicines that otherwise
might be restricted.
Question. Does your company view these practices as anticompetitive
or harmful to patients' access to quality, lower cost medicine?
Answer. Pfizer does not believe bundling is inherently
anticompetitive and in certain circumstances can be procompetitive.
However, Pfizer does not tie bundled rebates to blocking lower cost
competitive agents and believes that when a firm with monopoly power
uses such practices to block lower cost alternatives the conduct is
anticompetitive.
Question. If a policy were adopted to eliminate rebates, or to
require that rebate savings be passed on to the consumer, would that in
and of itself solve the issue of rebate ``traps'' and ``walls''? And
would consumers benefit from such a policy?
Answer. A policy that moves rebates to discounts would not in and
of itself eliminate the ability of a market leader to block a lower
priced medicine. In both Medicare and commercial, the Health Plan is
still responsible for the majority of the drug cost and would therefore
receive the majority of the discount. The Health Plan or PBM would
still need to transition patients from the higher priced market leader
to the lower priced product in order to realize the savings from the
discount. Based on internal analysis, Pfizer expects that moving from a
rebate to a discount model will weaken a market leader's ability to
restrict other less expensive products, but it would not eliminate the
possibility.
drug pricing
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider regulatory costs or compliance? If so, how specifically do
those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least
one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. The Food and Drug Administration is the primary regulatory
body for the pharmaceutical industry and is largely focused on the
safety, quality, and efficacy of medicines. The price of a new medicine
is most directly influenced by the value that the medicine may bring to
patients and society. Inherent in the value any product Pfizer brings
to the market are the quality, safety, delivery, efficacy, and
reliability of our medicines. These regulatory and compliance factors
are part of the underlying investments to identify a product's value
and are amongst the many factors we consider when we determine a launch
price or make a decision to change a price.
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider the risk of liability or litigation? If so, how specifically
do those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at
least one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. Liability and litigation are not primary considerations
when setting the list price of a medicine; the value that a product may
bring to patients and society is the most important factor considered.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. What role do you see value-based agreements (VBAs)
playing in the effort to reduce prescription drug costs? What potential
do these arrangements have to find the ``sweet spot'' between
controlling costs to patients and encouraging innovation of new drugs?
Answer. Value-based agreements (VBA) provide a framework for
manufacturers to be compensated based on a product's value to patients
and the overall health-care system. Although there are different
constructs for VBAs, the basic premise is that the net price for a
product will ultimately be derived based on an agreed upon performance
metric (e.g., clinical, financial, adherence, etc.). Therefore, VBAs
can play a role in reducing prescription drug costs by ensuring that
net prices are linked to value.
As we shift to a system that rewards value, manufacturers will be
incentivized to focus research and development (R&D) investments in
disease areas where there are unmet needs, to focus on best in class or
first in class medicines, and to design trials that provide the
necessary evidence to demonstrate the value of a medicine beyond the
regulatory standards of safety and efficacy to include the evidence to
support reimbursement. If manufacturers deliver medicines of value, the
system will reward the manufacturer which encourages innovation of new
drugs.
Question. How can VBAs help lower what patients pay out-of-pocket?
Answer. Value-based agreements (VBA) provide a framework for
manufacturers to be compensated based on a product's value to patients
and the overall health-care system. There are many different types of
VBAs including those based on clinical and/or financial performance
metrics for a product. Based on the outcomes achieved, payers use this
information to inform how they cover products. Products that perform
better should be covered in a more favorable manner which often
includes lower out-of-pockets costs for patients which is a benefit to
patients in the near term. In the long term, patients can also benefit
from other savings either directly, (e.g., reducing spending on other
medications, lowering medical costs from reduced hospitalizations,
doctor's visits, etc.), or indirectly through lower premiums based on
reductions in total cost of care.
Question. Can Congress do more to allow for and encourage the use
of VBAs?
Answer. VBAs are in the very early stages of development in the
United States. Many payers and manufacturers have tested different
concepts, but to date VBAs have not achieved scale. There are multiple
reasons why VBAs represent a small fraction of manufacturer/payer
contracts (e.g., access to data, difficult and costly to administer,
etc.). There are certain aspects of the current U.S. regulatory
landscape that are perceived by many as not only complicating VBA
implementation but in some cases limiting their rapid uptake.
Stakeholders have frequently identified two key regulatory hurdles as
limiting the expanded adoption of VBAs: (i) the Anti-Kickback Statute
and (ii) the Medicaid Best Price calculation requirement. While these
regulations serve important roles within the current volume-based
reimbursement system they do not contemplate innovative value-based
arrangements which have resulted in a lack of clarity on how to account
for these under the current regulatory framework. Ultimately, an
expansion of VBAs will require reforms to existing regulations that
enable more flexibility in designing VBAs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Michael B. Enzi
Question. More than 10 years ago, I worked on a bipartisan basis
with my good friends Ted Kennedy and Orrin Hatch to develop a
biosimilars approval pathway. One of the difficult things was
accounting for the differences between biosimilars and generics. I have
said before that if a drug was a three-bedroom, two-bath home, a
biologic would be a skyscraper. The size and complexity of the items
are just that different. I understand that it is much harder to build a
skyscraper without blueprints than a house. Even though the science has
come a long way since then, there aren't as many biosimilars on the
market as we might have hoped. Do you think the incentives in the law
appropriately account for the differences between biosimilars and
generics?
Answer. The Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act (BPCIA)
created an abbreviated pathway for the licensure of biosimilars,
including interchangeable biologic products, and created the framework
biosimilar applicants and reference product sponsors use to resolve
patent disputes. There are currently seven biosimilars on the market in
the United States, and there are a number of biosimilars currently in
development. The FDA has approved a total of 18 biosimilars to date.
Nevertheless, the success of the BPCIA lies in the increased use of
these products, which will provide savings to both the patient and the
taxpayer.
To date, there have been two key policies that have helped support
the biosimilars marketplace: 340B pass-through status for biosimilars
and the separate billing/J code policy for biosimilars.
The separate billing/J code policy for biosimilars has aided in the
prompt reimbursement of biosimilars for physicians, which is critical
in supporting uptake of biosimilars. The separate billing/J code also
provides Congress and CMS with transparency on the average sales price
of the biosimilar versus the reference biologic. Below is a table
outlining the latest Medicare published average sales prices for the
reference biologic Remicade and both of the biosimilars on the market
for Remicade, Pfizer's Inflectra and Merck's Renflexis.\2\ It is
important to note that the average sales price (ASP) for both
biosimilars is lower than the ASP of the reference biologic. Yet, the
market share of the Inflectra biosimilar remains at 6 percent in open
systems (which excludes the VA and Kaiser, which are closed systems
where the insurer is the payer, the prescriber and the provider).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Part-B-
Drugs/McrPartBDrugAvg
SalesPrice/2019ASPFiles.html.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Q4 2018 CMS
Q1 2019 CMS
Q2 2019 CMS
HCPCS Code
ASP
ASP
ASP
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Remicade (reference
J1745
$743.71
$723.10
$677.60
biologic)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inflectra
Q5103
$569.01
$529.37
$502.72
(biosimilar)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Renflexis
Q5104
$599.20
$575.64
$552.00
(biosimilar)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 340B pass-through policy for biosimilars has been another
positive policy to support uptake of biosimilars in 340B hospitals. The
340B pass-through policy provides a temporary ``level playing field''
for the biosimilar and the reference biologic. Under the reimbursement
model of ASP + x%, providers are incentivized to use a higher cost
product to drive a higher ``+ x%'' reimbursement. As in the case of
biosimilars, when the biosimilar has a lower ASP the reimbursement is
lower to the health-care provider/340B hospital. The pass-through
policy provides temporary reimbursement parity for lower cost
biosimilars. This policy has encouraged 340B hospitals to adopt
biosimilars and gain experience and confidence in using them.
Despite these current policies, other adverse incentives that favor
higher-cost originator biologics are keeping biosimilars from reaching
patients. In many cases, payers decline to include lower-cost
biosimilars or generics in their formularies because they would risk
losing the rebates they could receive by covering higher-cost
medicines.
Question. I know there are proposals to essentially pay more for
biosimilars to make them more attractive, but that is not exactly what
we were intending when we wrote the law. Can you talk about adverse
incentives in the market and any barriers to market penetration that we
might address to help improve patient access to these lower cost
products?
Answer. Ninety percent of the medicines Americans take are generics
and competition from these drugs keeps prices low in most cases. The
biologics market, where some of the most expensive drugs exist, needs
similar competition. The market today has already seen demonstrated
savings as high as 40 percent relative to the branded product. In
Europe, biosimilars have obtained a market share of over 60 percent on
some products. However, in the United States, our biosimilar,
Inflectra, has captured only 6 percent, despite the fact that its
average selling price (ASP) is more than 25 percent lower than the
originator product. With more competition, Pfizer hopes even further
savings can be realized. We believe some of the adverse incentives and
barriers to market penetration include:
1.
The Rebate Trap: Brand-name biologic companies are using
maneuvers to block biosimilar competition such as higher
rebates and exclusionary contracts.
2.
Misinformation: We believe that some physician and patient-
directed materials created by brand companies mischaracterize
biosimilars, creating doubt and confusion about the safety and
efficacy of biosimilars. As defined by statute, an approved
biosimilar must be highly similar to and have no clinically
meaningful differences from the reference product and must have
the same mechanism of action (to the extent the mechanism(s) of
action of the reference product are known) as the reference
product. Thus, by definition, biosimilars are safe and
efficacious treatments relative to the reference product and
must work in the same way as the reference product. Any
information disseminated by reference product sponsors to
suggest or imply otherwise should be promptly addressed by the
FDA.
3.
Need for incentives: Legislative ideas to promote
biosimilar uptake could include a shared savings biosimilar
model; reduced patient cost sharing for biosimilars.
Although the biosimilar market in the United States is still
relatively new, Pfizer's experience has been that
anticompetitive conduct by brand-name biologic manufacturers,
combined with the lack of policy measures to support
appropriate uptake of biosimilars, have contributed to a slow
uptake. Therefore, we encourage you to consider measures to
help incentivize the use of biosimilars, which can
substantially lower Medicare costs with demonstrated savings to
date as high as nearly 40 percent relative to the branded
biologic.
In addition to stopping anticompetitive behavior (either
through government enforcement or in the courts through private
litigation), some key policy initiatives we believe will
support the uptake of biosimilars in the United States include:

Waiver of Part B Patient Coinsurance for Biosimilars for a
certain period of time. CMS should waive Part B patient
coinsurance amounts for biosimilars. Cost-sharing changes could
be applied at the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System
(HCPCS) level. This would not change the overall payment for a
biosimilar; however, it would change the beneficiary's payment
percentage.

CMS should pursue a CMMI model designed to increase access
to biosimilars, including a ``shared savings'' model whereby
Medicare savings associated with prescribing a biosimilar, as
compared to a reference biological, would be shared with
providers.

CMS should maintain the current biosimilar pass-through
status as this provides biosimilars with a ``level playing
field'' with their higher priced reference biologic
competitors.

CMS should create payment incentives for plans by
contracting with a measure developer for a biosimilar use
measure for the STARS program, which would correct other
adverse incentives for biosimilar uptake for Medicare Advantage
plans.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. We continue to hear that rebates negotiated off of the
list price of a drug are both good and bad.
Pharmacy benefit managers and plans have argued that rebates are
used to lower premiums across the board and that it is the best way to
seek a price concession on otherwise expensive drugs.
Your industry argues that these payers are insisting on higher
rebates that can only be achieved by raising list prices.
But patients often lose under this system, with out of pocket costs
being tied to list price. Insulin patients appear to be routinely
impacted by this perversity in the system.
Please explain to the committee how your company would reduce list
prices if rebates were no longer a part of the equation?
Answer. If finalized, the rule would result in lower out-of-pocket
patient costs at the pharmacy counter and help address the perverse
incentives in the system that have been contributing to higher list
prices for medicines.
In 2019, Pfizer expects to pay billions of dollars in rebates to
ensure patients with pharmacy benefits coverage in Medicare Part D and
patients in commercial plans have access to our medicines. If the
proposed rule to share rebates with consumers at the point of sale is
finalized, we estimate that seniors taking Pfizer medicines could save
$270 on average per year, and up to $574 per year for certain Pfizer
medicines, through lower cost sharing--and that would outweigh any
premium increases.
As currently written, the proposed rule only applies to the
Medicare and Medicaid managed care segments of the market. It will be
important to have rebate reform changes apply to both government
programs and the commercial market. A bifurcated market will make it
more challenging for manufacturers to reduce list price since the
commercial market covers more than 50 percent of Americans with
insurance and represents over half of the business for most
manufacturers.
If the proposed reform is modified to apply to all market segments,
we would evaluate the best options to arrive at a net price that
ensures patients have access to our medicines. Decisions would be made
on a product by product basis given that each therapeutic class has its
own set of competitive and access dynamics.
Question. What assurance can you provide that you would in fact
lower your prices?
Answer. If the rule is finalized consistent with the aforementioned
concerns, Pfizer is confident patients will benefit from savings of any
price concessions at the point of sale.
Question. What actions should be taken to ensure that patients are
actually seeing the benefits of lower out of pocket costs?
Answer. We strongly support ensuring that patients receive the
benefit of rebates at the pharmacy counter and look forward to working
with Congress and HHS on this issue. We encourage Congress to ensure
that plans do not impose new barriers or restrictions to access that
undermine the spirit of the rule and prevent patients from benefiting
from the savings.
Question. If rebates are driving high list prices for drugs as drug
manufacturers' claim, why do you think that Part B drugs, which have no
PBM rebates, are also seeing significant price increases? Whose fault
is that?
There are rebates involved with infusion medicines (Medicare Part B
drugs), and Pfizer is willing to engage with your staff in general
terms to explain the relationship and negotiations between
manufacturers and payers such as insurers and PBMs for drugs in this
space.
Pfizer also believes there are other ways to reform the Part B
payment system to move away from incentivizing the use of more costly
drugs. One solution we support for reforming Part B is a Competitive
Acquisition Program (CAP) to allow vendors to deliver and bill Medicare
for drugs, starting in a few cities. We believe this will inject
competition into the program.
Biosimilars are another solution. Pfizer is fully committed to the
goals set by Congress to bring new biosimilars to market, ensuring that
patients have access to a wide range of treatment options at a
competitive, affordable price. The market today has already seen
demonstrated savings as high as 40 percent relative to the branded
product. With more competition, we hope even further savings can be
realized.
rebate traps
Question. Pfizer's biosimilar to Janssen's Remicade has struggled
to gain market share, despite being priced at a significant discount to
the biologic.
Please explain the market challenges you are seeing with this
product. How does the practice of drug companies ``bundling'' the
prices of product portfolios and rebates associated with these drugs
limit competition and access to lower-cost biosimilars?
Answer. As more fully laid out in Exhibit 4, the primary barrier to
Inflectra's uptake is an anticompetitive contracting scheme that
targets both the payer (i.e., insurer) channel and the health-care
provider (i.e., hospitals, clinics and doctors) channel. The
centerpiece of the scheme is the ``rebate trap'' that uses pricing
penalties (i.e., the loss of significant rebates) to coerce insurers to
enter into exclusive deals that cover Remicade while effectively
blocking Inflectra from coverage. Multi-
product bundling is just one aspect of the conduct. Despite bringing a
lower-cost version of Remicade to market, this biosimilar has captured
less than 10 percent of the market.
Question. Do you attribute this to exclusionary contracts or
``paying for position'' to keep your product off formularies? Please
explain this practice and how it keeps lower-cost drugs out of the
hands of patients.
Answer. Pfizer attributes low uptake to an anticompetitive
contracting scheme as described above in response to Question 1.
This is particularly concerning not only because of the direct
impact regarding the health-care system's spend, but also because it
could become the playbook by which innovator biologics thwart entry by
biosimilars in the future. This could inhibit significant competition
to biologics going forward and act as a disincentive for companies to
invest in developing biosimilars.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines
Question. As an advocate for improving Montanans' access to low-
cost medications, I've been a champion of the Creating and Restoring
Equal Access to Equivalent Samples (CREATES) Act, which would combat
anticompetitive practices used by some brand-name pharmaceutical
companies to block or delay competing generic drugs from entering the
market.
During the hearing when I asked if your company had ever withheld
samples from generic manufacturers, you answered emphatically no. Yet,
according to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), generic drug
makers have made inquiries with the agency claiming they were unable to
access samples provided by Pfizer and AstraZeneca that are needed to
conduct studies to produce low-cost generic drugs.
Do you agree that denying generic drug manufacturers access to
samples keeps drug costs high for patients due to lack of competition?
Has your company refused to sell samples or placed any barriers in
the way of generic drug makers acquiring samples?
Are you aware of any outstanding requests for samples?
How does your company work to prevent abuses in the sample system?
Answer. As a patient-focused company and leading manufacturer of
innovative, generic, and biosimilar medicines, Pfizer supports
innovation and a strong, competitive marketplace. Consistent with these
values, Pfizer does not block generic manufacturers from purchasing our
products, and it has never been our policy to do so. Generic
manufacturers are treated the same as any other customer seeking to
purchase our products. Pfizer is not aware of any current, unfulfilled
requests from a generic manufacturer to purchase a Pfizer product.
Generic manufacturers seeking to purchase Pfizer products should
request the product from Pfizer's authorized distributors or, if the
product is not available at a distributor, from Pfizer directly, the
same as any other Pfizer customers. Pfizer's website includes a list of
our authorized distributors, from which customers (including generic
companies) may purchase most Pfizer products (see https://www.
pfizer.com/products/medicine-distributors). For products that are not
available via our authorized distributors and that are not in extreme
drug shortage or unavailable due to a recall, customers can contact
Pfizer's Customer Service center at 1-800-TRY-FIRST (1-800-879-3477) to
purchase product directly from Pfizer. The telephone number for
Pfizer's Customer Service center is also included on our website at
https://www.pfizer.com/contact. Pfizer makes its products available for
sale to appropriately licensed entities at Pfizer's listed price and on
Pfizer's standard terms of sale. We do not have any agreements with
authorized distributors that block the sale of Pfizer's products to
generic manufacturers.
Regarding the FDA List (the List), while Pfizer supports FDA's (the
agency) goal of providing transparency, Pfizer is concerned that the
List lacks certain key information and context and, as currently
presented, may create the misleading impression that all products on
the List are the result of bad faith attempts to block generic
manufacturer access to samples. The appearance of a product on the FDA
List means only that a generic manufacturer informed the agency at some
point in time that it was having difficulty purchasing the listed
product. FDA's own disclaimer states that the agency has not
independently investigated or confirmed whether a generic manufacturer
actually made a request to purchase product, and to whom.\3\ The FDA
List also lacks several important pieces of information that would
enable a New Drug Application (NDA) holder to investigate its
appearance on the List. The List does not include: (1) which generic
manufacturer made the request; (2) when and to whom the generic
manufacturer made the request (e.g., to a wholesaler, directly to the
NDA holder); (3) whether the generic manufacturer that made the inquiry
was thereafter able to obtain product; and (4) any reason(s) why a
generic manufacturer may not have been able to obtain product (e.g., a
recall). Finally, Pfizer notes that FDA does not currently inform an
NDA holder in real time when a generic manufacturer notifies the agency
that it is having difficulty obtaining product. Had the agency informed
Pfizer at the time it received the inquiries noted on the FDA List,
Pfizer could have then undertaken its own efforts to resolve the issue.
Pfizer communicated its concerns about the FDA List to the agency in
May 2018. For your information we have included Pfizer's letter to FDA
on this topic and the agency's response (see Exhibits 1 and 2 in the
Appendix).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ (https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandAp
proved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm).
There are three new drug applications owned by Pfizer on the FDA
List: Embeda (NDA 022321), Tikosyn (NDA 020931) and Hemabate (NDA
017989). Embeda offers a good example of the List's shortcomings.
Pfizer acquired King Pharmaceuticals (the previous NDA holder of
Embeda) in March 2011, and two weeks later determined that Embeda
needed to be recalled from the U.S. market due to stability issues.
After diligently addressing the issues that led to the recall, Pfizer
relaunched Embeda to the U.S. market in January 2015, and it is
available for purchase via Pfizer's authorized distributors. However,
one consequence of the recall, was that Embeda was not available in the
U.S. market for almost 4 years which may explain why a generic
manufacturer had a problem obtaining it during those years. The FDA
List does not specify when the generic manufacturer's inquiry regarding
Embeda was made nor does the FDA List indicate that several generic
applications for Embeda had been submitted to FDA in 2010 (which means
that before the recall, several generic manufacturers were successfully
able to purchase Embeda, conduct the necessary testing, and file
Abbreviated New Drug Applications (ANDAs)). Pfizer has not identified
any recent inquiries from generic manufacturers seeking to purchase
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Embeda that have not been fulfilled.
The circumstances around Tikosyn also illustrate the List's
shortcomings. Pfizer was able to identify a single inquiry made by a
generic manufacturer directly to Pfizer to purchase Tikosyn in 2014. At
that time, Tikosyn was subject to an FDA imposed Risk Evaluation and
Mitigation Strategies (REMS) with Elements to Assure Safe Use
(``ETASU'') that restricted distribution, so Pfizer responded by asking
the manufacturer to obtain written confirmation from the FDA that
Pfizer's provision of the product to the generic manufacturer would not
be considered a violation of its REMS. The generic manufacturer did not
contact Pfizer further, and Pfizer never received any written
correspondence from the agency. FDA subsequently removed the REMS for
Tikosyn in 2016, and multiple generic versions of Tikosyn are now
approved, the first generic approval occurring in June 2016. This
context is not reflected in FDA's List.
Finally, with respect to Hemabate, this product was previously
subject to certain restrictions on distribution (i.e., it was sold only
to customers with medical and surgical intensive care centers) to
ensure its safe and appropriate use. This distribution approach was
established by the previous NDA holder (Pharmacia) and it continued
following Pfizer's acquisition of Pharmacia in 2003. Pfizer
discontinued this approach in early 2018 after determining that it was
no longer necessary, and this product is now available through our
authorized distributors. During the time when Hemabate was under
restricted distribution, it was not available at Pfizer's authorized
distributors, but had a generic manufacturer approached Pfizer's
Customer Service center directly, we would have been able to address
the inquiry. Pfizer's Customer Service was not able to identify any
specific requests from a generic manufacturer to purchase Hemabate that
have not been fulfilled.
We hope that this information explains the apparent discrepancy
between Mr. Bourla's testimony and the appearance of these Pfizer
products on the FDA List, and demonstrates Pfizer's diligence on these
issues and commitment to a competitive marketplace.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
re-evaluating business strategies in foreign countries
Question. Since taking office, President Trump has made reducing
drug prices one of his highest priorities--and has repeatedly spoken
about his frustration with the U.S. subsidizing the costs of
pharmaceuticals for the rest of the world. He has gone so far as to
issue proposals, like the International Pricing Index (IPI) Model, in
an attempt to bring down prescription drug prices.
With the increased scrutiny of the industry and of the drug supply
chain as a whole in the United States, have any of your companies re-
evaluated your business strategy in foreign countries?
Answer. Pfizer's purpose is breakthroughs that change patients'
lives; all aspects of Pfizer's business model are infused with this
purpose. It is Pfizer's priority to make our medicines and vaccines
available and accessible to all patients who need them, regardless of
where they live.
Proposals to implement international reference pricing for the U.S.
market would have far-reaching consequences to patient access,
innovation and our business strategies both in the United States and in
foreign countries.
If the United States were to implement the proposed International
Price Indexing (IPI) model, we believe that a change of this scale
could be very disruptive, challenging our ability to reach patients
both inside and outside of the United States in a timely manner while
fulfilling commitments to our shareholders and further investing in
R&D.
Question. If not, then why?
Answer. Pfizer agrees that more must be done to address foreign
pricing differentials. We want to continue to work with policymakers on
solutions to ensure other countries appropriately recognize the value
of innovation. Pfizer supports the concept of ``shared value for
innovation'' because it promotes global fairness. This means that all
nations recognize the importance and benefits of medicines to patients
and society and the significant investments required to develop them,
and that all patients should benefit, no matter where they live.
If foreign countries were to increase their support for shared
value for innovation, American patients would benefit based on
increased innovation, drug launches, competition and more access to new
medicines.
Question. If a proposal, like IPI, were implemented, would it force
your companies to potentially ``walk away from the negotiating table
when other countries demand low prices subsidized by America's
seniors,'' as HHS Senior Advisor for Drug Pricing Reform John O'Brien
has said?
Answer. While the IPI could lead to potential situations in which a
company would ``walk away'' as noted by John O'Brien, pricing is not
the only determinant of reimbursement negotiations in foreign
countries, many of which employ access controls, restricting patients'
ability to receive new innovative medicines.
We have concerns with the IPI model. The use of reference pricing
is strongly associated with market and patient access delays in
countries that have adopted reference pricing, among other cost-
containment mechanisms. Pfizer works with governments and health
systems around the world to support patients' access to the medicines
they need. We strongly believe that flexibility in our ability to set
global prices improves access to medicines.
Question. What are some of your ideas on how we can ensure
Americans aren't shouldering the full cost of pharmaceuticals?
Answer. Pfizer believes that developed countries have an important
role to play in supporting global innovation ecosystems. As such, we
would encourage the United States Government to continue to elevate the
innovation agenda in multilateral discussions, with an emphasis on
rewarding innovation in health-care delivery, science policy and
pharmaceutical breakthroughs (e.g., through the G7). U.S. trade
negotiations, such as those with Japan, also provide important
opportunities for the United States to secure robust commitments that
ensure countries protect intellectual property, provide fair market
access for U.S. companies, and appropriately recognize the value of
innovation.
Pfizer also believes that there are other ways to reform the Part B
payment system to move away from incentivizing the use of more costly
drugs. One solution we support for reforming Part B is a Competitive
Acquisition Program (CAP) to allow vendors to deliver and bill Medicare
for drugs, starting in a few cities. We believe this will inject
competition into the program.
Biosimilars are another solution. Pfizer is fully committed to the
goals set by Congress to bring new biosimilars to market, ensuring that
patients have access to a wide range of treatment options at a
competitive, affordable price. The market today has already seen
demonstrated savings as high as 40 percent relative to the branded
product. With more competition, Pfizer hopes even further savings can
be realized.
foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
Question. President Trump and Secretary Azar have both repeatedly
described their frustrations with ``foreign freeloading'' of U.S. drugs
in the last year.
``When foreign governments extort unreasonably low prices from U.S.
drug makers, Americans have to pay more to subsidize the enormous cost
of research and development. . . . It's unfair and it's ridiculous, and
it's not going to happen any longer.''
Do you agree that because of foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems, U.S. patients and innovators are shouldering the
burden for financing medical advances?
Answer. Pfizer agrees that more must be done to address foreign
pricing differentials. Wealthy countries should reimburse innovative
medicines based on fair value. As stated above, ``foreign free-
loading'' has a significant impact on the U.S. biopharmaceutical
industry's investments in continued innovation. If the United States
secures agreements that ensure countries protect intellectual property,
provide fair market access for U.S. companies, and appropriately
recognize the value of innovation, this will help ensure U.S. patients
continue to have access to innovative medicines.
Question. How do foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
systems affect our prescription drug costs?
Answer. The U.S. health-care system offers patients more choice and
faster availability of innovative medicines. While government-run
health systems aim to provide care to their people, they are often
challenged to provide fast and easy access to the latest innovations.
These governments often have to make choices between paying for health
care and other government priorities.
The United States allows companies and providers to set prices that
reflect the benefits to patients and societies. This includes ensuring
that health-care professionals and patients have choices for
individualized care, that there is competition among companies, and
that their expectations for access to the latest medical advances are
met.
Some developed countries rely on price controls and other
government regulations to set the prices of health care, including
medicines. This may result in some lower prices but can also result in
restrictions on who is eligible to receive a covered medicine. A recent
op-ed in The Wall Street Journal pointed out that of the 45 new drugs
that FDA approved in 2015, all were covered by Medicare in the United
States in 2017, but only 19 in France, 13 in Canada and 11 in
Australia.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-to-reduce-prescription-drug-
prices-first-do-no-harm-1155
0100537.
However, prices are not always higher in the United States. Nine
out of ten drugs that patients pick up at the pharmacy are generics,
and these drugs are less expensive than they are in Europe, Japan,
China or many countries around the world. The U.S. system is the most
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
efficient system for delivering lower-cost generics to patients.
Pfizer supports the concept of ``shared value for innovation''
because it promotes global fairness. This means that all nations
recognize the importance and benefits of medicines to patients and
society and the significant investments required to develop them, and
that all patients should benefit, no matter where they live.
If foreign countries were to increase their support for shared
value for innovation, American patients would benefit based on
increased innovation, drug launches, competition and more access to new
medicines.
Question. Are foreign governments taking note of the concerns being
raised by the Trump administration and have they responded in any way?
Answer. Pfizer believes that other governments are indeed taking
note of the administration's focus on health-care spending.
Question. Has there been any noticeable change in any of our trade
agreements since these concerns have been raised by the Trump
administration?
Answer. The Trump administration recently signed the U.S.-Mexico-
Canada Agreement (USMCA), which includes important commitments that
will help companies like Pfizer continue to innovate to bring new
therapies to patients. For example, the agreement includes a commitment
to provide 10 years of regulatory data protection for biologics. This
commitment had not been included in any trade agreement negotiated
prior to USMCA and is an important achievement. The Trump
administration is also pursuing new bilateral trade negotiations with
Japan, the EU, and the UK; because the negotiations have not yet
concluded, however, it is premature to comment on how those agreements
may compare to other U.S. trade deals.
medicaid closed formulary proposals
Question. In an attempt to bring down drug costs, various States
have been exploring whether to exclude certain drugs from its Medicaid
program. For example, the State of Massachusetts' recently asked CMS
for permission to create a closed formulary where the State Medicaid
program would pick at least one drug per therapeutic class. CMS denied
their waiver request citing violation of Federal law, but this proposal
does bring up important questions on how to contain drug prices in
State Medicaid programs.
If the principles of the Medicare Part D program--including the
necessary patient protections--were applied to State Medicaid programs,
do you think it lower drugs costs while ensuring access to patients?
Answer. Pfizer supports efforts to ensure patients have access to
medicines. Studies suggest that allowing more choice of medications has
positive results for patients: lowering the chances of drug
interactions and adverse events and increasing the efficacy of
treatment.\5\ Years of research have also shown that limiting
formularies correlates to poor medication adherence outcomes.\6\
Studies featuring Medicaid recipients with severe health conditions
indicate that in many instances, these restrictions can result in
negative health outcomes and other outcomes (such as increased
incarceration rates) without generating program savings or other
intended benefits (and sometimes increasing overall State costs).\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See, e.g., DiMasi, ``Competitiveness in follow-on drug R&D: a
race or imitation?'', 10 Nat. Rev. Discov. 23-27 (Jan. 2011); Turner
et. al, ``Parsing Interindividual Drug Variability: An Emerging Role
for Systems Pharmacology,'' Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med.
221-41 (2015); Mullins et. al, ``Persistence, Switching, and
Discontinuation Rates Among Patients Receiving Sertraline, Paroxetine,
and Citalopram,'' 25 Pharmacotherapy 660-67 (2005).
\6\ See, e.g., Happe et. al, ``A Systematic Literature Review
Assessing the Directional Impact of Managed Care Formulary Restrictions
on Medication Adherence, Clinical Outcomes, Economic Outcomes, and
Health Care Resource Utilization,'' 20 Manag. Care Spec. Pharm. 677-84
(2014).
\7\ See, e.g., U.S.C. Schaffer, ``Medicaid Access Restrictions on
Psychiatric Drugs: Penny-Wise or Pound Foolish?'', (Feb. 2015), http://
healthpolicy.usc.edu/documents/USC%20Issue%20Brief
%20No.%202%20Final.pdf (indicating increased incarceration rates
associated with certain access restrictions); Lu, et. al, ``Unintended
Impacts of a Medicaid Prior Authorization Policy on Access to
Medications for Bipolar Illness,'' 48 Medical Care 4 (Jan. 2010)
(finding that while a prior authorization policy in Maine Medicaid was
associated with a marked decrease in rates of initiation of bipolar
treatments associated with reduction in initiation of nonpreferred
agents, the policy had no discernable impact on rates of switching
therapy among patients currently on treatment); Farley, et al.,
``Retrospective Assessment of Medicaid Step-Therapy Prior Authorization
Policy for Atypical Antipsychotic Medications,'' 30 Clinical
Therapeutics 1524 (April 2008) (showing, for a group of Medicaid
patients with schizophrenia who were subject to a prior authorization
policy for atypical antipsychotic medications, significant increases in
per member per month outpatient expenditures far exceeded the
associated savings in atypical antipsychotic expenditures).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
medicaid ``best price''
Question. In the Trump administration's Blueprint, they suggested
that because drug manufactures have to give Medicaid the ``best price''
on drugs, there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers--both government and commercial--than what is already offered
under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Does the Medicaid ``best price'' requirement encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices?
Answer. Medicaid Best Price is not a factor in setting our launch
prices.
Question. What, if any, changes would you suggest we make to the
program?
Answer. Pfizer encourages HHS to consider how to address the
challenges that Medicaid Best Price poses for value-based agreement
(VBAs). Specifically, we recommend that:

To allow for innovative approaches and risk sharing, a poor
outcome should not set a new price for Medicaid. This would
allow manufacturers to share more risk with commercial health
plans.

Approaches to reporting VBAs should be as simple as
possible. This would help avoid creating operational challenges
for companies that may prevent development of innovative
approaches.

Manufacturers should continue to have flexibility to make
reasonable assumptions in their price reporting, so that
reporting approaches can evolve to reflect changes in the
dynamic market and contracting environment.
outcomes-based contracts
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you highlight your
support of outcomes-based contracts and how we need to be shifting our
system toward that approach.
How will these contracts lower drug costs for patients in both the
near term and long-term?
Answer. Value-based agreements (VBA) provide a framework for paying
for medicines based on their value to patients and the overall health-
care system. There are many different types of VBAs including those
based on clinical and/or financial performance metrics for a product.
Based on the outcomes achieved, payers use this information to inform
how they cover products. Products that perform better should be covered
in a more favorable manner which often includes lower out-of-pockets
costs for patients which is a benefit to patients in the near term. In
the long term, patients can also benefit from other savings either
directly, (e.g., reducing spending on other medications, lowering
medical costs from reduced hospitalizations, doctor's visits, etc.), or
indirectly through lower premiums based on reductions in total cost of
care.
Question. How will they lower overall health-care costs for our
Federal programs?
Answer. VBAs can be implemented in Federal programs so that the
benefits described above can accrue to the Federal programs.
Question. What have the preliminary results looked like so far?
Answer. VBAs are in the very early stages of development in the
United States. Many payers and manufacturers have tested different
concepts but to date, VBAs have not achieved scale. There are multiple
reasons why VBAs represent a small fraction of manufacturer/payer
contracts (e.g., access to data, difficult and costly to administer,
etc.). There are certain aspects of the current U.S. regulatory
landscape that are perceived by many as not only complicating VBA
implementation but in some cases limiting their rapid uptake.
Stakeholders have frequently identified two key regulatory hurdles as
limiting the expanded adoption of VBAs: (i) the Anti-Kickback Statute
and (ii) the Medicaid Best Price calculation requirement. While these
regulations serve important roles within the current volume-based
reimbursement system they do not contemplate innovative value-based
arrangements which has resulted in a lack of clarity on how to account
for these under the current regulatory framework. Ultimately, an
expansion of VBAs will require reforms to existing regulations that
enable more flexibility in designing VBAs.
transparency/point of sale
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you express your
support for the Trump administration's proposal to allow manufacturers
to provide PBMs up-front discounts that are passed onto patients at the
point of sale.
Do you feel like this proposal will make the transactions within
the drug supply chain more transparent?
Answer. Pfizer acknowledges that providing discounts pursuant to
the safe harbor for point-of-sale price discounts will enhance
transparency of net pricing strategies and potentially drive downward
pressure on net prices. Nonetheless, Pfizer believes that the proposed
safe harbors are good for patients and lay the groundwork for the
systemic change needed to create a simpler, more cost effective, and
more transparent U.S. health-care system, and we are fully committed to
operating in this new system. We are concerned, however, that plans and
PBMs could impose new formulary restrictions and utilization barriers
to make up for lost rebates that undermine the spirit of the rule and
create new access challenges to patients. For patients to receive the
benefits of the rule, we urge policymakers to ensure that no new access
barriers are created as a way to compensate for lost rebate.
Question. If so, would this transparency bring down drug costs--
overall and for specialty drugs?
Answer. Only through such transparency can Pfizer and other
industry players ensure that discounts and other price reductions
directly benefit the patient, which is a critical factor driving
Pfizer's support for the Proposed Rule.
the relationship between wholesalers and manufacturers
Question. When talking about the pharmaceutical supply chain, a lot
of focus has been placed on the Pharmacy Benefit Manager. But there's
another side of the equation that I'd like to ask about: how do
wholesalers negotiate pricing with manufacturers?
Answer. Wholesalers pay list price for our products. They may
receive prompt pay discounts, which would reduce their net price.
Wholesalers also can earn bona fide service fees based on performing
services that are important to pharmaceutical manufacturers.
Question. What impact does this have on drug costs?
Answer. These discounts and fees are relatively consistent across
products and do not significantly impact drug costs.
Question. What incentives or disincentives do they have to contain
price increases?
Answer. As a result of the competitive nature of their business,
wholesalers do have an incentive to contain price increases.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
proposed rebate rule
Question. As has been done in many other settings, drug
manufacturers said during the hearing that one reason list prices for
drugs are high is that pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) demand
larger and larger rebates in order for the drug to receive favorable
placement on a formulary. You and your colleagues who testified during
the hearing stated if the administration's proposal on changes to the
anti-kickback safe harbor for pharmaceutical rebates took effect, your
company would likely lower list price.
Like many Oregonians, I am skeptical drug manufacturers would
voluntarily lower their prices. Therefore, would you support
legislation that would (1) make similar changes the administration has
put forward related to Part D and Medicaid managed care, (2) change the
rebate system in a similar way to the proposal for the commercial
market, and (3) require drug makers to lower the list price of their
drugs equal to the amount of rebates provided today?
Answer. Pfizer would support legislation that reforms the current
system of rebating to one in which payers are required to use
manufacturer provided discounts to ensure that the patient gets the
benefit of the discount at the point of sale. We support this reform
across all segments of the market where private sector negotiations
result in lower net prices including Medicare Part D, Medicaid managed
care and the commercial markets.
We realize that the transition away from rebates toward a point-of-
sale discount model will result in a lowering of our net prices.
Despite this potential negative financial impact, we support efforts to
eliminate rebates because we believe the new model will be good for
patients.
As currently written, the proposed rule only applies to the
Medicare and Medicaid managed care segments of the market. It will be
important to have any rebate reform apply to both government programs
and the commercial market as that will also lead to a lowering of list
prices as well. A bifurcated market will make it more challenging for
manufacturers to reduce list price since the commercial market covers
more than 50 percent of Americans with insurance and represents over
half of the business for most manufacturers.
If the proposed rule is modified to apply to all market segments,
we would evaluate the best options to arrive at a net price that
ensures patients have access to our medicines. Decisions would be made
on a product by product basis given that each therapeutic class has its
own set of competitive and access dynamics. To ensure these benefits
reach patients, it will be important for policymakers to ensure that
plans do not create new barriers or restrictions that hinder patient
access and undermine the spirit of the rule.
medicaid drug rebate program
Question. The Medicaid Drug Rebate Program (MDRP) requires
manufacturers to provide a basic rebate and an additional inflationary
rebate for both brand and generic drugs. The inflationary rebate is an
increasingly substantial part of total rebates due in large part to
large increases in drug prices that exceed inflation. Under current
law, this inflationary rebate is capped at 100 percent of Average
Manufacturer Price (AMP). This is the case even when manufacturers
continue to raise their prices well above inflation.
Please provide a list of all of your pharmaceutical products that
have reached the Medicaid AMP rebate cap in any of the 20 quarters from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
For each drug listed in response to question 1, please also provide
a list of which quarters and years each drug hit the cap.
Answer. Given the highly confidential nature of the information
requested, we would need to discuss the scope of this request with your
staff.
medicaid drug rebate program compliance
Question. I am concerned about recent reports and legal settlements
surrounding drug manufacturers' failure to comply fully with the
requirements of the MDRP. For example, an analysis by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General
found that between 2012 and 2016 taxpayers may have overpaid by as much
as $1.3 billion for 10 potentially misclassified drugs. That is why I
introduced the Right Rebate Act with Chairman Grassley to prevent drug
manufacturers from manipulating Medicaid to increase their profits.
However, I continued to be concerned about oversight and manufacturer
compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Accordingly, please describe the following: your company's current
compliance plan and procedures used to ensure compliance with the
requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program including internal
audits or other checks you use to identify compliance vulnerabilities;
any past or ongoing issues of non-compliance; any corrective actions
taken to address identified problems or issues of non-compliance with
the MDRP and how such steps were communicated to the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services; and any steps taken to improve
compliance and ensure that all Medicaid drug rebates owed to the
Federal Government and the States are paid in full.
Answer. It is Pfizer's policy to comply with all legislation,
regulations, provisions, requirements, terms and conditions of the
MDRP.
In order for its outpatient drugs to be covered by the Medicaid
program, a manufacturer must enter into a national rebate agreement
with the Secretary of HHS. This agreement generally requires
manufacturers to offer Medicaid agencies the mandated discounts for
covered prescription drugs. Pfizer is responsible for calculating and
reporting to the Federal Government on a monthly and quarterly basis
various metrics for each of Pfizer's products and, ultimately, for
paying corresponding rebates based on Medicaid recipients' purchases of
the company's covered drugs. In return for these rebates, State
Medicaid agencies must pay for all of the drug company's covered drugs
(with certain limited exceptions). If the price of the manufacturer's
drug rises faster than the inflation rate, States may require an
additional rebate. Pfizer and/or its predecessor entities have signed a
Rebate Agreement with HHS for all Pfizer labeler codes and Pfizer
remains vigilant of its obligations under the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program.
The Company has robust policies and procedures to ensure compliance
with government price calculations, certification and reporting under
MDRP including Pfizer's certification, reporting, payment obligations,
records retention and audit obligations. The Company's policies and
procedures are also meant to impart to Pfizer employees an
understanding of the government pricing metrics calculated under the
MDRP. Consistent with Pfizer's policies and procedures and available
CMS guidance, if Pfizer becomes aware of any instances of non-
compliance with the MDRP, Pfizer reports and/or communicates with CMS.
Based on our current information and belief, Pfizer complies with CMS
regulations and interacts with CMS to take corrective action as
instructed.
bonus payments tied to specific drugs
Question. I am concerned by the potential for employee financial
incentives to encourage high launch prices and price increases for
prescription drugs.
Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to sales or
revenue targets of a single product your company sells? Has it ever
been? If yes, please state the product or products to which your
salary, bonus or other compensation was tied.
Answer. No. Dr. Bourla's salary, bonus, or other compensation is
not nor has ever been tied to the sales or revenue targets of a single
product.
Question. Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to
either revenue or net income of the company as a whole? Has it ever
been? If yes, please explain what assumptions about price increases are
used when the compensation committee sets revenue or net income goals.
Does the compensation committee provide any guidance to executives in
regards to the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth?
Answer. Dr. Bourla, along with over approximately 48,000 other
colleagues, participates in Pfizer's annual bonus plan, Pfizer's Global
Performance Plan (GPP), which is funded annually based on Pfizer's
performance measured against three financial metrics: revenue, adjusted
earnings per share and cash flow from operations and has been since
2008.
Therefore, any annual bonuses through Pfizer's GPP, determined by
the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors and ratified by
the independent members of the Board, is in part based on company
revenue and net income as adjusted earnings per share is derived from
net income. In determining Dr. Bourla's bonus, the Compensation
Committee also takes into account other factors such as his individual
performance against his annual performance objectives and overall
company performance (e.g., pipeline). Neither Dr. Bourla's salary nor
other compensation is tied to revenue or net income of the company as a
whole.
In setting the corporate financial goals for compensation purposes,
the Compensation Committee uses the company's annual budget as the
starting point and it is adjusted accordingly based on the final
business plan discussion which accounts for various factors, including
access, rebates, losses of exclusivity and expected price adjustments.
The Compensation Committee does not provide any guidance with
regard to the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth.
net prices
Question. In your testimony, you stated, ``In 2018, the average net
price of Pfizer's medicines in the United States declined 1 percent.''
Please describe how the company's year-over-year aggregate net price is
calculated.
Answer. The Net Sales Price impact versus the Prior Year reflects
the year-over-year change in average net selling price (calculated as
net sales / units) multiplied by the current year's units. This
calculation is performed at a product NDC level, and then aggregated up
to the product and then the total business level.
The company's aggregate year-over-year impact of price on growth is
the summation of the sales price impact versus prior year from all
products in dollars, divided by the prior year's total net revenues. In
2018, the year-over-year impact on price on growth for the U.S.
pharmaceutical business was negative 1 percent.
Question. How many products are included in the calculation of the
average net price change? What was the median net price change?
Answer. For 2018, there are a total of 399 products included in the
U.S. portfolio; median net price impact on growth is negative 4
percent.
Question. Is net price weighted? If so, how? For example, in
determining the aggregate net price does the company assign different
weights to different products based on volume or other factors? Are
``on patent'' and ``off patent'' drugs weighted identically? Are other
statistical weights used or are all products treated equally?
Answer. Aggregate change in net price is weighted based on product
volume (units) and mix. All products--both ``on patent'' and ``off
patent''--are treated identically.
Question. Does the figure that you provided during your testimony
account for U.S. prices, international prices, or both? Generally
speaking, when your company reports net price changes, does it
differentiate between U.S. and international prices?
Answer. The figure of negative 1 percent price impact on growth
provided during the testimony is for the United States. Generally
speaking, when we respond to inquiries on the impact of price on
growth, we have responded on a global basis, a U.S. only basis, or
both, dictated by how the inquiry is posed.
Question. Please list the five drugs your company sold in the U.S.
that had the greatest year-over-year net price increase in 2018, noting
the increase for each drug by dollar figure and percentage.
Answer. The following products had the greatest positive impact of
sales price on growth in the United States in 2018: Prevnar, Lyrica,
Chantix, Pristiq, Relpax.
Question. Please list the five drugs your company sold in the U.S.
that had the lowest year-over-year net price increase (and/or the
greatest decrease) in 2018, noting the increase (or decrease) for each
drug by dollar figure and percentage.
Answer. The following products had the greatest negative impact of
sales price on growth in the United States in 2018: Xeljanz, Viagra,
Inflectra, Ibrance, Celebrex.
Question. For 2018, what was the average net price change in the
U.S. market for (1) drugs with no competition, (2) drugs with only
branded competition, and (3) drugs with generic competition?
Answer. The 2018 impact of price on growth from branded products in
the United States was 2 percent. 2018 impact of price on growth from
remainder of portfolio (excluding Branded Products) in the United
States was negative 5 percent.
Question.Pfizer has lost exclusivity for several products in recent
years, including Viagra, Zyvox, Relpax, Tygacil, and Pristiq. For each
of these products, please provide the percentage and dollar change in
the average net price from (1) the last full year in which Pfizer
maintained product exclusivity to the (2) first full year in which
generic competition was present in the market.
Answer. Pfizer has lost exclusivity on several products in recent
years, including: 2014: Detrol, Rapamune, Celebrex; 2015: Zyvox; 2016:
Relpax, Tygacil; and 2017: Viagra, Pristiq.
In all but one case, the net price impact of the branded products
listed above was negative the year after exclusivity was lost,
reflecting market dynamics and the competitive environment.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. During the hearing, when I asked whether your company
engaged in tactics to delay generic production of your products, you
answered ``no''. However, Pfizer appears on the FDA's list of companies
who have access complaints against them. Can you explain the
discrepancy between your answer and the FDA list? The FDA list can be
found here: https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApproval
Process/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/
Abbreviated
NewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/ucm607738.htm.
Answer. As a patient-focused company and leading manufacturer of
innovative, generic, and biosimilar medicines, Pfizer supports
innovation and a strong, competitive marketplace. Consistent with these
values, Pfizer does not block generic manufacturers from purchasing our
products, and it has never been our policy to do so. Generic
manufacturers are treated the same as any other customer seeking to
purchase our products. Pfizer is not aware of any current, unfulfilled
requests from a generic manufacturer to purchase a Pfizer product.
Generic manufacturers seeking to purchase Pfizer products should
request the product from Pfizer's authorized distributors or, if the
product is not available at a distributor, from Pfizer directly, the
same as any other Pfizer customers. Pfizer's website includes a list of
our authorized distributors, from which customers (including generic
companies) may purchase most Pfizer products (see https://www.
pfizer.com/products/medicine-distributors). For products that are not
available via our authorized distributors and that are not in extreme
drug shortage or unavailable due to a recall, customers can contact
Pfizer's Customer Service center at 1-800-TRY-FIRST (1-800-879-3477) to
purchase product directly from Pfizer. The telephone number for
Pfizer's Customer Service center is also included on our website at
https://www.pfizer.com/contact. Pfizer makes its products available for
sale to appropriately licensed entities at Pfizer's listed price and on
Pfizer's standard terms of sale. We do not have any agreements with
authorized distributors that block the sale of Pfizer's products to
generic manufacturers.
Regarding the FDA List (the List), while Pfizer supports FDA's (the
agency) goal of providing transparency, Pfizer is concerned that the
List lacks certain key information and context and, as currently
presented, may create the misleading impression that all products on
the List are the result of bad faith attempts to block generic
manufacturer access to samples. The appearance of a product on the FDA
List means only that a generic manufacturer informed the agency at some
point in time that it was having difficulty purchasing the listed
product. FDA's own disclaimer states that the agency has not
independently investigated or confirmed whether a generic manufacturer
actually made a request to purchase product, and to whom.\8\ The FDA
List also lacks several important pieces of information that would
enable a New Drug Application (NDA) holder to investigate its
appearance on the List. The List does not include: (1) which generic
manufacturer made the request; (2) when and to whom the generic
manufacturer made the request (e.g., to a wholesaler, directly to the
NDA holder); (3) whether the generic manufacturer that made the inquiry
was thereafter able to obtain product; and (4) any reason(s) why a
generic manufacturer may not have been able to obtain product (e.g., a
recall). Finally, Pfizer notes that FDA does not currently inform an
NDA holder in real time when a generic manufacturer notifies the agency
that it is having difficulty obtaining product. Had the agency informed
Pfizer at the time it received the inquiries noted on the FDA List,
Pfizer could have then undertaken its own efforts to resolve the issue.
Pfizer communicated its concerns about the FDA List to the agency in
May 2018. For your information we have included Pfizer's letter to FDA
on this topic and the agency's response (see Exhibits 1 and 2 in the
Appendix).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ (https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandAp
proved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm).
There are three new drug applications owned by Pfizer on the FDA
List: Embeda (NDA 022321), Tikosyn (NDA 020931) and Hemabate (NDA
017989). Embeda offers a good example of the List's shortcomings.
Pfizer acquired King Pharmaceuticals (the previous NDA holder of
Embeda) in March 2011, and two weeks later determined that Embeda
needed to be recalled from the U.S. market due to stability issues.
After diligently addressing the issues that led to the recall, Pfizer
relaunched Embeda to the U.S. market in January 2015, and it is
available for purchase via Pfizer's authorized distributors. However,
as a consequence of the recall, Embeda was not available in the U.S.
market for almost 4 years which may explain why a generic manufacturer
had a problem obtaining it during those years. The FDA List does not
specify when the generic manufacturer's inquiry regarding Embeda was
made nor does the FDA List indicate that several generic applications
for Embeda had been submitted to FDA in 2010 (which means that before
the recall, several generic manufacturers were successfully able to
purchase Embeda, conduct the necessary testing, and file Abbreviated
New Drug Applications (ANDAs)). Pfizer has not identified any recent
inquiries from generic manufacturers seeking to purchase Embeda that
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
have not been fulfilled.
The circumstances around Tikosyn also illustrate the List's
shortcomings. Pfizer was able to identify a single inquiry made by a
generic manufacturer directly to Pfizer to purchase Tikosyn in 2014. At
that time, Tikosyn was subject to an FDA imposed Risk Evaluation and
Mitigation Strategies (REMS) with Elements to Assure Safe Use
(``ETASU'') that restricted distribution, so Pfizer responded by asking
the manufacturer to obtain written confirmation from the FDA that
Pfizer's provision of the product to the generic manufacturer would not
be considered a violation of its REMS. The generic manufacturer did not
contact Pfizer further, and Pfizer never received any written
correspondence from the agency. FDA subsequently removed the REMS for
Tikosyn in 2016, and multiple generic versions of Tikosyn are now
approved, the first generic approval occurring in June 2016. This
context is not reflected in FDA's List.
Finally, with respect to Hemabate, this product was previously
subject to certain restrictions on distribution (i.e., it was sold only
to customers with medical and surgical intensive care centers) to
ensure its safe and appropriate use. This distribution approach was
established by the previous NDA holder (Pharmacia) and it continued
following Pfizer's acquisition of Pharmacia in 2003. Pfizer
discontinued this approach in early 2018 after determining that it was
no longer necessary, and this product is now available through our
authorized distributors. During the time when Hemabate was under
restricted distribution, it was not available at Pfizer's authorized
distributors, but had a generic manufacturer approached Pfizer's
Customer Service center directly, we would have been able to address
the inquiry. Pfizer's Customer Service was not able to identify any
specific requests from a generic manufacturer to purchase Hemabate that
have not been fulfilled.
We hope that this information explains the apparent discrepancy
between Mr. Bourla's testimony and the appearance of these Pfizer
products on the FDA List, and demonstrates Pfizer's diligence on these
issues and commitment to a competitive marketplace.
Question. When new products enter the market, do drug companies set
high initial rebates and then provide deep rebates in order to gain
access to insurance plan's formularies?
Answer. Launch pricing is driven by a multitude of factors, the
most important being the medicine's impact on patients and their
health. We also may consider other factors like the medicine's
potential to reduce other health-care costs, such as hospital stays;
the availability of other treatments and generic options; affordability
for patients, insurers and governments; and investments to maintain the
quality, safety, delivery, and reliability of our medicines.
Given the consolidation that has taken place in the U.S. market,
the vast majority of retail prescriptions are managed by a few large
PBMs. Pharmaceutical manufacturers must successfully negotiate with
these PBMs to gain access to their formularies or risk having their
products disadvantaged or even excluded from coverage.
The system has evolved in a manner where rebates play a significant
role in how the PBM business is transacted and in the decisions
regarding product placement on formularies. PBMs often win or lose
business on the basis of rebate guarantees and are therefore
incentivized to favor products with high list prices and deep rebates
assuming comparable safety and efficacy. Because the PBMs have enormous
leverage and depend on rebates to attract and retain clients, many
manufacturers will enter the market with higher list prices and deeper
rebates in order to ensure patients have access to their medicines.
Question. If CMS finalizes the rebate rule, do you anticipate
future products entering the market with significantly lower initial
list prices?
Answer. Launch pricing will be driven by product value and
competitive intensity of the specific therapeutic category.
Importantly, if finalized, the rule could result in lower out-of-pocket
patient costs at the pharmacy counter and help address the perverse
incentives in the system that have been contributing to higher list
prices for medicines.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
Question. What are your recommendations for lowering prices for the
40 percent of drugs that do not offer rebates in Medicare Part D? In
the health insurance plans that you offer your employees, do you ask
your insurers to pass through the full manufacturer rebates to the
beneficiaries?
Answer. It is unclear if the 40 percent of drugs that do not offer
rebates in Medicare Part D are brand medicines or generics. However,
Pfizer pledges to bring more affordable treatment options to the
market. Our mid-to late-stage pipeline contains five biosimilar
candidates expected to launch in the next 2 to 3 years. Ninety percent
of medicines Americans take are generics, and competition from these
drugs keeps prices low in most cases. We need to bring similar
competition to the biologics market, where some of the most expensive
drugs exist. The market today has already seen demonstrated savings as
high as 40 percent relative to the branded product. With more
competition, we hope even further savings can be realized.
Pfizer's plan design is generous and corresponding employee cost
sharing for prescription drugs is already very limited--in fact, for
many products, Pfizer employees experience no cost sharing at all.
Given this, the terms of contract with our PBM for our employee
benefits does not include a requirement to pass on rebates to Pfizer
employees at the point of sale.
Question. The systems for pricing and distributing drugs are opaque
and difficult to understand. What are your recommendations for
increasing transparency in how your companies set the list prices for
drugs, and for improving transparency in the supply chain for
prescription drugs? Would you support Federal standards for
transparency in setting the list prices for drugs?
Answer. Pfizer supports system-wide price transparency that is
thoughtful, purpose-driven, and that can result in improved patient
care, an enhanced understanding of the comparative value of all medical
services, and a more patient-centered use of health-care resources.
We would be interested in exploring with the committee ways to
ensure transparency across the health care system, including hospitals,
plans, PBMs, etc., so that we can make informed judgments about the
root of cost inflators in the system. We are also committed to ensuring
that patients, health-care professionals and payers understand our
commitment to pricing our medicines responsibly.
Regarding a Federal transparency standard, we believe that an
appropriately crafted, balanced piece of Federal legislation that
applies to all stakeholders in the health care system and preempts
future State laws could be beneficial for patients. However, Pfizer
believes that mandating disclosure of research and development,
manufacturing, or marketing costs to assess the value of medicines is
inconsistent with purpose-driven transparency.
Question. In nearly every sector of the health-care industry,
Medicare, Medicaid, employers, and insurers are moving away from fee-
for-service payments to reimbursements based on value and performance.
Prescription drugs and medical devices were the glaring exceptions to
this trend until recently. How many of your drugs are included in
value-based contracts and how many patients are benefiting from them?
Answer. Patient outcomes should determine our reimbursement and
Pfizer pledges that we will aggressively pursue value-based
arrangements. We should not be rewarded for treatments that do not
work.
Currently, Pfizer has value-based contracts for twelve drugs in our
portfolio.
The agreements are in place with commercial and Medicare payers
with millions of covered lives. In addition, Pfizer has a multi-product
innovative agreement that has been offered to the majority of States
for the Medicaid program, but currently only a small number of States
compromising less than five million lives have taken or are actively
considering the offer.
Question. How do these value-based contracts work to lower drug
prices for both patients and taxpayers?
Answer. Value-based agreements (VBA) provide a framework for
manufacturers to be compensated based on a product's value to patients
and the overall health-care system. There are many different types of
VBAs but the optimal structure of a VBA includes clinical and/or
financial performance metrics for a product. Based on the outcomes
achieved, payers use this information to inform how they cover
products. Products that perform better should be covered in a more
favorable manner which often includes lower out-of-pockets costs for
patients which is a benefit to patients in the near term. In the long
term, patients can also benefit from other savings either directly,
(e.g., reducing spending on other medications, lowering medical costs
from reduced hospitalizations, doctor's visits, etc.), or indirectly
through lower premiums based on reductions in total cost of care.
VBAs can be implemented in Federal and State programs so that the
benefits described above can accrue to the Federal programs thereby
benefitting taxpayers.
Question. Last year, Senator Portman and I did an investigation on
the pricing of an opioid overdose reversal drug called EVZIO,
manufactured by Kaleo. Kaleo increased the price of EVZIO from $575 in
2014 to $4,100 in 2017. We found that the best price Medicare was able
to get for EVZIO, about $4,000, was much higher than the price other
Federal programs and private insurers were able to get. It seemed that
Kaleo was able to get this higher price of $4,000 from Medicare by
helping doctors fill out paperwork showing that the drug was medically
necessary, even though there are cheaper alternatives on the market. As
a result of the investigation, Kaleo announced it will bring a generic
version of the drug to market at only $168 per pack. Are any of your
companies providing medical necessity paperwork to doctors in order to
get your drugs covered by Medicare?
Answer. Consistent with industry practice, Pfizer provides a sample
statement of medical necessity and appeals letters through our patient
support programs for patients, their caregivers and prescribing
physicians to help guide these individuals in gaining access to certain
Pfizer medicines after a physician has determined that a Pfizer product
is right for a patient and a prescription has been written. These
sample letters are generally PDF documents that describe the type of
information payers require to approve access/coverage of a particular
medication based upon the payers' formulary requirements, such as step
therapy (therapeutic agents that must be tried first), proof of
diagnosis or other common utilization management techniques that payers
determine. Pfizer does not customize these letters, and patients,
caregivers and physicians are advised that they are responsible for the
accuracy of the information that they submit to the payer to obtain
coverage and/or reimbursement. Sample letters are available from
Pfizer's third-party call centers which specialize in product access
triage with payers, field based reimbursement specialists and Pfizer
product websites. Pfizer sales representatives do not provide this
information to physicians.
Question. In 2017, the Rand Corporation estimated that biosimilar
drugs, which are competitors to complex, biologic drugs, could save the
United States more than $50 billion over the next decade. Some of you
have also argued that increasing the use of biosimilar drugs would help
lower drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers. What is delaying the
uptake of biosimilar drugs in the United States? What policies do you
recommend to increase the development of biosimilar drugs?
Answer. Pfizer believes that some of the adverse incentives and
barriers to market penetration include:
1.
The Rebate Trap: Brand-name biologic companies are using
maneuvers to block biosimilar competition such as higher
rebates and exclusionary contracts.
2.
Misinformation: Some physician and patient-directed
materials created by brand companies mischaracterize
biosimilars, creating doubt and confusion about the safety and
efficacy of biosimilars. As defined by statute, an approved
biosimilar must be highly similar to and have no clinically
meaningful differences from the reference product and must have
the same mechanism of action (to the extent the mechanism(s) of
action of the reference product are known) as the reference
product; thus, by definition, biosimilars are safe and
efficacious treatments relative to the reference product and
must work in the same way as the reference product. Any
information disseminated by reference product sponsors to
suggest or imply otherwise should be promptly addressed by FDA.
3.
Need for incentives: Legislative ideas to promote
biosimilar uptake could include a shared savings biosimilar
model; reduced patient cost sharing for biosimilars. More
detail is provided below.
Although the biosimilars market in the United States is still
relatively new, our experience has been that anticompetitive conduct by
brand-name biologic manufacturers, combined with the lack of policy
measures to support appropriate uptake of biosimilars, have contributed
to a slow uptake. Therefore, we encourage you to consider measures to
help incentivize the use of biosimilars, which can substantially lower
Medicare costs with demonstrated savings to date as high as nearly 40
percent relative to the branded biologic.
Some key policy initiatives we believe will support the uptake of
biosimilars in the United States are the following:

Waiver of Part B Patient Coinsurance for Biosimilars for a
certain period of time:
CMS should waive Part B patient coinsurance
amounts for biosimilars. Cost-sharing changes could be applied
at the HCPCS level. This would not change the overall payment
for a biosimilar; however, it would change the beneficiary's
payment percentage.

CMS should pursue a CMMI model designed to increase access
to biosimilars, including a ``shared savings'' model whereby
Medicare savings associated with prescribing a biosimilar, as
compared to a reference biological, would be shared with
providers.

CMS should maintain the current biosimilar pass-through
status as this provides biosimilars with a ``level playing
field'' with their higher priced reference biologic
competitors.

CMS should create payment incentives for plans by
contracting with a measure developer for a biosimilar use
measure for the STARS program, which would correct other
adverse incentives for biosimilar uptake for Medicare Advantage
plans.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
Question. The United States is one of the only countries in the
world to allow prescription drug manufacturers to advertise directly to
consumers through magazines, billboards, radio, and television
commercials. While I will not argue that it is beneficial to educate
consumers about an unfamiliar disease and encourage them to seek
medical help, most commercials from all of your companies recommend
asking about a specific brand name drug, not a medical condition.
Furthermore, even if your advertisements follow all FDA rules and list
medication side effects, they also almost always list these while a
smiling, apparently healthy person is walking on a beach.
Researchers say that this type of imagery, combined with viewing
hours of drug commercials each month, leads consumers to underestimate
the risks associated with medications. For the past decade, studies
have shown that aggressive direct-to-consumer advertising is associated
with rising drug prices and an increase in inappropriate drug
prescriptions.
Since researchers have concluded that consumers are
misunderstanding the benefits and risks described in your ads, what
further policies could help you and your colleagues ensure that you are
educating patients in a clear manner?
Answer. Pfizer wants patients to have access to our drugs and part
of this is making sure patients have the information they need. Pfizer
believes that direct-to-
consumer (DTC) advertising should be, first and foremost, a tool
through which we can provide patients with useful information to inform
them about their medical conditions, and the potential benefits and
risks of available treatment options so they can have a discussion with
their doctors and take an active role in managing their health.
The Office of Prescription Drug Promotion at the FDA, which has
responsibility for reviewing prescription drug advertising and
promotional labeling to ensure that the information contained in them
is not false or misleading, studies advertising so that regulations are
grounded in evidence on how best to ensure ads are accurate, balanced
and not misleading. The FDA's website describes in detail the many ways
that its Office of Prescription Drug Promotion ensures that DTC
advertising is not misleading.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.fda.gov/aboutfda/centersoffices/
officeofmedicalproductsandtobacco/cder/ucm
090142.htm.
DTC advertising is of significant educational importance to
patients, especially as the provision of health care becomes more
patient-centric. Over the last 2 decades, consumer research sponsored
by the industry and the FDA has underscored that clear, relevant
communication allows DTC advertising, when executed thoughtfully, to
have a positive impact on public health. For example, in 2004, a study
by FDA found that ``DTC ads help patients have better discussions with
their physicians and provide greater awareness of treatments. The study
demonstrated that when a patient asked about a specific drug, 88
percent of the time they had the condition that the drug treated. And
80 percent of physicians believed their patients understood what
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
condition the advertised drug treats.''
More recently, according to a 2017 survey, conducted by Princeton
Survey Research Associates International on behalf of PhRMA, Americans
overwhelmingly reported that DTC advertisements help inform people
about new treatments (88 percent), alert people to symptoms that are
related to a medical condition they may already have (81 percent), and
allow people to be more involved in their health care (79 percent).\10\
Similarly, a research survey published in 2017 with 4,481 U.S. adults
and sponsored by a working group of pharmaceutical companies has shown
DTC advertising conveys useful information.\11\ DTC ads raise awareness
about medications and effectively communicate potential risks and
benefits, but they also increase concern about potential side effects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ 2017 Direct to Consumer Advertising Survey Results, presented
by Princeton Survey Research Associates International, prepared for
PhRMA, https://www.phrma.org/report/2017-direct-to-consumer-
advertising-survey-results.
\11\ DIA, Therapeutic and Regulatory Science, https://
journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/2168479017708226iii, https://
www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OfficeofMedicalProducts
andTobacco/CDER/ucm090276.htm#Completed.
Pfizer believes that PhRMA, individual companies, academics and FDA
should continue to study DTC advertising to ensure that pharmaceutical
consumer communications are achieving their intended goals to educate,
inform information-seeking consumers and facilitate better discussions
with health-care professionals.
pharmaceutical companies continue to raise prices
Question. As you are well aware, high prescription drug prices are
the number one concern for Americans and their families. According to
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the average
American spends around $1,208 annually on prescription drugs. There
have been several instances where brand name or even generic drugs that
have been on the market for years continue to increase in price.
One of the most well-known examples is Mylan's increase of the
price of EpiPen from less than $100 in 2007 to more than $600 in 2016.
Another example, is the ever-increasing price of insulin. Sanofi
increased the price of a vial of Lantus from $88.20 in 2007 to $307.20
in 2017. And those are just a small sample of price increases.
Why don't we see price decreases for drugs that have been on the
market for years without new formulations or added benefit?
Answer. There are a number of reasons that the price of medicines
can change over time. While these reasons often include more obvious
changes such as discovery of new indications and new formulations, they
can also include less obvious changes such as improvements in the
manufacturing and supply chain and market-based factors.
Pfizer has reduced the price of many of our older off-patent
medicines in the United States, and we are committed to bringing more
affordable treatment options to the market to induce competition,
including generic and biosimilar medicines. Competition is the best way
to promote affordable access to quality, safe and effective medicines;
competition means more and better medicines, more options for patients,
and more affordable drugs.
pay for delay
Question. Pay for delay is a tactic that more and more branded drug
manufacturers have been using to stifle competition from lower-cost
generic manufacturers. This allows you to sidestep competition by
offering patent settlements that pay generic companies not to bring
lower-cost alternatives to market.
These ``pay-for-delay'' patent settlements benefit both brand-name
pharmaceutical companies by helping them avoid costly patent litigation
and general manufacturers by rewarding them a hefty sum to delay
entering the market with a cheaper drug alternative. However, these
deals do not benefit consumers. According to an FTC study, these
anticompetitive deals cost consumers and taxpayers $3.5 billion in
higher drug costs every year.
Does your company partake in pay-for-delay settlements?
Answer. No. On the contrary, when Pfizer settles patent litigation
with generic firms, we do so on terms that generally enable entry of
generic competition earlier than the expiration of its patents and that
do not involve unlawful reverse payments. Pfizer's patent settlements
thus involve lawful compromises that appropriately resolve patent
disputes and accelerate patient access to lower cost generics relative
to the expiration of its patents. While Pfizer has been the target of
plaintiff lawyer driven class action lawsuits challenging certain of
its settlements with generic companies, we believe these lawsuits are
without merit and are vigorously asserting the pro-competitive nature
of these settlements in court.
Question. Why would a pharmaceutical company enter into a pay-for-
delay agreement?
Answer. Pfizer does not enter into these types of settlements and
cannot speculate on why others might.
Question. Do you think these agreements stifle competition and
prevent generic alternatives to your branded medications?
Answer. Pfizer's patent settlements do not ``stifle competition''
or ``prevent generic alternatives.'' On the contrary, when Pfizer
settles patent litigation with generic firms, it does so on terms that
generally enable entry of generic competition earlier than the
expiration of its patents and that do not involve unlawful reverse
payments. Pfizer's patent settlements thus involve lawful compromises
that accelerate patient access to lower cost generics relative to the
expiration of its patents.
drug rebate rule
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services'
(HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG) promulgated a new regulation to
remove regulatory safe harbor protections under the Anti-Kickback
Statute (AKS) for rebates on prescription drugs rebates paid by
manufactures to PBMs under Medicare Part D and for Medicaid managed
care organizations (MCOs). The OIG proposal attempts to ban most
rebates by eliminating their regulatory protections.
The rule is predicted to increase net drug costs in its early
years. The CMS actuaries estimate it would cost $196 billion over 10
years. Despite this high price tag, the beneficiary benefits are
limited. The proposed rule notes that under the CMS Actuary's analysis,
the majority of beneficiaries would see an increase in their total out-
of-pocket payments and premium costs; reductions in total cost sharing
will exceed total premium increases.
I wanted to ask a question about the administration's rebate rule,
which I understand that many of the drug manufacturers, and your main
trade association, strongly support. According to an analysis of the
rule by the Office of Actuaries at CMS, drug manufacturers are likely
to initially retain 15 percent of the current rebates as higher net
drug prices.
Given that estimate, can you provide the committee with any
assurances that prices will not increase under this proposed rule?
Answer. If finalized, the rule could result in lower out-of-pocket
patient costs at the pharmacy counter and help address the perverse
incentives in the system that have been contributing to higher list
prices for medicines. In 2019, Pfizer expects to pay billions of
dollars in rebates to ensure patients with pharmacy benefits coverage
in Medicare Part D and patients in commercial plans have access to our
medicines. If the proposed rule to share rebates with consumers at the
point of sale is finalized, we estimate that seniors taking Pfizer
medicines could save $270 on average per year, and up to $574 per year
for certain Pfizer medicines, through lower cost sharing.
Importantly, we believe any reform should apply to all market
segments as this could also lead to further reduction in list prices. A
bifurcated market in which we eliminate rebates in government programs
but maintain rebates for commercial plans will make it difficult for
manufacturers to reduce list prices because a single list price applies
to all markets.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. According to an article recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, medical marketers spent nearly $30
billion dollars in 2016, up from $17 billion in 1997. Direct-to-
Consumer (DTC) advertising had the biggest percentage increase: from
$2.1 billion, or 11.9 percent of all medical marketing, in 1997 to $9.6
billion, or 32 percent of total spending, in 2016.
Can each of you please provide what your ratio of spending on sales
and marketing to research and development is today?
Answer. In order to fulfill Pfizer's mission to create breakthrough
medicines that change patients' lives, we invest in several areas to
ensure an innovative pipeline, top-quality manufacturing, and education
of patients and physicians to ensure they have the information they
need to make knowledgeable decisions about patient care.
In 2018, Pfizer spent approximately $6.9 billion on direct sales
and marketing and approximately $8 billion on research and development
globally.
biosimilars/rebate traps
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mention that encouraging
the development of generics and biosimilars will help bring down the
cost of drugs. However, while 17 biosimilars are now approved in the
US, only 7 are actually on the market and available to patients. There
are growing concerns about rebate traps, which are ways of gaming the
system to ensure a biosimilar is not able to enter the market.
Dr. Bourla, in your testimony, you said: ``Adverse incentives that
favor higher cost originator biologics are keeping biosimilars from
reaching patients. In many cases, payers decline to include lower cost
biosimilars or generics in their formularies because they would risk
losing the rebates they can get by covering higher cost medicines.''
Your company has filed lawsuits challenging rebate traps as antitrust
violations. What do you think should be done about these rebate
practices?
Answer. Anticompetitive conduct should be stopped through
government enforcement of the antitrust laws and in the courts. Brand-
name biologic companies should not be permitted to abuse the rebate
system to effectively block lower-cost biosimilars from coverage
For more details, see Pfizer's Exhibit 4 attached.
price-gouging
Question. Sanofi, as I understand it, has made a pledge to the
public to limit its price increases to the national health expenditures
growth projection.
Would your company commit to a cap on annual price increases as
part of your PhRMA membership criteria?
Answer. We are unable to answer this question as it requires
analysis under the antitrust laws.
Question. What policies would you propose to help ensure lower
launch prices for new drugs?
Answer. At Pfizer, we are committed to our purpose: breakthroughs
that change patients' lives. Pfizer's more than 90,000 colleagues
around the world come to work every day focused not only on creating
breakthrough medicines, but also on making sure those medicines get
into the hands of the patients who need them.
The launch prices for our medicines reflect the value that they
bring to patients and society. The relationship between the price of a
medicine and a patient's out-of-pocket cost is not always clear. Out-
of-pocket costs continue to rise due to insurance designs that place a
disproportionate burden on consumers who use medicines than other
interventions. Consumers on average pay 15 percent of medicine costs
but only 2 percent of hospitalization and other health-care costs. We
encourage Congress to continue its efforts to understand the complexity
of the pricing and reimbursement system in the United States, and to
identify ways in which patient out-of-pocket expenditures can be
reduced.
transparency
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mentioned that the
current system of pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) back-end rebates do
not rarely results in a scenario where the PBM passes on savings to
consumers at the point of sale (POS). The administration recently
proposed a rule to eliminate the anti-kickback statute safe harbor
protections for these drug rebates.
Do you agree that greater transparency should be required to
understand how manufacturers and PBMs are negotiating prices and
rebates to ensure that savings are passed down to beneficiaries?
Answer. Pfizer is committed to working toward greater transparency
along the supply chain, so patients can better understand what they are
paying for and why. We believe pricing transparency policies should
seek to inform consumers about the costs of health-care items and
services across the industry and should promote a definition of value
that considers impact to health and costs over time and across all
industry stakeholders.
Pfizer believes that the proposed safe harbors lay the groundwork
for the systemic change needed to create a simpler, more cost
effective, and more transparent U.S. health-care system, and we are
committed to operating in this new system.
Question. Senator Thune asked if this administration rule would
lead you to lowering list prices. Both of you answered that you would
be likely to lower your prices. However, if this rule were finalized
tomorrow as proposed, would any of your companies be required to lower
the list price of any of your drugs?
Answer. As long as rebate reform extends to both the commercial
market and government programs, there could be a reduction in list
prices. The commercial market covers more than 50 percent of Americans
with insurance, and the safe harbor will not affect it at all. However,
in Medicare, the rebate rule will make list prices less relevant
because the entire rebate will be converted to a point of sale discount
so that patient out-of-pocket costs, when they are in the deductible,
coinsurance, and coverage gap phases of the benefit, will be based off
the lower net price. If we ensure that rebates paid out to commercial
plans find their way to patients, the patients will see savings of
hundreds of dollars.
pbms
Question. An Axios article from March 7, 2019 highlights the fact
that, while ``pharmaceutical companies put a lot of the blame for high
drug prices on pharmacy benefit managers,'' many large pharmaceutical
companies ``rely on PBMs to manage their own health-care benefits.''
In your role as an employer, does your company contract with a
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) to administer the prescription
drug benefits for your employees and negotiate lower drug costs on your
behalf?
Answer. Yes, we contract with a PBM to administer our prescription
drug benefits and we work with them to establish criteria for
negotiating lower drug costs on our employees' behalf.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, how do you utilize the
rebates your PBM negotiates to lower health-care costs or drug costs
for your employee plans, and what does your company do with that
savings? Specifically, do the savings go toward lowering premiums?
Answer. Pfizer's medical and prescription drug coverage is generous
in terms of what we subsidize as an employer; therefore we work to
ensure that our employees benefit from our investment in our workforce
and any savings in the form of affordable plan premiums and
substantially lower cost sharing responsibilities for prescription
drugs.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, does your PBM offer
point-of-sale rebates to your employees?
Answer. Pfizer's plan design is generous and corresponding employee
cost sharing responsibility for prescription drugs is already very
limited--in fact, for many products, Pfizer employees experience no
cost sharing at all. Given this, the terms of contract with our PBM for
our employee benefits does not include a requirement to pass on rebates
to Pfizer employees at the point of sale.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. Please describe any policy changes you support that would
result in your company lowering the list prices of its drugs.
Answer. Pfizer would support legislation that reforms the current
system of rebating to one in which payers are required to use
manufacturer provided discounts to ensure that the patient gets the
benefit of the discount at the point of sale. We support this reform
across all segments of the market where private sector negotiations
result in lower net prices including Medicare Part D, Medicaid managed
care and the commercial markets. It is important to understand that
even if rebates are prohibited, manufacturers will still negotiate
discounts with plans consistent with safe harbors in exchange for
formulary access, though those discounts will be reflected in lowered
drug prices at the pharmacy counter rather than retrospective payments
benefitting plans or their PBM instead of the beneficiaries who are
underwriting premiums for others.
To ensure these benefits reach patients, it will be important for
Congress and the administration to ensure that plans do not create new
barriers or restrictions that hinder patient access and undermine the
spirit of the rule.
Question. How much does your company's research and development
portfolio rely on taxpayer-funded research conducted by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)?
Answer. The biopharmaceutical industry is one of the most research-
intensive industries in the United States. In 2017, NIH had a budget of
$39.2 billion, only a fraction of which, $3.2 billion, was dedicated to
drug discovery. The industry invested over $90 billion in R&D--almost
30 times more. For Pfizer alone, we invested approximately $8 billion
in R&D last year.
NIH's strength is its focus on important basic scientific research
and the industry does derive important insights from basic scientific
research conducted by NIH-funded researchers and scientists worldwide.
There is, however, a large gap between understanding basic scientific
principles and the discovery, development, and delivery of medicines to
patients. For example, the initial NIH-funded basic science discovery
of cell division and cell signaling proteins in yeast led researchers
to identify similar proteins in humans. This early research later
informed the thinking of Pfizer scientists and helped pave the way for
the discovery and development of targeted cancer drugs like
palbociclib, a new treatment for breast cancer.
The discovery of cell division in yeast is a long way from
discovering and developing a drug that prevents cancer tumors from
growing. As stated above, the government plays a role in advancing
basic science such as identifying cellular pathways underlying disease.
However, the ability to translate knowledge about biological processes
into a medicine or vaccine, with appropriate drug-like properties and a
clinically meaningful benefit, remains the primary function of the
biopharmaceutical industry. The drug discovery and development process
involves harnessing existing knowledge of underlying disease biology to
chart and execute a research agenda that often encompasses ten to 15
years of discovery research, preclinical testing, clinical development
(for dosing, safety, and efficacy) and pharmaceutical science to ensure
the quality of the compound to be delivered. Disciplines like medicinal
chemistry, process and formulation chemistry and formulation, drug
metabolism, pharmacokinetics and safety sciences are practiced at a
scale and expertise in the biopharmaceutical industry that extends well
beyond government and academic research endeavors to deliver life-
savings therapies for patients.
Question. How many of your company's products are based, at least
in part, on NIH research, and how many are the result of research
funded solely by your company?
Answer. We have not identified readily available information in
response to this request that is maintained in the ordinary course of
business. We would need to discuss the scope and terms of this question
with your staff to respond appropriately.
Question. In each of the last 5 years, how much has your company
spent on research and development versus the advertising and marketing
of your products?
Answer. In order to fulfill Pfizer's mission to create breakthrough
medicines that change patients' lives, we invest in several areas to
ensure an innovative pipeline, top-quality manufacturing, and education
of patients and physicians to ensure they have the information they
need to make knowledgeable decisions about patient care.
Over the last 5 years, Pfizer spent approximately $34 billion on
advertising and marketing and approximately $40 billion on R&D
globally. Advertising and marketing expenses include advertising,
promotion and field selling.
Question. During the hearing, you mentioned that your company would
be likely to lower the list prices of its drugs if the recent proposal
by the Trump administration to change the current system of rebates was
extended to the private market.
If the policy was extended to the private market, how large would
the list price reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
Answer. The size of any list price reductions relative to the size
of rebates Pfizer is currently providing would depend on all components
of the final rule and how the point of sale discount model that
replaces rebates will function.
Question. How will this proposal affect how your company sets the
list prices for new drug products?
Answer. At Pfizer, we are committed to our purpose: breakthroughs
that change patients' lives. Pfizer's more than 90,000 colleagues
around the world come to work every day focused not only on creating
breakthrough medicines, but also on making sure those medicines get
into the hands of the patients who need them.
Launch pricing is driven by a multitude of factors, the most
important being the medicine's impact on patients and their health. We
also may consider other factors like the medicine's potential to reduce
other health-care costs, such as hospital stays; the availability of
other treatments and generic options; affordability for patients,
insurers and governments; and investments to maintain the quality,
safety, delivery and reliability of our medicines.
Question. If the proposal is finalized and not extended to the
private market, will your company make any list price reductions? If
so, how large would the reductions be relative to the size of the
rebates your company is currently providing?
Answer. Because there is no specific requirement for plans and PBMs
to shift away from negotiating contracted rebates in the commercial
market, it is possible that a bifurcated market, with the same perverse
incentives and the same mechanism to drive list prices higher, will
result. If reform does extend to the commercial marketplace, it could
result in lowering of list prices. However, we cannot speculate on the
amounts until we see the specifics of the rule and the changes that are
made to the supply chain.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan
Question. In June of 2018, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission (MACPAC) unanimously recommended under Recommendation 1.1 in
their annual report to Congress that Congress remove the statutory
requirement that manufacturers blend the average manufacturer price
(AMP) of a brand drug and its authorized generic.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ MACPAC: ``Improving Operations of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program,'' https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Improving-
Operations-of-the-Medicaid-Drug-Rebate-Program.pdf.
This requirement created an unintended loophole. Rather than use
the price of the authorized generic, drug companies can sell its
authorized generic to a corporate subsidiary at an artificially lower
price, and use that lower price to bring down the AMP, which in turn
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lowers the rebate obligation.
Does your company engage in this practice? Has your company ever
engaged in this practice in the past?
Answer. Pfizer has a number of Authorized Generics (AGs)
arrangements, both with affiliates and non-affiliates. CMS's Medicaid
Covered Outpatient Drugs Final Rule, 81 Fed. Reg. 5170 (Feb. 1, 2016)
(the ``Final Rule'') included an extensive discussion of when a primary
manufacturer should include or exclude sales of AGs to secondary
manufacturers in its average manufacturer price (AMP). Pfizer has
developed reasonable assumptions that it believes are consistent with
the guidance CMS set forth in the Final Rule for purposes of
determining when to include or exclude sales of AGs in its AMP
calculation. Pfizer disclosed its assumptions with respect to its
approach both in written correspondence and in an onsite meeting with
CMS representatives. In addition, Pfizer disclosed its assumptions to
the OIG in response to a January 2018 survey.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
Question. According to public filings, in 2015 Pfizer collected
U.S. revenues that were more than double the amount you invested in
R&D. Is this still true--do you collect more in revenue in the U.S.
alone than you invest in R&D?
Answer. The biopharmaceutical industry is one of the most research-
intensive industries in the United States In 2017, NIH had a budget of
$39.2 billion, only a fraction of which, $3.2 billion, was dedicated to
drug discovery. The industry invested over $90 billion in R&D--almost
30 times more. For Pfizer alone, we invested approximately $8 billion
in R&D last year.
Pfizer's number one priority is always the care of our patients,
and we are proud of the investments Pfizer makes to insure we continue
to bring new, innovative cures to patients. These responsibilities
require investments in R&D, manufacturing and other areas to accomplish
our mission of creating breakthrough medicines that change people's
lives.
In 2018, Pfizer spent approximately $20 billion on global R&D and
manufacturing. This includes investing in state-of-the-art labs so we
can attract the finest scientists in the world and continuing to invest
in innovative, high-tech manufacturing to ensure the high quality of
our products. Pfizer's revenues in the United States in 2018 totaled
approximately $25 billion.
Question. As a portion of your revenue, for what percentage of the
drugs in your portfolio do you offer no rebates? Based on the drugs in
your pipeline, do you foresee that portion growing? For those drugs is
your list price equal to your net price?
Answer. Approximately one third of Pfizer's revenue comes from
products that are not Medicare Part D eligible. This product group
includes generics, vaccines, and physician administered products. Of
the remaining two thirds of our revenue, 92 percent comes from products
that offer Medicare Part D or commercial rebates. The remaining 8
percent is from products that have lost patent exclusivity, have
generic alternatives, and offer no rebates. It is not possible to
determine at this time whether that portion will increase because
rebating on future products will be based on numerous factors,
including product value and the competitive intensity of the
therapeutic area. For products that do not rebate, there are additional
deductions from sales such as prompt payment fees and distribution
service fees resulting in the net price being lower than list price.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you generate in U.S. sales
revenue? Please include specific figures.
Answer. The biopharmaceutical industry is one of the most research-
intensive industries in the United States In 2017, NIH had a budget of
$39.2 billion, only a fraction of which, $3.2 billion, was dedicated to
drug discovery. The industry invested over $90 billion in R&D--almost
30 times more. For Pfizer alone, we invested approximately $8 billion
in R&D last year.
Pfizer's number one priority is always the care of our patients,
and we are proud of the investments Pfizer makes to insure we continue
to bring new, innovative cures to patients. These responsibilities
require investments in R&D, manufacturing and other areas to accomplish
our mission of creating breakthrough medicines that change people's
lives.
In 2018, Pfizer's revenues in the United States totaled
approximately $25 billion and Pfizer spent approximately $20 billion on
global R&D and manufacturing. This includes investing in state-of-the-
art labs so we can attract the finest scientists in the world and
continuing to invest in innovative, high-tech manufacturing to ensure
the high quality of our products.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? What company functions do you consider to be included
in administration? Please include specific figures.
Answer. In order to fulfill Pfizer's mission to create breakthrough
medicines that change patients' lives, we invest in several areas to
ensure an innovative pipeline, top-quality manufacturing, and education
of patients and physicians to ensure they have the information they
need to make knowledgeable decisions about patient care.
In 2018, Pfizer spent approximately $14 billion on selling,
informational and administrative expenses and approximately $8 billion
on R&D. Selling, informational and administrative costs are expensed as
incurred. Among other things, these expenses include the internal and
external costs of marketing, advertising, shipping and handling,
information technology and legal defense.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
sales? What company functions do you consider to be included in sales?
Please include specific figures.
Answer. In order to fulfill Pfizer's mission to create breakthrough
medicines that change patients' lives, we invest in several areas to
ensure an innovative pipeline, top-quality manufacturing, and education
of patients and physicians to ensure they have the information they
need to make knowledgeable decisions about patient care.
In 2018, Pfizer spent approximately $6.9 billion on direct sales &
marketing and approximately $8 billion on R&D globally. Direct sales
and marketing expenses include, among other things: direct promotion or
sale of the company's products.
Question. Why do you advertise for the drugs you manufacture? What
factors do you consider in choosing which drugs you advertise?
Answer. Pfizer believes that direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertising
should be, first and foremost, a tool through which we can provide
patients with useful information about their medical conditions, the
availability of treatments and the potential benefits and risks of
available treatment options so they can have a discussion with their
doctors and take an active role in managing their health. Research has
confirmed that this communication channel delivers on this goal.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See 2017 Direct to Consumer Advertising Survey Results,
presented by Princeton Survey Research Associates International,
prepared for PhRMA, https://www.phrma.org/report/2017-direct-to-
consumer-advertising-survey-results; DIA, Therapeutic and Regulatory
Science, https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/2168479017708226;
https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/
OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/ucm090276.htm#Completed.
We may consider several factors when making decisions about our
consumer communications. Some of these may include the information
needs of patients who might benefit from one of our medicines and/or
the extent to which a health condition is un- and under-diagnosed and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
treated.
______
Pfizer Inc.
500 Arcola Rd.
Collegeville, PA 19426
Tel: 484-865-8937
Fax: 484-865-0090
www.pfizer.com
Peter Honig, M.D., M.P.H.
Senior Vice President
Worldwide Safety and Regulatory
May 30, 2018
Scott Gottlieb, M.D.
Commissioner
Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
[emailprotected]
Re:
Reference Listed Drug (RLD) Access Inquiries Website and NDA
022321 for Embeda (morphine sulfate; naltrexone hydrochloride)
Extended-
Release Capsules; NDA 017989 for Hemabate (carboprost tromethamine)
Injection; and NDA 020931 for Tikosyn (dofetilide) Capsules
Dear Dr. Gottlieb:
We write in reference to the newly posted page on the FDA website
entitled ``Reference Listed Drug (RLD) Access Inquiries.'' \1\ We note
that several new drug applications (NDAs) owned by Pfizer Inc. or
wholly-owned subsidiaries of Pfizer (collectively, ``Pfizer'') are
included in the list published on this site (``List''):
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandAp
proved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm.
1.
Embeda (morphine sulfate; naltrexone hydrochloride), NDA
022321;
2.
Hemabate (carboprost tromethamine), NDA 01 7989; and
3.
Tikosyn (dofetilide), NDA 020931.
We write to the Agency for several reasons. First, we wish to inform
the Agency about Pfizer's internal practice for handling drug
purchasing inquiries from prospective generic applicants, as well as
provide some context for why the Agency may have received inquiries
about these particular products, and Pfizer's diligence in addressing
these issues. We believe that this information demonstrates Pfizer's
commitment to supporting innovation and a competitive marketplace.
Second, we wish to provide our suggestions on additional, non-
confidential information to add to the List in order to provide context
critical to understanding the List and its value. Additionally, we wish
to express our concerns that the Agency's announcement surrounding the
new webpage and how the information is currently presented implies that
the companies listed have engaged in ``gaming'' or anti-competitive
behavior, which is untrue with respect to Pfizer, and not supported by
the facts currently included in the List.
Pfizer was surprised and disappointed to discover that FDA had been
informed by prospective generic applicants that they had difficulty
obtaining some of our products to conduct the testing necessary to
support submission of an abbreviated new drug application (ANDA).
However, we note that the Agency included a disclaimer on the webpage
stating that ``[w]e note that FDA has not independently investigated or
confirmed the access limitations described in the inquiries received.''
\2\ As discussed in more detail below, without having any additional
information about these inquiries, Pfizer is unable to confirm whether
those inquiries were made to Pfizer, and if so, whether they were
handled in accordance with Pfizer's practice to make its drug products
available to applicants for purchase.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandAp
proved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm.
Following publication of the List, Pfizer conducted internal due
diligence to identify whether Pfizer was contacted by prospective
generic applicants for the listed products, and whether Pfizer was able
to provide those customers with the requested drug product. By way of
background, our standard approach is to ensure that drug product is
available to licensed generic manufacturers at the listed price and on
Pfizer's standard terms of sale.\3\ The vast majority of Pfizer's
products are available through traditional wholesale channels (i.e.,
available through one or more of Pfizer's authorized distributors). If
Pfizer receives an inquiry about a product that is available at
wholesale, Pfizer will refer a prospective buyer to a publicly
available list of its authorized distributors, and indicate that the
prospective buyer should obtain product from an authorized distributor
on that list. For the limited number of products that are not available
at wholesale, requests made to Pfizer by a generic manufacturer wishing
to purchase drug samples should be fulfilled in accordance with
Pfizer's standard practice. If such requests involve a product with a
REMS that restricts distribution, Pfizer's position is that a Safety
Determination Letter (SDL) needs to be provided prior to sale. Pfizer
developed an internal process to handle such requests in early 2015,
upon realizing that such requests come into Pfizer via multiple
departments and colleagues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ If a drug product is in critical short supply, Pfizer will ship
products to fulfill orders for dispensing to patients before fulfilling
orders for product for testing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tikosyn
The List indicated that the Agency had received four inquiries
regarding Tikosyn. To the best of its knowledge, Pfizer is aware of
only one request for Tikosyn from a prospective generic applicant. At
the time of that request, Tikosyn was approved with a REMS with
elements to assure safe use (ETASU) that restricted distribution. When
contacted by the applicant, Pfizer requested that the applicant provide
us with written confirmation from the Agency that Pfizer's sale of the
product to the applicant would not be considered a violation of our
REMS. The applicant did not contact Pfizer further and Pfizer never
received any written correspondence from the Agency. The Agency removed
the REMS in 2016, and Pfizer notes that the Access Inquiries Webpage
indicates that FDA never issued any SDLs for this drug product.
We note despite the inquiries submitted to the Agency identified in the
List, ANDAs have been submitted and approved for the drug product.
There are three approved ANDAs for the drug product, with the first
approved on June 6, 2016,\4\ and two additional ANDAs approved in
2018.\5\ Additionally, the Agency's paragraph IV certification list
indicates that the first ANDA containing a paragraph IV certification
was submitted on May 1, 2014, when the REMS was still in place.\6\ This
additional information indicates that applicants were able to obtain
product, submit ANDAs, and obtain approval from the approval even while
the REMS was in place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ANDA 207058, see https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/
ob/results_product.cfm?Ap
pl_Type=A&Appl_No=207058, accessed May 23, 2018.
\5\ ANDA 208625, see https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/
ob/results_product.cfm?Ap
pl_Type=A&Appl_No=208625, accessed May 23, 2018; ANDA 207746, see
https://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/ob/
results_product.cfm?Appl_Type=A&Appl_No=207746, accessed May 23, 2018.
\6\ See https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDe
velopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/
AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/UC
M293268.pdf.
As the REMS has been removed by the Agency, Pfizer now makes Tikosyn
available at wholesale through its authorized distributors.
Embeda
The List indicated that the Agency received one inquiry regarding
Embeda. We note that despite the inquiry submitted to the Agency, ANDAs
containing a paragraph IV certification were submitted to the Agency
for Embeda from May 3, 2010, through May 28, 2010, covering five of the
six approved strengths of Embeda.\7\ Pfizer acquired King
Pharmaceuticals (and with it, Ernbeda) on March 1, 2011. Two weeks
later, Pfizer recalled Embeda from the market due to stability issues
with the product. Pfizer spent the next several years diligently
addressing the issues that led to the recall, and Pfizer was able to
re-launch the product in January 2015. However, as a result of these
issues, from March 2011 through January 2015, there was no Embeda
product available for sale in the U.S. market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDe
velopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/
AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/UC
M293268.pdf.
Pfizer was not able to identify any request from a generic applicant to
purchase Embeda. Embeda is now available at wholesale through Pfizer's
authorized distributors.
Hemabate
Finally, the List indicated that FDA had received one inquiry for
Hemabate, an older drug owned by Pharmacia and Upjohn Co., which was
acquired by Pfizer in 2003. Pharmacia, and later Pfizer, limited
Hemabate distribution to customers with medical and surgical intensive
care facilities to help ensure the drug product was used in accordance
with the product's labeling. While this limited distribution may have
prevented a prospective generic applicant from acquiring the drug
product from a wholesaler, it would not have prevented an applicant
from contacting Pfizer directly to buy the drug product. Pfizer ceased
the limited distribution of Hemabate to ensure patients and healthcare
professionals had appropriate access to the drug product. The product
is now available at wholesale through Pfizer's authorized distributors
since January 2018. Pfizer was not able to identify any request from a
generic applicant to purchase Hemabate.
Proposed Revisions to the List
We encourage the Agency, in accordance with its goal ``[t]o help
address this issue and to provide transparency regarding these
inquiries,'' \8\ to add further information to the List. The
information Pfizer suggests the Agency include will provide critical
context to help clarify to the stakeholders involved, i.e., the
American public, the United States Government, and industry, whether an
NDA bolder may be preventing generic applicants from obtaining the drug
products necessary to support submission of an ANDA Without this
information, stakeholders may come away with the false impression that
every company on the List has impeded access, as demonstrated by the
news coverage of the List and FDA's statements.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandAp
proved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm.
\9\ See, e.g., Sara Koblitz, FDA's Version of the Scarlet Letter,
FDA Law Blog (May 23, 2018), http://www.fdalawblog.net/2018/05/fdas-
version-of-the-scarlett-letter/; Sheila Kaplan, ``F.D.A. Names and
Shames Drug Makers to Encourage Generic Competition,'' The New York
Times (May 17, 2018), https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/17/health/drug-
prices-generics-fda.html; Sy Mukherjee, ``The FDA Is Naming and Shaming
Companies Accused of Blocking Cheap Generic Drugs,'' Fortune (May 17,
2018), http://fortune.com/2018/05/17/fda-database-generic-drug-delays/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recommend that the List include:

The date the inquiry was made to FDA, and if furnished by the
prospective generic applicant, the date(s) the applicant attempted to
acquire the drug product and failed;

If available, whether the prospective generic applicant directly
approached the NDA holder or manufacturer , and was unable to obtain
product that way;

The identity of the NDA holder at the time the inquiry was made;

Whether there are approved generic products for the drug
product, and when those were approved;

Whether and when an applicant submitted an ANDA with paragraph
IV certification; and

Whether a particular inquiry for a product with a REMS with
ETASU restricting distribution included a protocol, and whether the
Agency issued an SDL relating to that inquiry.
While the Agency includes a disclaimer on the Access Inquiries Webpage
that it has not investigated or confirmed the access limitations
described in the inquiries it received,\10\ the Agency's statements,
both on its website and in public statements, strongly suggest that the
Agency endorses the claim that access to biosamples was blocked for all
products on the list. In reality, however, the only certain fact about
the inquiries on the List is that a prospective applicant complained to
FDA that it was unable to obtain the drug product. Neither Pfizer nor
the FDA knows whether that is in fact the case, or, if it is, whether
there are reasons the applicant did not obtain product that are not the
result of ``gaming'' or anti-competitive tactics by NDA holders. For
example, the drug may not be available due to a drug shortage, recall
(as in the case of Embeda), or because the generic applicant did not
actually try all avenues to obtain the drug product, such as contacting
the NOA holder or manufacturer directly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandAp
proved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.
htm.
Including this additional information in the List will shed light on
the reasons the generic applicant may have been w1able to obtain the
drug product, as well as indicate whether generic applicants were able
to obtain the drug product, despite the inquiries received by FDA. For
example, knowing the dates the inquiries were made could indicate
whether the requests came during a time when the drug product was not
being marketed, as in a recall situation, or when a REMS with ETASU
that restricted distribution was in place that may have triggered the
need for a review of the prospective generic applicant's protocol. And,
knowing those dates will help industry perform its own due diligence to
identify whether a request for drug product was inappropriately denied.
Likewise, noting whether the prospective generic applicant stated
whether it contacted the NDA holder or manufacturer will indicate
whether the applicant reached out to a party that could provide the
drug product, and will assist a company in determining whether its
policy on providing drug product, such as Pfizer's, was appropriately
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
followed.
Additionally, providing the identity of the NDA holder at the time of
the inquiry will help clarify whether the company that currently owns
the NDA could potentially be responsible for the failure to provide
drug product, or whether that failure, if any, could be attributable to
the prior holder of the NDA. For example, without knowing when the
inquiry was made or who the NDA holder was at the time of the inquiry,
Pfizer cannot tell for two of its products on the List (Embeda and
Hemabate) whether those inquiries came before or after Pfizer's
acquisition of the companies that originally owned those
products.Accordingly, Pfizer cannot adequately respond to allegations
that it may have inappropriately restricted access to its drug
products.
Including the dates of generic entry would also demonstrate to
stakeholders whether generic competition was impeded, or if in fact,
one or more generic applicants were able to obtain the product needed
in order to obtain approval from the Agency. While we recognize that
the Agency may be unable to identify who made the inquiry to FDA, even
if that applicant has an ANDA approved later, to the extent that
information can be provided, it would demonstrate whether a particular
generic applicant was blocked from obtaining product.
Additionally, providing more information related to products with REMS
that restrict distribution, e.g., whether an applicant has submitted a
protocol to the Agency, and whether a particular inquiry on the List
correlates to the issuance of an SOL, will also indicate whether the
generic applicant who made the inquiry provided its protocol to the
Agency, and whether the Agency determined that the protocol contained
safety protections comparable to the REMS. Currently, there is no
indication as to whether an applicant who complained about not having
access to such drug product took appropriate steps to facilitate its
access to the product when there was such a REMS in place for the drug
product.
Finally, we also note that the Agency does not inform an NOA holder in
real time when an applicant has had difficulty obtaining product. Given
Pfizer's policy to provide drug product when requested, if the Agency
had informed Pfizer that it had received such an inquiry on a specific
date, Pfizer could have then undertaken its own efforts to resolve the
issue.
We appreciate the Agency's consideration of the issues raised in this
letter, and reiterate our commitment to competition and innovation in
the biopharmaceutical industry.
Sincerely,
Peter Honig, M.D., M.P.H.
Senior Vice President, Worldwide Safety and Regulatory
cc:
Janel Woodcock, M.D., Janet [emailprotected]
Theresa Toigo, [emailprotected]
Kathleen Uhl, M.D., [emailprotected]
Maryll Toufanian, [emailprotected]
______
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
July 19, 2018
Peter Honig , M.D., M.P.H.
Senior Vice President, Worldwide Safety and Regulatory
Pfizer Inc.
Email: [emailprotected]
Dear Dr. Honig:
Thank you for your letter of May 30, 2018, regarding FDA's Reference
Listed Drug (RLD) Access Inquiries webpage. Your letter informs FDA
about Pfizer's internal practice for handling inquiries about samples
from prospective generic applicants, provides suggestions about
additional information to add to the RLD Access Inquiries webpage, and
expresses concern about the Agency's announcement surrounding the
webpage (Letter at 1-2). The Commissioner referred your letter to the
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) for response.
1.
Pfizer's internal practice for handling drug purchasing
inquiries from prospective generic applicants
Your letter provides a synopsis of Pfizer's internal practices for
handling the inquiries that it receives related to RLD access to its
products and the circumstances surrounding the Pfizer products that
appear on the RLD Access Inquiries webpage (Letter at 2-3). We
appreciate the insight provided by Pfizer on its internal processes. As
you are aware, inclusion on the list of products on the RLD Access
Inquiries webpage signifies that FDA has received an RLD access inquiry
related to limited distribution of the product. As we state on the
webpage, FDA has not independently investigated or confirmed the access
limitations as described in the inquiries received.
You also state that FDA ``does not inform an NDA holder in real time
when an applicant has had difficulty obtaining product'' and that ``if
[FDA] had informed Pfizer that it had received such an inquiry on a
specific date, Pfizer could have then undertaken its own efforts to
resolve the issue.'' As the webpage explains (and as also described in
the draft guidance for industry How to Obtain a Letter from FDA Stating
that Bioequivalence Study Protocols Contain Safety Protections
Comparable to Applicable REMS for RLD (How to Obtain a Letter
Guidance)), FDA does notify certain RLD sponsors, after the prospective
generic applicant has provided appropriate disclosure authorization to
the Agency. However, to the extent that Pfizer has a process for
prospective generic applicants to obtain samples, we encourage Pfizer
to consider making that process public to help ensure both that
interested developers know what process to use, and that Pfizer has
access to as much information as possible about any access issues.
2.
Suggestions for additional information Pfizer believes FDA
should add to the RLD Access Inquiries webpage
Your letter also contains a list of six points of information Pfizer
recommends be added to the RLD Access web page (Letter at 4):
1.
The date the inquiry was made to FDA, and (if furnished
by the prospective generic applicant), the date(s) the
applicant attempted to acquire the product and failed;
2.
If available, whether the prospective generic applicant
directly approached the NDA bolder or manufacturer, and was
unable to obtain product that way;
3.
The identity of the NDA holder at the time the inquiry
was made;
4.
Whether there are approved generic products for the drug
product, and when those were approved;
5.
Whether and when an applicant submitted an ANDA with a
paragraph IV certification; and
6.
Whether a particular inquiry for a product with a REMS
with ETASU impacting distribution included a protocol, and
whether the Agency issued a Safety Determination Letter (SDL)
relating to that inquiry.
We note that two of these items (``[t]he identity of the NDA holder at
the time the inquiry was made,'' and ``whether the Agency issued a
[Safety Determination Letter] relating to [an] inquiry'') are already
included on the RLD Access Inquiries webpage. The webpage identifies
the RLD sponsor associated with each inquiry, and clarifies that this
is the RLD sponsor that was listed in the Approved Drug Products with
Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations (the Orange Book) at the time FDA
received the inquiry (see footnote on the chart of inquiries). The web
page also identifies whether FDA issued a Safety Determination Letter
in connection with a particular RLD access inquiry (and explains that
receipt of such a letter is preceded by FDA' s review of bioequivalence
study protocols to assess whether they contain safety protections
comparable to those in the applicable REMS for the RLD).
Two of the other points of information (``[w]hether there are approved
generic products for the drug product, and when those were approved''
and ``[w]hether an applicant submitted an ANDA with a paragraph IV
certification'') are already publicly available on FDA's website (via
the Orange Book or [emailprotected] and the Paragraph IV Certifications List,
respectively).\1\ For the remaining points of information, to the
extent FDA has access to the information you describe, we will take
your feedback (along with feedback from other stakeholders) into
account as we consider whether any changes to the RLD Access Inquiries
webpage should be made in order to best address and improve
transparency about this topic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
See http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/ob/index.cfm,
http://www.accessdata.fda.
gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm and https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/
ApprovalApplications/Abbre
viatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/UCM293268.pdf, respectively.
3.
Concerns relating to the Agency's announcement surrounding the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
RLD Access Inquiries webpage
Your letter also indicates that FDA's presentation of information about
this topic ``strongly suggest that the Agency endorses the claim that
access to biosamples was blocked for all products on the list'' (Letter
at 4). As you note, however, the RLD Access webpage makes clear that
FDA has not independently investigated or confirmed the access
limitations described in the inquiries the Agency received. The webpage
is one effort under the FDA's Drug Competition Action Plan to provide
transparency about the potential impact of this important issue. If
generic companies are unable to purchase the samples they need to
support their applications, this slows down, or entirely impedes, the
generic drug development process--leading to delays in bringing
affordable generic alternatives to patients in need. FDA is committed
to advancing policies to help bring more competition to the
prescription drug market, and we will continue to consider how we can
best advance this goal, including whether any changes to the RLD Access
Inquiries webpage should be made. We appreciate your feedback on this
issue.
Thank you again for contacting us.
Sincerely,
Janet Woodcock, M.D.
Director
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
______
PFIZER FOUNDATION GRANT SUMMARY
2015-2018
TOTAL: $45,877,000
GLOBAL HEALTH PROGRAMMING
NOTE: This report includes information for recipient both U.S. and ex-
U.S. recipient organizations. Certain Pfizer Foundation grants to non-
U.S. grantees are facilitated through U.S.-based donor-advised funds
that specialize in vetting and processing grants to non-U.S. grant
recipients.
IMPROVING HEALTHCARE DELIVERY AND LOCAL INNOVATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE BOARD
APPROVED
PARTNER
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
Swasth
Global Health Innovation
$1,500,000
Foundation,
Grants support
Afya Research,
organizations that are
Jacaranda
advancing innovative
Heath,
health models in low
Northstar
and middle income
Alliance,
countries. The goal of
Penda Health,
this portfolio is to
World Health
improve healthcare
Partners,
delivery for
Clinicas del
underserved populations
Azucar,
and support local
Saluno, APOPO,
innovation in key
Ayzh, Last
countries: India,
Mile Health,
Kenya, Mozambique,
LifeNet
Mexico, Tanzania,
International,
India, Liberia, Uganda,
One Family
Rwanda, and South
Health,
Africa. The grants
Operation ASHA
support projects that
and Sevamob
align to the
Foundation's 4
strategic elements:
primary healthcare
delivery, women and
children's health,
health technologies for
low resource settings
and innovative
financing mechanisms.
The Foundation
supported $100,000
grants to fifteen
organizations in 10
countries.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2016
Swasth
SECOND CYCLE: The
2,000,000
Foundation,
Foundation supported
Afya Research,
$100,000 grants to
Jacaranda
twenty organizations in
Heath,
10 countries.
Northstar
Alliance,
Penda Health,
World Health
Partners,
Clinicas del
Azucar,
Saluno, Ayzh,
Last Mile
Health,
LifeNet
International,
One Family
Health,
Operation ASHA
and Sevamob,
Purple Source,
Unjani,
AccuHealth,
Bive, Salud
Cercana,
2020MicroClini
c
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 2018
Swasth
THIRD CYCLE: The
2,000,000
Foundation,
Foundation supported
Afya Research,
$100,000 grants to
Jacaranda
twenty organizations in
Heath,
12 countries.
Northstar
Alliance,
World Health
Partners,
Clinicas del
Azucar,
Saluno, Ayzh,
Last Mile
Health,
LifeNet
International,
One Family
Health,
Operation ASHA
and Sevamob,
Purple Source,
Unjani, Bive,
2020MicroClini
c, MUSO,
Possible, UE
Life Sciences
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 2018
Acumen
The Foundation provided
500,000
catalytic funding to
Acumen America, an
early-stage
philanthropic venture
fund that invests in
companies that are
improving the lives of
low-income Americans
and advancing
innovative solutions to
issues of poverty in
America. Through this
grant, Acumen will grow
its portfolio of health
investments that
transform services for
the poor in the US,
including programs that
will increase access to
care, including
lowering the financial
and time burden of
health and wellness on
low-income individuals,
improve quality of care
to make care more
effective, and improve
patient experience of
care to drive patient
engagement & adherence.
Portfolio companies
include approaches to
use technology to
address and reduce
health disparities for
underserved and
multicultural
populations.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
IMPACT INVESTING CATALYTIC GRANTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE BOARD
APPROVED
PARTNER
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2015
PharmAccess
The Foundation provided
$1,500,000
a grant to support the
development and roll
out of PharmAccess'
innovative healthcare
financing, funding
which will help scale
PharmAccess's mobile
health (mHealth)
wallet, a mobile health
payment platform linked
to M-Pesa in Kenya. The
goal of the
Foundation's grant is
to support user roll-
out of the platform and
increase the number of
people who use the
platform, demonstrating
its usability and
collecting data. The
Foundation's grant will
target 100,000 low
income, urban mothers
who will be enrolled
and receive a financial
subsidy through the
mHealth wallet to pay
for healthcare services
and products for their
children under 5 years
old.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2015
PATH
The Foundation provided
350,000
a grant to support the
expansion of PATH's
Global Health
Innovation Hub in South
Africa, in partnership
with the South Africa
Medical Research
Council. The Hub's
mission is to
accelerate access to
the most promising
technology innovations
by building the
capacity of local
innovators to develop,
manufacture, and deploy
global health
technologies for
vulnerable groups,
leveraging PATH's
expertise and network
in global health and
product development.
The grant will support
activities to build and
accelerate local
innovations and
identify and prioritize
local technologies that
can deliver global
health impact.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2015
UNITUS
The Foundation provided
650,000
a grant to support the
expansion of
`StartHealth,' a health
technology jump-starter
designed to accelerate
the pace of development
of bottom of the
pyramid focused health-
tech startups in India.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2015
Global
The Foundation provided
500,000
Partnerships
a grant to this impact
investment fund, which
focuses on providing
products and services
using market based
approaches in Latin
America. This includes
efforts to pilot and
validate high potential
health modes for last
mile and underserved
populations, with a
focus on woman and
children.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUPPORT INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO ENHANCING NON-COMUNICABLE DISEASE CARE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE BOARD
APPROVED
PARTNER
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
FHI360
The Foundation provided a
$1,000,000
grant to support the
``Suc Khoe Doi Dao''
project that will
establish a community-
based, integrated NCD
prevention and control
program in Vietnam.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
George
This partnership will
1,000,000
Institute of
pilot implementation of a
Global Health
novel primary care
platform to support
communities and
healthcare providers in
the prevention and
management of NCDs in
Indonesia and India.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2016
PATH
As part of Pfizer
500,000
Foundation's work to
advance oncology care,
the Foundation provided
support to PATH in Peru
to reduce the growing
burden of illness and
death from breast cancer
for underserved
populations through early
detection linked to
service and treatment.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2016
Susan G Komen
As part of Pfizer
500,000
Breast Cancer
Foundation's work to
Foundation
advance oncology care,
the Foundation provided
support to Susan G Komen
Breast Cancer Foundation
in Northeast Brazil to
integrate breast cancer
patient support, early
detection and timely/
quality diagnosis into
existing primary care
services with the goal of
improving health access
and delivery for
underserved women.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2016
Partners in
As part of Pfizer
500,000
Health
Foundation's work to
advance oncology care,
the Foundation provided
support to Partners in
Health to increase
accessibility of
treatment for breast
cancer for underserved
patients and document and
disseminate lessons
learned to inform cancer
care in Rwanda.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2016
Indiana
As part of Pfizer
500,000
University
Foundation's work to
Center for
advance oncology care,
Global Health
the Foundation partnered
with AMPATH, through the
Indiana University Center
for Global Health, to
improve breast cancer
services for underserved
women in Kenya including
screening, early
diagnosis, treatment and
palliative and
survivorship care.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2017
FHI360
The Foundation provided
300,000
additional funding of the
``Abundant Health''
project to support
routine prevention,
screening and management
of hypertension and
diabetes care in five
commune health stations
in Tan Phu district in Ho
Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2017
PATH
The Foundation provided
350,000
additional funding of the
``Community Based Program
for Breast Health''
project in Peru.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2018
FHI360
The Foundation provided
437,000
additional funding/phase
two of the ``Abundant
Health'' project to
support routine
prevention, screening and
management of
hypertension (HTN) and
diabetes (DM) care at the
community level.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2018
PATH
The Foundation provided
230,000
additional funding of the
``Community Based Program
for Breast Health''
project in Peru.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2018
Indiana
The Foundation provided
250,000
University
additional funding to
Center for
AMPATH, through the
Global Health
Indiana University Center
for Global Health, to
improve breast cancer
services for underserved
women in Kenya including
screening, early
diagnosis, treatment and
palliative and
survivorship care.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2018
George
The Foundation additional
150,000
Washington
funding to help improve
American
health outcomes and
Cancer
reduce health disparities
Institute
for African-American,
Latina and LGBT women.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PROVIDING CRITICAL SUPPORT FOR PRESSING U.S. PUBLIC HEALTH NEEDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE BOARD
APPROVED
PARTNER
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2016
American
As part of Pfizer
$1,000,000
Cancer
Foundation's work to
Society
advance oncology care,
the Foundation partnered
with the American Cancer
Society in Los Angeles,
California and Hamptons
Roads, Virginia to
develop a patient
navigation model that
links community health
advisors with federally-
qualified health center
(FQHC) screening and in-
hospital navigation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2016
George
As part of Pfizer
1,000,000
Washington
Foundation's work to
American
advance oncology care,
Cancer
the Foundation provided
Institute
support to George
Washington University
Cancer Institute to help
improve health outcomes
and reduce health
disparities for African-
America, Latina and LGBT
women.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
West Virginia
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Department of
grant to support opioid
Health and
addiction prevention and
Human
education programming in
Resources
West Virginia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
New Hampshire
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Department of
grant to support opioid
Education
addiction prevention and
education programming in
New Hampshire.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
Office of Drug
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Control
grant to support opioid
Policy
addiction prevention and
education programming in
Kentucky.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
New Mexico
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Department of
grant to support opioid
Health
addiction prevention and
education programming in
New Mexico.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
Utah
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Department of
grant to support opioid
Health
addiction prevention and
education programming in
Utah.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
Commonwealth
The Foundation provided a
500,000
of
grant to support opioid
Massachusetts
addiction prevention and
Department of
education programming in
Public Health
Massachusetts.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
Rhode Island
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Department of
grant to support opioid
Health
addiction prevention and
education programming in
Rhode Island.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
Foundation for
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Appalachian
grant to support opioid
Ohio
addiction prevention and
education programming in
Ohio.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
Department of
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Public Health
grant to support opioid
addiction prevention and
education programming in
CT.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2017
Delaware
The Foundation provided a
500,000
Health and
grant to support opioid
Social
addiction prevention and
Services
education programming in
Delaware.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADDRESSING KEY BARRIERS FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE BOARD
APPROVED
PARTNER
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2015
Save the
The Foundation provided a
$500,000
Children
grant to support a pilot
program offering an
integrated approach to
delivering immunization
and family planning
services. The grant
supported development of
materials and tools for
healthcare workers to
engage women on family
planning services,
including formal
evaluation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
CARE
The Foundation provided a
1,000,000
grant to support
increased access to
family planning and
immunization in Benin by
integrating both services
into comprehensive
delivery and
strengthening of clinical
skills and outreach.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
FHI360
The Foundation provided a
1,000,000
grant to support to
develop a global
monitoring and evaluation
framework to assess task
shifting in the delivery
of family planning
products and demonstrate
the effectiveness and
safety of using Community
Health Workers to
administer products.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
IRC
The Foundation provided a
1,200,000
grant to support
increased access to
family planning and
immunization in Ethiopia
and Uganda by integrating
both services into
comprehensive delivery
and male engagement. The
project focused on last
mile and hard to reach
communities.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
PSI
The Foundation provided a
1,000,000
grant to support
increased access to and
demand for contraception
and reproductive health
services in Uganda for
women and adolescent
girls
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
U.S. Fund for
The Foundation provided a
1,000,000
UNICEF
grant to support
expanding national mobile
health platforms that
improve immunization
coverage and delivery in
Indonesia, Laos and
Uganda in partnership
with MOH.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2015
World Vision
The Foundation provided a
1,000,000
grant to support
increased access to
family planning and
immunization in Kenya by
integrating both services
into comprehensive
delivery, community
mobilization and male
engagement.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2016
World Vision
The Foundation partnered
1,000,000
with World Vision in
Zimbabwe to identify gaps
in immunization coverage
for children, adolescents
and adults and support
efforts to develop a life
course approach to
immunization with the
Ministry of Health. The
focus of the project was
to increase access to and
use of basic childhood
immunizations for
children from birth to
age 5, and HPV
immunization for girls as
well as maternal
immunizations for
pregnant women. In
addition World Vision
worked with the Ministry
of Health to address
adult immunization needs,
barriers and gaps in
community service.
Activities included
training village health
workers, health facility
staff and community and
faith leaders to educate
and mobilize their
communities around
immunization and promote
vaccination. This project
also supported the
development of a national
life course approach.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2016
U.S. Fund for
The Foundation provided a
1,000,000
UNICEF
grant to help UNICEF
improve immunization
coverage in urban
underserved communities
in Asia (Cambodia,
Myanmar, Mongolia and the
Philippines), and to
support UNICEF in
conducting operational
research to assess the
feasibility of using
current newborn
immunization delivery
programs to support life
course immunization
strategies and reach
female populations with
additional immunizations
and reproductive health
services. A centerpiece
of this work is
supporting the roll out
of technology platforms
that track immunization
coverage and population
registries.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
August 2016
UN FOUNDATION
The Foundation partnered
1,000,000
with the UN Foundation's
[emailprotected] program to
pilot a life course
immunization approach
with a focus on rubella.
Activities include the
development of culturally
specific local
communication materials
on the importance of
vaccination and answering
concerns parents may have
about immunization and
life-long impacts, as
well as an integrated
marketing program
featuring social media,
digital assets and a U.S.-
based media campaign.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2017
IRC
The Foundation provided
800,000
additional funding to
existing programs in
Uganda and Ethiopia to
advance integrated
immunization and family
planning program.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2017
Save the
The Foundation provided
250,000
Children
additional funding to
existing programs in
Malawi to advance
integrated immunization
and family planning
program.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2017
CARE
The Foundation provided
250,000
additional funding to an
existing program in Benin
to advance integrated
immunization and family
planning program.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
July 2017
World Vision
The Foundation provided
300,000
additional funding to an
existing program in Kenya
focused on integrated
immunization and family
planning.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 2018
CARE
The Foundation provided
1,000,000
additional funding to
support work in Benin,
where mortality of
mothers and children is
high. The project works
in 20 public health
clinics to increase the
uptake of two live saving
interventions, childhood
vaccinations and family
planning, through
integration of the two
services. The project
addresses two main
challenges at the same
time: a weak healthcare
system and sociocultural
barriers in the
community, which both
need to be overcome for
women and children to
have access to quality
health services.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 2018
IRC
The Foundation provided
1,500,000
additional funding to
permit the IRC to expand
their work with health
partners in Ethiopia and
Uganda to increase the
use of immunization and
family planning by
reaching women with
information and services
at a critical time--the
12 months following
birth.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 2018
Save the
The Foundation provided
1,000,000
Children
additional funding to an
existing program in
Malawi to advance
integrated immunization
and family planning
program with Save the
Children.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 2018
World Vision
The Foundation provided
1,000,000
funding for the second
phase of this project,
Increasing Use of Family
Planning (FP) and
Immunization Services in
Kenya.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DISASTER RELIEF RESPONSE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATE BOARD
APPROVED
PARTNER
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
April 2015
American Red Cross
Cyclone Pam
$10,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
June 2016
American Red Cross
West Virginia
25,000
relief efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
June 2016
American Red Cross
Ecuador Earthquake
75,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
June 2016
International
Ecuador Earthquake
75,000
Medical Corp.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
American Red Cross
West Virginia
25,000
relief efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
American Red Cross
Ecuador Earthquake
75,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
International
Ecuador Earthquake
75,000
Medical Corp.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
American Red Cross
Louisiana flooding
25,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
Direct Relief
Louisiana flooding
25,000
International
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
One SC Fund
Hurricane Matthew
50,000
in SC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
Direct Relief
Hurricane Matthew
50,000
International
in the US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
Project Hope
Hurricane Matthew
50,000
in Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
World Vision
Hurricane Matthew
50,000
in Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
PSI
Zika virus relief
100,000
efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
The CDC Foundation
Zika virus relief
500,000
efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
The CDC Foundation
Zika virus relief
500,000
efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
PAHO Foundation
Zika virus relief
1,000,000
efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
Florida State Dept
Zika virus relief
1,000,000
of Health
efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2016
Texas Dept of
Zika virus relief
1,000,000
Health
efforts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2016
American Red Cross
Louisiana flooding
25,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2016
Pinebelt Foundation
Mississippi
25,000
flooding
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2016
American Red Cross
Peru and Colombia
100,000
mudslide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 2016
UNICEF
Peru and Colombia
100,000
mudslide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
Americares
Hurricane Harvey--
125,000
TX and LA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
World Vision
Hurricane Harvey--
125,000
TX and LA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
American Red Cross
Hurricane Harvey--
250,000
TX and LA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
One America Appeal
Hurricane Irma--TX
500,000
and FL
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
American Red Cross
Hurricane Irma--
400,000
Puerto Rico/U.S.
Virgin Islands
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
IFRC
Hurricane Irma--
100,000
Caribbean
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
American Red Cross
Hurricane Maria--
250,000
Puerto Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
American Red Cross
Mexico Earthquake
250,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2017
UNICEF
Mexico Earthquake
250,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
American Red Cross
California
50,000
Wildfires
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
United Way of North
Hurricane Florence
100,000
Carolina
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
Central Carolina
Hurricane Florence
100,000
Community
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
International
Hurricane Florence
200,000
Medical Corp.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
American Red Cross
Hurricane Florence
100,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
International
Hurricane Michael
100,000
Medical Corp.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
Florida Disaster
Hurricane Michael
100,000
Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
Save the Children
Indonesia Tsunami
100,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
Direct Relief
Indonesia Tsunami
100,000
International
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
World Vision
Indonesia Tsunami
100,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept-Oct 2018
Physicians for a
California
100,000
Healthy California
Wildfires
------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA
PFIZER INC., Plaintiff,
Case No.
v.
JURY TRIAL DEMANDED
JOHNSON & JOHNSON and JANSSEN
BIOTECH, INC., Defendants.
COMPLAINT
For its Complaint, plaintiff Pfizer Inc. (``Pfizer'') alleges
against defendants Johnson & Johnson and Janssen Biotech, Inc.
(collectively, ``J&J''), as follows:
PRELIMINARY STATEMENT
1. It is accepted national policy to promote price competition
among pharmaceutical manufacturers after an originator firm's patent
protection has expired. This policy extends to biologics, a unique
category of medications that are derived from living organisms. As one
lawmaker put it when adopting applicable legislation, such competition
``is good for patient safety, consumer choice . . . and the healthcare
system at large.'' This case is about J&J's efforts to suppress that
competition and deprive society of those benefits by, among other
things, imposing a web of exclusionary contracts on both health
insurers and healthcare providers (e.g., hospitals and clinics) to
maintain its stranglehold in respect of an important biologic, brand
named Remicade, also known by its generic name, infliximab.
2. For many patients suffering from chronic diseases such as
rheumatoid arthritis, plaque psoriasis, and Crohn's disease, the best--
and sometimes the only--option for treatment is infusion therapy with
infliximab. As these conditions are chronic in nature, patients often
require long-term treatment and multiple infusions per year.
3. J&J owned patents protecting infliximab and has been amply
rewarded for its invention: Between 1998 and 2016, Remicade was the
only infliximab product on the market. This position allowed Remicade
to become J&J's best-selling drug by far, generating about $4.8 billion
in U.S. sales in 2016 alone. In fact, Remicade is among the best
selling drugs in the world. For most uses, at list price Remicade sells
for about $4,000 per infused dose and about $26,000 for a full year of
treatment. When Pfizer introduced its competing biologic Inflectra
(infliximab-dyyb) in 2016, J&J deployed improper exclusionary tactics
to maintain the dominance of its flagship product.
4. Inflectra received marketing approval under the Biologics Price
Competition and Innovation Act (``BPCIA''). Congress recognized the
growing importance of biologics, as well as the growing costs
associated with them, and passed the BPCIA in 2010. The purpose of the
BPCIA, as its name suggests, is to foster meaningful price competition
for long-entrenched branded biologic products--with the ultimate goal
of lowering healthcare costs. To facilitate price competition, the
BPCIA provides an abbreviated FDA approval pathway for ``biosimilar''
versions of branded biologic drugs. Biosimilars are products that the
FDA has determined to have ``no clinically meaningful differences''
from the already approved biologic (sometimes referred to as the
``reference listed drug'' or ``RLD'') in terms of safety, purity, and
potency. Although the BPCIA was enacted in 2010, FDA procedures for
implementing the Act did not become effective until a few years later,
and biosimilars are only recently beginning to come onto the market,
with the first biosimilar approval in 2015.
5. On April 5, 2016, Inflectra received FDA approval as the first
biosimilar to Remicade. Pfizer began shipping Inflectra in November
2016 and set its initial list price, often referred to as the wholesale
acquisition cost (or ``WAC''), at 15 percent below the then-current WAC
of Remicade.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ WAC is the manufacturer's published list price to wholesalers
or direct purchasers, not including prompt pay or other discounts,
rebates, or reductions in price.
6. The threat from Inflectra did not go unnoticed by J&J. Within
weeks of Inflectra's launch, J&J began to deploy what it publicly has
termed its ``Biosimilar Readiness Plan.'' The core features of the plan
are exclusionary contracts that foreclose Pfizer's access to an
overwhelming share of consumers, coupled with anticompetitive bundling
and coercive rebate policies designed to block both insurers from
reimbursing, and hospitals and clinics from purchasing, Inflectra or
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
other biosimilars of Remicade despite their lower pricing.
7. J&J's actions with respect to Remicade exclude competition at
multiple levels:
8. Exclusive contracts with insurance company payers. Insurer
decisions regarding reimbursement policies have a dramatic impact on
which infliximab product will be stocked by healthcare providers such
as hospitals and clinics. Because providers administer infliximab on
site (it is an infusion product), they must use their own funds to
stock the product, purchasing it for later use and relying upon
subsequent reimbursement from insurers to recoup their expenses. Given
the cost of biologic drugs generally, and Remicade in particular, there
is almost no chance that providers will pay for a product that is not
widely covered by insurers for fear of stocking a product that will not
be reimbursed after the provider administers it to a patient, as even a
single unreimbursed dose may cost the provider in excess of $4,000.
 Recognizing this, J&J has induced insurers to enter into
contracts that require an explicit commitment not to cover Inflectra at
all or to do so only in the rarest of circumstances--in effect, to make
Remicade the only covered infliximab. As a direct result of these
exclusive dealing contractual commitments, Inflectra is either not
listed on the insurance company's medical policy--a published listing
of the drugs approved for reimbursement under the insurer's medical
benefit--or is designated reimbursable only in so-called ``fail first''
cases. The ``fail first'' exception, which requires that Remicade has
been tried by and failed with respect to a given patient before a
biosimilar infliximab can be reimbursed, is medically inappropriate and
illusory in practice. If Remicade, which is an infliximab product, does
not work for a patient, a physician would turn to a non-infliximab
drug, not to Inflectra, which also is an infliximab product and has no
clinically meaningful differences from Remicade. The spurious nature of
J&J's ``fail first'' restriction is illustrated by the fact that in
early 2017, before J&J's contracts took hold, the major insurers listed
Inflectra at parity with Remicade--indicating that they saw no medical
reason to favor one over the other.
 J&J's ``fail first'' contractual restrictions therefore have the
same practical effect as pure exclusive contracts: both operate to
exclude Inflectra from qualifying for reimbursement under the insurers'
plans; both prevent the insurer from freely reimbursing for Inflectra
or another biosimilar without breaching the contracts; and both
foreclose Inflectra from competing for patients covered by those plans.
J&J has entered into such contracts with all or nearly all national
health insurance companies. These ``biosimilar-exclusion'' contracts,
on their own, have foreclosed Inflectra's ability to vie for at least
70 percent of commercially insured patients in the United States,
including a significant number of commercially insured patients who
reside in the Philadelphia area. But the foreclosure effects of those
insurer contracts go well beyond the immediate impact on patients
covered by the affected plans, as discussed below.
9. Exclusionary rebates and bundling arrangements with insurance
company payers. A key to J&J's ability to coerce insurers into
accepting its exclusionary commitments is its denial of rebates to
insurers that decline J&J's exclusivity commitments, thereby imposing a
substantial financial penalty. In effect, J&J says to insurers, ``If
you want to receive attractive rebates on Remicade for all your
existing Remicade patients''--rebates which, for some insurers, run
into the tens of millions of dollars annually--``you must agree to not
reimburse for Inflectra, or to do so in the most limited of
circumstances.'' In short, insurers that decline J&J's offer face a
substantial financial penalty, and those that accept receive a payoff
(multimillion dollar rebate payments) in return for their commitment to
exclude biosimilars.
 J&J's threatened financial penalty is effective because there is
a substantial base of patients across the country who are already
controlling their diseases with Remicade and thus are unlikely to
switch to a lower-priced biosimilar once available. Although
biosimilars have no clinically meaningful differences in safety,
purity, and potency from the biologic originator, they are not
substitutable without the prescriber's approval (unlike generics for
non-biologic drugs approved under the Hatch-Waxman structure, which are
substitutable without a new prescription). And, although the FDA's
approval permits physicians to switch from the originator to the
biosimilar, and Pfizer believes they should consider doing so in
appropriate circumstances, as a practical matter, existing-patient
Remicade demand is economically incontestable, that is, not a realistic
candidate for biosimilar firms to compete for. As the head of J&J's
pharmaceuticals business told investors, ``the 70 percent of patients
who are [already] stable on Remicade are highly unlikely to switch.''
\2\ J&J bundles this economically ``incontestable'' demand for Remicade
with the portion of demand that is ``contestable'' for biosimilar
firms-- new patients starting therapy with infliximab--by threatening
to deny rebates on all Remicade prescriptions if any infliximab
biosimilar prescriptions are reimbursed, effectively meaning insurers
would have to forfeit their rebates and pay J&J's ever increasing price
for the incontestable patients.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Johnson & Johnson, Q3 2016 Results Earnings Call Transcript
(Oct. 14, 2016), available at https://seekingalpha.com/search/
transcripts?term=johnson+%26+Johnson+biosimilar.
 J&J also bundles rebates on multiple different products, such
that insurers that refuse to grant exclusivity to Remicade would be
forced to pay higher prices and/or forego enhanced portfolio rebates.
The net effect of these anticompetitive bundling practices is that the
insurers subject to them have no real choice but to agree to J&J's
exclusivity conditions. Insurers have made it clear to Pfizerthat its
net cost for Inflectrawould need to be low enough to offset the loss of
J&J rebates. Pfizer and other biosimilar firms cannot feasibly make up
the difference for the J&J rebates (on the existing Remicade patient
base) that insurers would lose if they declined J&J's conditions.
Insurers have stated a desire to support biosimilars--and the lower
per-unit prices they bring--but realistically cannot do so without
incurring a substantial financial penalty imposed by J&J and thus
potentially placing themselves at a disadvantage relative to insurers
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
accepting J&J's rebates.
10. J&J-engineered coverage restrictions impact provider purchasing
behavior and thus magnify foreclosure. The foreclosure created by J&J's
exclusionary insurer-level contracts goes well beyond the patients
covered by these health insurers: Inflectra's coverage status has a
spillover effect on the purchasing decisions of healthcare providers
(as noted, the clinics, hospitals, and other institutions that purchase
and administer infliximab) as well as the prescribing decisions of
physicians affiliatedtherewith. Given the widespread gaps in
Inflectra's insurance coverage--engineered by J&J--providers have
overwhelmingly chosen to stock only Remicade (which is essentially
universally covered given its long tenure and dominant position) rather
than deal with the risk of possible denials of coverage for Inflectra.
Thus, providers have declined to purchase Inflectra across the board,
even for patients covered by insurance plans that do cover the product.
To take one example, even though Inflectra is covered by Medicare and
other government programs, providers have been unwilling to stock
Inflectra even for potential use with such government-insured patients.
As a result, not only is the federal government forced to continue
reimbursing for Remicade, the more expensive product, but the effective
foreclosure of biosimilars is expanded well beyond the 70 percent of
commercially insured patients directly foreclosed by J&J's insurer
contracts. Indeed, as of September 1, 2017, about 90 percent of
healthcare provider accounts using infliximab had purchased no
Inflectra at all. J&J has stoked providers' reluctance to purchase
Inflectra by touting with providers the very lack of coverage for
Inflectra created by J&J's own exclusionary contracts.
11. Exclusionary rebates and bundling arrangements with healthcare
providers. Beyond the spillover impact described above, J&J has also
extended its practices of multi-product bundling and bundling of
contestable and incontestable demand in contracts with healthcare
providers.
12. J&J's exclusionary plan has been remarkably effective at
stifling competition: Today, almost no national commercial health
insurer provides coverage for Inflectra (except under the spurious
``fail first'' scenario), and the vast bulk of healthcare provider
accounts using infliximab (approximately 90 percent) have not purchased
Inflectra at all. Despite some coverage by regional and government
plans, Inflectra has secured less than 4 percent of total infliximab
unit sales in the U.S. as of September 1, 2017.
13. The harm to Pfizer and to competition as a whole--and,
ultimately, to consumers, businesses, and the U.S. government, who bear
the brunt of rising healthcare costs nationwide--is manifest. In
response to a new entrant offering lower prices for a product deemed to
have ``no clinically meaningful differences'' from the incumbent's
brand, basic economics would predict that market-wide prices would
fall. Instead, the opposite has occurred. Since the time the FDA
approved Inflectra and J&J implemented its publicly-stated plan to
block biosimilars like Inflectra, J&J has raised the list price of
Remicade by close to 9 percent and increased the amount the U.S.
government reimburses for Remicade by more than $190 per infused dose.
J&J's list price increases are not overcome by increased rebates and
discounts: Remicade's ``average selling price'' (``ASP'')--which by
federal law is an average of a drug's pricing after taking into account
discounts, rebates, and other price concessions--actually has increased
since Inflectra's entry. As of September 2017, Remicade's ASP was more
than 10 percent higher than Inflectra's ASP. Pfizer has offered to
guarantee clients that Inflectra would be less expensive unit-for-unit
than Remicade during a contract term. Despite Inflectra's lower per-
unit prices, and J&J's escalating prices, Remicade has not lost any
substantial volume or share of sales to Inflectra, even though FDA
determined there to be no clinically meaningful differences between the
two products.
14. In July, J&J extolled the success of its scheme, noting that it
had not ``seen much of an impact'' from Inflectra's entrance, and that
J&J is ``especially well-
prepared to manage through the Remicade biosimilars.'' \3\ J&J also
said it was confident that it could fend off even subsequent biosimilar
entrants this year because of its exclusionary contracts: ``[W]e have
our contracting in place with all the managed care organizations [e.g.,
health insurers].'' \4\ The net result is that patients (along with
healthcare providers and the U.S. Government) have fewer choices and
pay more than they should.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Johnson & Johnson, Q2 2017 Results Earnings Call Transcript
(July 18, 2017), available at https://seekingalpha.com/search/
transcripts?term=johnson+$26+Johnson+biosimilar.
\4\ Id.
15. Major stakeholders at every level of the healthcare marketplace
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
are suffering as a result of J&J's competition-reducing actions:

Most importantly, consumers suffer in the form of artificially
inflated prices (including higher coinsurance payments, insurance
premiums, and taxes), as well as reduced choice.

Government programs, including Medicare--and ultimately
taxpayers--suffer by having to pay artificially higher prices for the
vast majority of their infliximab utilization.

Pfizer, of course, suffers loss of sales, investment, and
reputation as a result of J&J's success in securing commitments to
disadvantage Inflectra.
16. Pfizer brings this action under the antitrust laws of the
United States to challenge J&J's anticompetitive conduct. If J&J's
conduct is allowed to continue, its ``Biosimilar Readiness Plan'' will
become the playbook for biologic originator firms seeking to preserve
their dominance in the face of biosimilar competition--thus subverting
the competition-enhancing objectives of the BPCIA.
17. Allegations relating to Pfizer's conduct are based on personal
knowledge; other allegations are based on Pfizer's research, publicly
available sources, feedback from customers, and information and belief.
THE PARTIES
18. Plaintiff Pfizer is a corporation organized and existing under
the laws of Delaware. Pfizer's principal place of business in the
United States is located at 235 East 42nd Street, New York, New York
10017. Pfizer is a research-based international pharmaceutical company
which researches, develops, manufactures, and sells pharmaceutical
products across the spectrum, from branded innovator products to
generics and over-the-counter medications. Pfizer is also committed to
developing biosimilar medications to bring competition, lower prices,
and choice to patients.
19. Pfizer has commercialized Inflectra, a biosimilar to J&J's
Remicade, through its partnership with Celltrion, the holder of the
drug product's Biologics License Application. The FDA approved
Inflectraas a biosimilar to Remicade on April 5, 2016.
20. Defendant Johnson & Johnson is a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of New Jersey. Johnson & Johnson's principal
place of business in the United States is located at One J&J Plaza, New
Brunswick, New Jersey 08933. Johnson & Johnson is an international
pharmaceutical company--one of the largest in the world--and was the
sole supplier of infliximab, marketed as Remicade, between 1998 and
2016, when Inflectra came to market.
21. Defendant Janssen Biotech, Inc. (``Janssen'') is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson. Janssen is a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of Pennsylvania. Janssen's corporate
headquarters are located at 800 Ridgeview Drive, Horsham, Pennsylvania
19044. Janssen co-owns or has licenses to the Remicade patents and
performs the marketing for Remicade in the United States.
JURISDICTION, VENUE, AND INTERSTATE COMMERCE
22. This action arises under the antitrust laws of the United
States, including Section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1,
Section 2 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 2, Section 3 of the
Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 14, and Sections 4 and 16 of the Clayton
Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 15 and 26.
23. Subject matter jurisdiction is founded on 28 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 1331 and 1337(a).
24. Johnson & Johnson may be found, transacts business, and is
subject to personal jurisdiction in this judicial district.
25. Janssen maybe found, transacts business, and is subject to
personal jurisdiction in this judicial district.
26. The violations of law alleged in this Complaint took place, in
part, in this judicial district and have injured Pfizer in this
district. Venue is therefore appropriate in the Eastern District of
Pennsylvania under Section 12 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 22,
and under 28 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1391(b) and (c).
27. The creation, marketing, sale, and distribution of Remicade and
Inflectra, and the actions complained of in this Complaint, occur in
and substantially affect interstate commerce.
FACTUAL AND REGULATORY BACKGROUND
A. Biologics
28. Biologics are treatments derived from living systems such as
microorganisms or plant or animal cells. As the FDA explains:
``Biological products include a wide range of products such as
vaccines, blood and blood components, allergenics, somatic cells, gene
therapy, tissues, and recombinant therapeutic proteins. Biologics can
be composed of sugars, proteins, or nucleic acids or complex
combinations of these substances, or maybe living entities such as
cells and tissues. Biologics are isolated from a variety of natural
sources--human, animal, or microorganism--and may be produced by
biotechnology methods and other cutting-edge technologies. Gene-based
and cellular biologics, for example, often are at the forefront of
biomedical research, and may be used to treat a variety of medical
conditions for which no other treatments are available.'' \5\ In
contrast to most drugs, which are chemically synthesized and whose
structure is known, most biologics are complex mixtures that are not
easily identified or characterized.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See U.S. Food & Drug Administration, What Are ``Biologics''
Questions and Answers, https://www.fda.gov/aboutfda/centersoffices/
officeofmedicalproductsandtobacco/cber/ucm133077.htm (last visited
Sept. 18, 2017).
\6\ Id.
B.
Congress Enacts the Biologics Price Competition and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Innovation Act to Spur Price Competition for Biologic Medications
29. Congress has made clear that competition in pharmaceuticals is
to be encouraged, and, to that end, in 1984 enacted the Hatch-Waxman
Act (``Hatch-Waxman''), which established an abbreviated pathway for
approval of generic counterparts to non-biologic branded drug products.
Before Hatch-Waxman, a generic applicant had to conduct the same kinds
of safety and efficacy studies (including large clinical trials and the
like) as the originating drug manufacturer. Such a process, which can
cost hundreds of millions of dollars and take years to complete, was
prohibitive for would-be generic entrants and led to the near absence
of generic competition to branded drug products. Hatch-Waxman
eliminated this hurdle; it allowed generic firms to rely upon the
originator's safety and efficacy studies. Generic applicants need only
show that their products use the same active pharmaceutical ingredient
as the originator, and that their products are bioequivalent (e.g.,
that the generic product's uptake into the body is equivalent to the
branded drug). A principal goal of Hatch-Waxman was to trigger price
competition with originator products, many of which had enjoyed
longstanding exclusivity. That goal has been achieved: According to the
FDA, the competition spurred by Hatch-Waxman has saved more than $1.6
trillion for patients and the healthcare system.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Kathleen ``Cook'' Uhl, 2016: A Record-Setting Year for
Generic Drugs, U.S. Food & Drug Administration (Feb. 24, 2017),
available at https://blogs.fda.gov/fdavoice/index.php/2017/02/2016-a-
record-setting-year-for-generic-drugs/ (noting that ``2016 was a
record-setting year for FDA's generic drug program,'' and that ``[o]ver
the last 10 years, generic drugs have saved the U.S. healthcare system
about $1.68 trillion'').
30. However, for a number of reasons, biologic products generally
are not covered by the Hatch-Waxman procedures. Nevertheless, given the
success of Hatch-
Waxman in spurring competition for non-biologic medicines, Congress and
nearly all stakeholders in the healthcare system have recognized the
great desirability of having an analogous system for biologics.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Implementation of the
Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act of 2009 (Feb. 12, 2016),
available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/ucm215089.htm (``The goal of
the BPCI Act is similar, in concept, to that of the Drug Price
Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984 (a.k.a. the `Hatch-
Waxman Act') which created abbreviated pathways for the approval of
drug products under Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFD&C
Act).'').
31. In 2009, Congress addressed the need for competition in the
biologics marketplace by introducing the BPCIA, which was signed into
law in 2010. The Act furthers the ``FDA's longstanding policy of
permitting appropriate reliance on what is already known about a drug,
thereby saving time and resources and avoiding unnecessary duplication
of . . . testing.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Implementation of the
Biologics Competition and Innovation Act of 2009, https://www.fda.gov/
Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/ucm215089.htm (last
visited Sept. 18, 2017).
32. A principal purpose of the Act--as reflected in its very name
(i.e., the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act)--was to spur
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
price competition in biologic drug products:

``We have to find a way to introduce competition into [the
biosimilar] market,'' including balancing ``giving incentives
for development of new products but bringing about the benefits
of competition in the marketplace.'' (Hon. Henry Waxman, United
States Representative from California)

``Legislation to facilitate the development of biosimilars
should promote competition and lower prices[.]'' (Hon. Anna G.
Eshoo, United States Representative from California)

``We want to foster a robust biosimilar market.'' (Hon. Joe
Barton, United States Representative from Texas)

``[C]ompetition [from biosimilars] is good for patient
safety, consumer choice, and drive[s] savings for consumers and
the healthcare system at large.'' (Hon. Gene Green, United
States Representative from Texas)
33. The BPCIA provides an abbreviated regulatory approval pathway
for the introduction of biosimilars. A biosimilar applicant may rely on
the clinical studies of the reference listed drug if it can show: (a)
that the proposed biosimilar is ``highly similar to the [originator
product, or RLD] notwithstanding minor differences in clinically
inactive components''; and (b) that ``there are no clinically
meaningful differences between the [proposed biosimilar] and the [RLD]
in terms of safety, purity, and potency'' (42 U.S.C. Sec. 262(i)(2)).
34. Although biosimilars have no clinically meaningful differences
in safety, purity, and potency from the RLD, they are not automatically
substitutable with the RLD (unlike Hatch-Waxman generics). Thus, if a
doctor prescribes the RLD, a pharmacist cannot substitute a biosimilar
unless that product has been designated as interchangeable by FDA and
the relevant state law permits substitution of interchangeable
biologics.\10\ This allows originator firms to retain the bulk of their
existing patient bases, which typically is not possible for a branded
firm to do when a Hatch-Waxman generic enters (because state
substitution laws permit prescriptions for the brand to be
automatically substituted with the Hatch-Waxman generic by the
pharmacist without the need for physician intervention). This
difference enables biologic originator firms to leverage their
monopolies over existing patients to extract anticompetitive
commitments from insurers and providers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ The BPCIA does provide for an ``interchangeable'' designation,
but FDA published draft guidelines for establishing interchangeability
only this year. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Considerations in
Demonstrating Interchangeability With a Reference Product (Draft
Guidance) (Jan. 17, 2017). And while Pfizer believes that Inflectra can
be safely and effectively substituted for Remicade (indeed, studies
have shown that switching patients can be done safely and effectively,
and Pfizer has supported and/or taken part in some of these studies),
it will be years before Inflectra or any other biologic receives a
formal ``interchangeability'' designation from FDA in the United
States. Nonetheless, neither the BPCIA nor FDA contemplates that
biosimilars should be prevented from competing in themarketplace--i.e.,
that consumers should be denied access to them--until they are
designated interchangeable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Infliximab
35. Infliximab is a tumor necrosis factor (``TNF'')-inhibiting
biologic drug used to treat a range of immune-mediated diseases,
including Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis,
psoriatic arthritis, ankylosingspondylitis, and plaque psoriasis.
36. As a biologic, infliximab is not synthesized in a laboratory,
but rather derived from a living organism. Infliximab is a chimeric
IgG1k monoclonal antibody (composed of human constant and murine
variable regions) specific for human tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
Infliximab is produced by a recombinant cell line cultured by
continuous perfusion and is purified by a series of steps that includes
measures to inactivate and remove viruses.
37. Infliximab is an infusion therapy, meaning it is administered
intravenously. Thus, infliximab patients must (in most cases) visit
clinics, hospitals, or other medical facilities to receive the therapy
from healthcare professionals. As a result, patients rarely purchase
infliximab themselves at retail pharmacies. Instead, infusion centers,
clinics, and hospitals purchase infliximab, and after administration,
seek reimbursement from the patient's insurer or a government payer
(e.g., Medicare). Infliximab is an important medicine that has provided
life-changing benefits to millions of patients.
D. J&J's Remicade
38. J&J introduced the first infliximab product in the United
States in 1998, under the brand name Remicade.
39. Remicade is widely used: An estimated 475,000 patients in the
U.S. receive at least one dose of Remicade annually. This fact,
combined with the cost (approximately $4,000 per infused dose at list
price), makes administering Remicade a major expense item for insurers
and healthcare providers.
40. J&J's list price increases for Remicade and other pricing
actions have resulted in consistent increases in Remicade's ASP. J&J
has increased the price of Remicade without experiencing a loss of
sales to other therapies. Instead, Remicade sales have increased
steadily since it was introduced. Indeed, J&J has been able to continue
raising the price of Remicade notwithstanding the arrival of Inflectra.
41. Since 1998, J&J has made billions of dollars in profit on
Remicade.
E. Pfizer's Inflectra
42. Beginning in 2008, Celltrion undertook to develop a biosimilar
to Remicade and move it through the intensive FDA review process. The
Biologics License Application for Inflectra was filed with FDA in 2014.
After rigorous scientific review, FDA approved infliximab-dyybon April
5, 2016. In the FDA news release announcing its approval of Inflectra,
the director of FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
reiterated that approval as a biosimilar reflects a determination of
``no clinically meaningful differences'' from the originator, and
stated that ``[p]atients and the health care community can be confident
that biosimilar products are high quality and meet the agency's
rigorous scientific standards.'' \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FDA Approves Inflectra,
A Biosimilar to Remicade (Apr. 5, 2016), https://www.fda.gov/
newsevents/newsroom/pressannouncements/ucm494227.
htm.
43. J&J claimed patent protection over Remicade--as noted, making
it the sole provider of infliximab for nearly two decades--and thus
Pfizer and Celltrion were forced to defend against J&J's patent suit in
parallel with FDA's regulatory review of the Inflectra application. On
August 17, 2016, J&J's patent covering the infliximab antibody was
ruled invalid by the United States District Court for the District of
Massachusetts, a ruling which confirmed that J&J had no valid right to
exclude Pfizer (or other potential biosimilar entrants). The Court held
that the antibodies covered by J&J's Remicade patent had been disclosed
and claimed in an earlier patent.\12\ Just a few months after the
district court ruling, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office issued a
final decision in a re-examination of the same patent, holding that the
patent was invalid.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Janelle Lawrence, J&J Remicade Patent Found Invalid in U.S.
Victory for Pfizer, Bloomberg (Aug. 17, 2016), https://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-08-17/j-j-patent-on-remicade-
expiring-in-2018-invalid-judge-rules.
\13\ Id.
44. After overcoming these hurdles, and after a 180-day notice
period required by the BPCIA, Pfizer began selling Inflectra in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
November 2016.
45. Inflectra is approved for all the same indications as Remicade,
except pediatric ulcerative colitis, as to which J&J continues to enjoy
an FDA-granted period of exclusivity because of the indication's status
as an ``orphan'' indication (established on proof that the number of
people affected by the disease or condition for which the drug is to be
developed is fewer than 200,000 persons), which is scheduled to end in
2018. On that date, Inflectra will be eligible to seek approval for
pediatric ulcerative colitis. In any event, this indication accounted
for less than 5 percent of overall infliximab utilization in 2016.
46. Pfizer introduced Inflectra with a list price 15 percent lower
than Remicade's, and, in negotiations with insurers and providers,
offered substantial additional pricing concessions in the form of
discounts and/or rebates that in some instances were more than 40
percent below Inflectra's list price. The goal and effect was to offer
Inflectra for less than J&J was offering Remicade; indeed, for many
customers, Pfizer committed to ensure that Inflectra would have a lower
net per-unit price than Remicade.
47. Given that it was charging a lower price for Inflectra than J&J
was charging for Remicade, Pfizer was optimistic that it would have an
opportunity to compete, to secure a reasonable share of the business,
particularly for new patients, and to bring the benefits of price
competition to consumers, providers, insurers, and the U.S. government.
However, due to J&J's exclusionary conduct, competition has been
foreclosed. J&J maintains its monopoly and has continued to capture
over 96 percent of infliximab sales even while maintaining prices far
above competitive levels.
F.
The Importance of Insurance Coverage for Infliximab
48. Most patients who are prescribed Remicade have some form of
insurance coverage or qualify for patient assistance. The sources of
insurance coverage are (a) private insurance, accounting for about 60
percent of patients nationally, and (b) government insurance programs
(principally Medicare and Medicaid), accounting for the remaining 40
percent. Insurance coverage and reimbursement are therefore key to the
adoption of the product by patients and healthcare providers alike. If
a product as expensive as Remicade is not widely reimbursed, it will
not be significantly utilized.
49. Because Remicade is not dispensed in a retail pharmacy but
rather administered intravenously in a clinic or other institutional
setting, it generally is not included under the ``pharmacy benefit'' of
most health plans. In the pharmacy benefit setting, physicians
prescribe a drug and the patient procures the medication him or herself
at the pharmacy, paying for it with a combination of insurance coverage
(either private or government-sponsored) and out-of-pocket payment
(usually, a co-pay). In the pharmacy benefit context, neither the
prescribing physician nor the institution with which the physician is
affiliated bears financial risk with respect to the drug selected,
i.e., the drug is not purchased and stocked in advance by providers at
their own cost. The pharmacy buys the drug, dispenses it, and is
reimbursed.
50. In contrast, ``medical benefit'' products such as Remicade are
administered at a clinic or other healthcare provider site, and the
provider itself first purchases the drug product for use in the
infusion treatment of patients, and then later seeks reimbursement for
the drug from a third party payer (a practice commonly referred to as
``buy and bill''). When a treatment is administered, the provider must
secure payment for the service, including the cost of the product
dispensed (which the provider had to pay up front with its own funds).
In this context, the provider has a strong interest in utilizing drugs
that are widely covered by insurance, particularly by the major
national commercial health insurers and significant regional insurers
active in its area. If a drug product is not widely covered, such that
there is a risk that coverage might be denied, and providers thus would
be burdened with a potential financial loss for what they paid for the
product, providers are much less likely to purchase that product--a
response that is in line with the providers' economic interests (to be
reimbursed).
51. Many of the facilities administering infusion services of the
type at issue here are physician-owned. Thus, the physicians themselves
have both prescribing authority and a strong financial incentive to
avoid products that are not widely covered.
52. Commercial insurers typically publish medical policies
enumerating the drug products they will cover under the medical benefit
and the terms under which they will do so. For example, medical
policies may exclude drugs from coverage, or they may dictate
restrictions on use. Drug manufacturers compete, usually with rebates
or other price concessions, to obtain coverage under insurer medical
policies and to have either fewer restrictions on reimbursement than
their competitors--or, at a minimum, to achieve ``parity'' whereby the
competing products have the same restrictions on reimbursement and the
patient and/or doctor can choose between them. Securing at least parity
placement is critical, especially for new products seeking to gain
traction in the marketplace, and particularly with large insurers,
which have tens of millions of covered patients.
G. The Importance of Access at the Provider Level
53. As discussed above, providers (hospitals, clinics, etc.) are
the market actors that actually purchase infliximab for use with their
infusion services for patients. J&J's agreements and conduct have the
effect of foreclosing this essential source of distribution.
54. Providers do not want to risk being unable to secure
reimbursement for any drug used to treat a patient after having already
paid for the product. Because it can be costly to monitor coverage
status across myriad insurers and implement procedures to match product
use to a patient's coverage, gaps in reimbursement policies give ``buy
and bill'' provider accounts reasons to stock only products with
universal (or near-universal) coverage. Here, due to J&J's
anticompetitive contracts at the insurer level, J&J has succeeded in
preventing biosimilar competitors from achieving the same status.
J&J'S EXCLUSIONARY SCHEME
55. Not content with its nearly 2 full decades of exclusivity with
Remicade, and the billions of dollars of profits that such exclusivity
enabled, J&J hatched a multifaceted scheme to ensure that biosimilars
would never become viable competitors--a scheme embodied, at least in
part, in its ``Biosimilar Readiness Plan.'' J&J revealed the existence
of the plan, and at least some specifics thereof, during a recent
investor call and presentation.\14\ And a J&J consultant bragged at a
recent health conference that his firm helped design the plan to
realize J&J's goal of ensuring that biosimilars never gain a foothold.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Johnson & Johnson, Q3 2016 Results Earnings Call Transcript
(Oct. 14, 2016), available at https://seekingalpha.com/search/
transcripts?term=johnson+%26+Johnson+biosimilar.
56. J&J's conduct has not gone unnoticed in the industry. For
example, an analyst at a prominent securities firm (Bernstein Research)
recently summarized key aspects of J&J's scheme, observing that J&J
has: (a) ``negotiated with [insurers]'' and set up ``exclusive
contracts . . . in nearly half the market,'' thereby making providers
unwilling to purchase Inflectra; (b) ``offered up deeper discounts to
large independent infusion centers [i.e., major providers], which are
more economically sensitive''; and (c) ``bundled several drugs and
medical devices [together] for larger hospitals.'' \15\ The analyst
also noted that a key to J&J's strategy was the ``long `tail' of
[patients] remaining on the brand'' \16\--the incontestable demand--
which gives J&J leverage to extract commitments from insurers not to
cover Inflectra.\17\ Another industry observer, commenting on the
Bernstein survey, noted that J&J's ``fail first'' requirements with
insurers ``force hospitals and clinics to buy Remicade.'' The observer
also noted that:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Aaron Gal, Biosimilars: So, Why Has Remicade Biosimilar Not
Gotten Much Traction in the U.S., Bernstein Research, at 1 (July 20,
2017).
\16\ Id.
\17\
While the Bernstein survey suggests that Pfizer has offered
only a `` `low single digit' discount off of the ASP'' of Inflectra,
that is not accurate. As set forth herein, Pfizer has offered Inflectra
at a significantdiscount (to list price as well as ASP), but continues
to be foreclosed by J&J's anticompetitive contracts. J&J, meanwhile,
has raised the price of Remicade since Inflectra's entry. The Bernstein
survey also speculates that with the entry of a third biosimilar in
mid-2019, ``we would likely [sic] see one of the biosimilars crossing
the Rubicon and offering the required discounts.'' Gal, supra note 15,
at 1. However, as set forth herein, J&J's exclusive contracts and
bundling practices foreclose all new biosimilar entrants, including
Pfizer, from competing with Remicade on price and, if not stopped, will
allow J&J to continue to maintain the monopoly power it currently
exercises with Remicade.
J&J has had yet another advantage--an ability and willingness
to bundle different medicines as part of a package deal. By
offering discounts and rebates for several drugs, J&J can
secure contracts and crowd out rivals. And discounts are also
appealing to physicians who run their own infusion centers.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Ed Silverman, J&J Now Has Two Competitors for A Pricey
Blockbuster. Will That Finally Drive Down Prices?, Stat News (July 25,
2017), https://www.statnews.com/pharmalot/2017/07/25/merck-samsung-
biosimilar-pfizer-johnson/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
57. J&J's scheme is set forth in more detail below:
A.
J&J Bars Access to Insurer Reimbursement Through Improper
Exclusive Contracts and Anticompetitive Bundling Practices
1.
J&J's Exclusive Contracts with Health Insurers
58. A centerpiece of J&J's strategy to block competition from
biosimilars has been to secure contractual commitments from commercial
insurance companies to exclude biosimilars from coverage under their
plans, making Remicade the exclusive infliximab available to patients
covered by those plans. Such contractual commitments have taken various
forms. Some insurers have entered into contracts with J&J that required
them simply to exclude biosimilars from their medical policies and/or
drug formularies altogether. Other J&J contracts have imposed a
spurious requirement that the biosimilar could be reimbursed only after
a patient first tried and failed on Remicade (the ``fail first''
requirement), which virtually ensures that the biosimilar will never be
prescribed and never be reimbursed. If a patient fails on Remicade, it
would defy sound medical judgment for a physician to switch to the
therapeutically equivalent biosimilar, which works in exactly the same
way, rather than another therapy, to which a patient may potentially
respond differently.\19\ Regardless of their specific form, these
contracts all had the same effect--to exclude biosimilars from coverage
and (as one analyst recently confirmed) grant an ``exclusive'' to
Remicade.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ The notion that attempting treatment with a biosimilar after
its reference listed drug has first failed would defy medical judgment
recently has been reinforced in the European League Against Rheumatism
rheumatoid arthritis management recommendations. In those
recommendations, ``[t]he Task Force reiterated its position that if a
TNF-inhibitor fails, another TNF-inhibitor--but not a biosimilar of the
same molecule!--can be as effective as changing the mode of action.''
Smolen, J.S., et al., EULAR Recommendations for the Management of
Rheumatoid Arthritis with Synthetic and Biological Disease-Modifying
Antirheumatic Drugs: 2016 Update, Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases
2017:0:1-18 (Mar. 6, 2017).
\20\ Gal, supra note 15, at 1.
59. J&J has induced most major health insurers, covering at least
70 percent of commercially insured patients in the United States, to
adopt these improper contractual exclusivity restrictions and to impose
outright bans on Inflectra's coverage or so-called ``fail first''
requirements. These insurers include (in decreasing order of patients
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
covered):
National insurers:
(a)
UnitedHealthcare: UnitedHealthcare adopted the ``fail first''
requirement. United Healthcare has approximately 30.6 million covered
commercial medical patients across all 50 states.
(b)
Anthem: Anthem excluded Inflectra from coverage altogether.
Anthem has approximately 30.4 million covered commercial medical
patients concentrated in 14 states.
(c)
Aetna: Aetna adopted a complex set of indication specific
conditions which operate in practice as ``fail first'' requirements.
Aetna has approximately 17.9 million covered commercial medical
patients in all or nearly all states and territories in the United
States.
(d)
Cigna: Cigna adopted the ``fail first'' requirement. Cigna has
approximately 13 million covered commercial medical patients across all
50 states.
Regional insurers:
(a)
HealthNet (Centene): HealthNet adopted a complex set of
indication specific conditions which operate in practice as ``fail
first'' requirements. HealthNet (as part of its acquisition by Centene)
has approximately 12 million covered commercial medical patients
concentrated in 28 states.
(b)
CareFirst/Blue Cross Blue Shield: CareFirst adopted the ``fail
first'' requirement. Indeed, CareFirst agreed with J&J that Inflectra
would be non-preferred, meaning it cannot be reimbursed unless there
are ``clinical circumstances that would exclude the use of . . .
preferred products,'' including Remicade. CareFirst has approximately
3.2 million covered commercial medical patients principally found in
Maryland, Virginia, and the District of Columbia.
(c)
Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina: BCBS of North
Carolina adopted the ``fail first'' requirement. BCBS of North Carolina
has approximately 2.7 million covered commercial medical patients
concentrated in North Carolina.
(d)
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Tennessee: BCBS of Tennessee adopted
the ``fail first'' requirement. BCBS of Tennessee has approximately 1.6
million covered commercial medical patients concentrated in Tennessee.
(e)
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana: BCBS of Louisiana adopted
the ``fail first'' requirement. BCBS of Louisiana has approximately 1.6
million covered commercial medical patients principally concentrated in
Louisiana.
(f)
Excellus Blue Cross Blue Shield: Excellus BCBS adopted the
``fail first'' requirement. Excellus has approximately 1.2 million
covered commercial medical patients concentrated in New York.
(g)
Independence Blue Cross: Independence Blue Cross adopted the
``fail first'' requirement. Independence Blue Cross is the leading
health insurer in Philadelphia.
These contracts alone affect approximately 114 million covered
commercial medical patients of the over approximately 214 million
patients covered by commercial medical insurance in the United States.
Pfizer has reason to believe there are more.
60. While exclusive contracts can--in certain circumstances--be
perfectly appropriate, the exclusivity provisions described in
Paragraphs 8, 9, and 58 serve no legitimate or procompetitive purpose
and were not earned through simple price competition. After Inflectra's
FDA approval in April 2016, and before J&J implemented its exclusionary
contracts, health insurers undertook reviews to determine whether there
was a medical reason not to reimburse Inflectra or to disfavor it
relative to other therapies. Following these reviews, several major
health insurance companies--including at least Aetna, Anthem, and
UnitedHealthcare-- classified Inflectra at parity with Remicade. This
confirmed that there was no medical reason justifying a restrictive
reimbursement policy toward Inflectra. It also meant that, for the time
being, Inflectra would be reimbursed without restriction. As a result,
the stage was set for Inflectra to begin competing head-to-head with
Remicade on a level playing field--and for patients to begin receiving
the benefits of greater choice and lower prices.
61. But this initial state of affairs was short lived. As a result
of J&J's anticompetitive conduct, insurers began to reverse course and
restrict coverage of Inflectra.
62. For example, in October 2016, UnitedHealthcare, the nation's
largest health insurer, with over 30 million covered commercial medical
patients, published an update to its medical and site of care policies
classifying Inflectra at parity with Remicade for the approved
indications (with an effective date of November 1, 2016). This meant
that, for UnitedHealthcare, Inflectra would be reimbursed freely and
would not be disfavored relative to Remicade. Just weeks later,
however, UnitedHealthcare reversed course. UnitedHealthcare classified
Remicade as its ``preferred'' product, and instructed that Inflectra
would be eligible for reimbursement only in circumstances so limited as
to be practically non-existent. Under UnitedHealthcare's new policy,
Inflectra could be reimbursed only where the following conditions are
met: (a) the patient must show a minimal clinical response, or an
intolerance or adverse reaction, to Remicade; (b) the physician must
attest that Inflectra would not lead to the same adverse responses; and
(c) the patient must show no loss of favorable response in established
maintenance therapy with Remicade, and must not have developed
neutralizing antibodies to any infliximab biosimilar product that has
made the therapy less effective. As a practical matter, this meant that
Inflectra would not be reimbursed for UnitedHealthcare's more than 30
million commercial medical members, and that Remicade would be the
exclusive infliximab with UnitedHealthcare--despite the lack of any
medical basis for denying those members access to a lower-priced
alternative to Remicade.
63. UnitedHealthcare's reversal, of course, did not happen by
chance. J&J induced UnitedHealthcare to enter into an exclusive deal by
threatening to penalize UnitedHealthcare with the loss of significant
rebates unless UnitedHealthcare agreed to deny coverage of Inflectra.
64. J&J has employed the same approach to secure exclusive deals
with most or all of the major insurers identified above. In most cases
these coercive biosimilar-exclusion contracts were the only
economically viable option for insurers--as adopting any alternative
would require the insurer to incur a substantial penalty (i.e.,
foregone rebates to existing Remicade patients) that could not be
offset by the per-unit cost savings available on the number of patients
likely to use the biosimilar, at least in the near term.
2. J&J's Bundling Tactics with Health Insurers
65. J&J's threatened penalties are effective because they leverage
the large base of existing patients already stabilized on Remicade.
Given that J&J has offered the only infliximab option in the United
States for nearly two decades, its base of existing Remicade patients
is substantial, amounting to hundreds of thousands of patients across
the country. And, in part driven by J&J's marketing efforts to secure
this outcome, existing Remicade patients are likely to stay on
Remicade. Thus, the demand for Remicade associated with this existing
base of patients is, as a practical and economic matter, incontestable.
This is so despite the fact that switching is within the scope of FDA's
approval for use of biosimilars and thus appropriate when medically
directed--something Pfizer discusses with clients. The situation is
different for new patients who may be candidates for infliximab. In
light of this, Pfizer has focused, among other things, on competing for
a substantial share of new patient starts (the ``contestable'' demand)
by pricing Inflectra competitively with both insurers and providers on
a unit-for-unit basis. The fact that Inflectra's ASP is lower than
Remicade's underscores the cost savings it offers.
66. By threatening to withhold attractive rebates on all Remicade
prescriptions-- including those for existing patients as well as new
ones--unless an insurer agrees to exclusivity, J&J is able to leverage
the incontestable demand for Remicade to exclude competition for the
contestable demand, i.e., it bundles the contestable and incontestable
demand. Even if Pfizer offers a significantly lower price for Inflectra
unit-for-unit, as it has done, insurers will agree to J&J's exclusive
deals to avoid losing rebates on the substantial base of existing
Remicade patients who are not likely to switch to Inflectra despite the
presence of the lower-priced biosimilar. A recent article by two Yale
Medical School professors in the Journal of the American Medical
Association illustrates how the kind of leverage J&J has over existing,
stable Remicade patients allows it to extract commitments to exclude
the biosimilar:
If a biosimilar manufacturer intends to upend the preferred
position of the brand by offering a substantial price discount
to the [insurer], the branded manufacturer can respond by
withdrawing the rebate on the [branded] biologic, creating a
``rebate trap.'' For any patient continuing the [branded]
biologic, a payer's cost for that patient will double once the
rebate is withdrawn. . . . Even in [an] optimistic scenario, in
which the price of the biosimilar is 60 percent less than the
price of the brand after rebates and discounts, if the payer is
only able to convert 50 percent of its patient users to the
biosimilar [because existing patients will tend to stay on the
original branded product], the rebate trap ensures that payer
total costs actually increase relative to costs prior to
biosimilar availability.
*
*
*
To avoid the rebate trap, any strategy to reduce spending on
biologics through adoption of biosimilars requires a near-
complete switch of patient users from the branded biologic to
the biosimilar. However, for many chronic diseases, the
proportion of patients new to a given biological therapy is
less than 20 percent of the total patients taking that drug in
a given year. The remainder represents a stable base of
patients whose disease is well-maintained while they are using
current therapy and thus are unlikely to switch [to the
biosimilar].\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Aaron Hakim and Joseph S. Ross, ``Obstacles to the Adoption of
Biosimilars for Chronic Diseases,'' Journal of the American Medical
Association (May 1, 2017), available at http://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/article-abstract/2625049 (emphasis added).
67. J&J has further insulated its contracts with insurers from
competition by bundling rebates for Remicade with rebates on other
products in return for commitments not to cover Inflectra. J&J made it
no secret that it would leverage other products as part of its
``Biosimilar Readiness Plan.'' As J&J's Worldwide Chair for
Pharmaceuticals made clear on a recent earnings call, ``We are fully
prepared to execute our focused biosimilar readiness plan,'' including
``developing innovative contracts . . . [to] utilize the full breadth
of our portfolio.'' \22\ The ``full breadth of [J&J's] portfolio''
includes several drugs for which Pfizer does not offer any directly
competing alternative. These include drugs such as Simponi (used for
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosingspondylitis, and
ulcerative colitis), Simponi Aria (used for rheumatoid arthritis), and
Stelara (used for plaque psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and Crohn's
disease). These products are widely used, with Simponi/Simponi Aria
generating for J&J approximately $1.7 billion in 2016 and Stelara
generating for J&J approximately $3.2 billion in 2016. J&J has
threatened insurers with the loss of rebates on these other drugs, as
well as Remicade, if they do not agree to exclude Inflectra from
coverage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Johnson & Johnson, Q3 2016 Results Earnings Call Transcript
(Oct. 14, 2016), available at https://seekingalpha.com/search/
transcripts?term=johnson+%26+Johnson+biosimilar.
68. J&J's multi-product bundling, along with its bundling of
contestable demand (i.e., new patients) and incontestable demand (i.e.,
existing Remicade patients), have amplified the anticompetitive effects
of J&J's exclusive contracts, and made the exclusivity provided by
those contracts even more durable. Insurers have made it clear to
Pfizer that its net cost for Inflectra would need to be low enough to
offset the loss of J&J rebates. But, because of the combined effect of
these bundles, Pfizer cannot offset the financial penalties that J&J
threatens to impose on insurers who do not agree to exclusivity. As a
result, Pfizer is economically prohibited from competing for coverage
by the major insurers--even when their exclusive contracts with J&J
expire. J&J can use the same bundling strategies to ensure continuation
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of the exclusionary pattern.
B.
J&J's Improper Insurer-Level Contracts Deter Hospitals
and Clinics from Purchasing Inflectra, Thus Amplifying Foreclosure
69. Providers are unwilling to stock a drug product where there is
significant uncertainty about whether it will be reimbursed by health
insurers; because they administer infliximab onsite, providers must
expend funds for the product in the first instance, then seek
reimbursement after providing treatment. The provider has theoretical
recourse against the patient where coverage is denied, but the prospect
of securing payment in full from the patient is bleak, especially for
drugs as costly as Remicade. As a result, where a significant portion
of a provider's patients are insured by plans that have agreed to
exclude Inflectra--pursuant to the types of contracts described above--
the provider is unlikely to offer Inflectra for any of its patients, to
avoid being caught with no reimbursement.
70. As a recent article in Bloomberg stated:
Ascension Health, a nearly 23,000-bed nonprofit hospital system
based in St. Louis, spends $55 million a year on Remicade, more
than any other drug. Using Inflectra, part of a new class of
medicines called biosimilars, would save it at least $10
million annually, according to Ascension's chief pharmacist,
Roy Guharoy. He met with Pfizer and planned to integrate
Inflectra into care more often until learning that insurers
preferred to stay with Remicade. ``This we did not expect,''
Guharoy said. ``If the insurance companies force us to use the
branded product, of course our hands are tied.'' \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Jared S. Hopkins, What's Harder Than Making Copycat Biotech
Drugs? Selling Them, Bloomberg (Aug. 15, 2017).
In short, provider purchases are driven by the coverage stated by
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
commercial insurers.
71. Having created reimbursement concerns through its exclusionary
contracts with health insurers, J&J touts the excluded status of
Inflectra in its marketing communications, knowing that doing so will
discourage providers from stocking the new biosimilar. As this brochure
shows, J&J markets the ``fail first'' requirement as a selling point
despite the fact that such a provision is medically inappropriate and
despite FDA's determination that there are no clinically meaningful
differences between the two products. Thus the brochure touts that
Remicade is ``Preferred Over Inflectra . . . Inflectra requires trial
and failure on Remicade prior to [Inflectra] utilization.''
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
72. Given the widespread gaps in Inflectra's insurance coverage--
caused by J&J--providers using infliximab have overwhelmingly chosen to
stock only Remicade (which is essentially universally covered given its
long tenure and dominant position) rather than deal with the risk of
possible denials of coverage for Inflectra. Thus, providers have
declined to purchase Inflectra across the board, even for patients
covered by commercial or government insurance plans that do cover the
product. The effective foreclosure of biosimilars thereby is expanded
well beyond the 70 percent of commercially insured patients directly
foreclosed by J&J's insurer contracts. Indeed, as of September 1, 2017,
about 90 percent of healthcare provider accounts using infliximab had
purchased no Inflectra at all.
C.
J&J Has Further Barred Access Through Exclusionary
Contracts with Providers
73. To further amplify Inflectra's foreclosure--even beyond the
population of patients covered by insurance plans that have agreed to
J&J's exclusivity terms, and the spillover effect on providers
discussed above--J&J has imposed exclusionary contracts on providers
themselves (e.g., clinics, hospitals, etc.).
74. After Inflectra's introduction, J&J began offering certain
large providers additional rebates and/or discounts on Remicade, but
only if the provider committed to buy Remicade for nearly all of its
infliximab needs. To be eligible for rebates, J&J required providers to
maintain purchase levels for Remicade at very close to the levels of
the year before Inflectra's launch--when Remicade was the only
infliximab option. With about 30 percent of prescriptions in any year
representing new patients (and a certain percentage of existing
patients exiting therapy each year), this condition also requires
providers to use Remicade for new patients if they wish to secure
payment from J&J, thus bundling contestable and incontestable demand
for Remicade. Like its insurer-level contracts, these contracts as a
practical matter make Remicade the exclusive infliximab with the
participating providers.
75. J&J has also used multi-product bundling in its provider-level
contracts. As one analyst reported, ``J&J bundled several drugs and
medical devices for larger hospitals, making Inflectra less
economical.'' \24\ Conditioning rebates linked to other J&J products
upon a promise not to do business with Inflectra only exacerbates the
exclusionary nature of J&J's contracts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Gal, supra note 15, at 1.
76. Pfizer was and is prepared to negotiate with providers to make
Inflectra the lower-priced infliximab option on a per-unit basis, and
has even offered to guarantee that Inflectra would be less expensive
unit-for-unit than Remicade. But as with insurer contracts, to secure
the right to deal freely as to Inflectra (i.e., principally as to new
patients), the providers would lose significant J&J rebates on their
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
existing Remicade patient bases.
77. For Pfizer to make up the J&J rebates/discounts that insurers
and providers would lose on their existing Remicade patients, Pfizer
would have to price Inflectra below its own average variable cost. This
is because the lost J&J rebates/discounts are based on the much larger
base of existing Remicade patients, whereas Pfizer would be serving a
much smaller group of new patients, at least in the near term.
78. When the total amount of discounts and rebates that J&J offers
to insurers and providers under the contracts described herein,
including multi-product bundle contracts, is attributed to the portion
of Remicade sales that is contestable by a biosimilar like Inflectra,
J&J is pricing Remicade below its own average variable cost. As a
result, biosimilar competition to Remicade is foreclosed.
79. The combined effect of J&J's multifaceted exclusionary scheme
has been to foreclose Inflectra from approximately 90 percent of the
provider account distribution channel essential to connecting Inflectra
with patients of any kind.
J&J HAS MONOPOLY POWER IN THE RELEVANT MARKETS
80. Monopoly power is the ability of a single seller to raise
prices above the competitive price level without losing significant
business.
81. For years before Inflectra's entry, J&J's ASP for Remicade
increased, yet Remicade did not lose business. Between 2007 and 2017,
Remicade's ASP increased more than 62 percent. Despite Remicade's price
hikes, unit sales of Remicade have actually grown 15 percent during the
period from 2012 to 2016.
82. Inflectra's introduction has done nothing to erode Remicade's
monopoly power: Since Inflectra was launched, Remicade's ASP has
continued to increase without impacting Remicade's market position. Ten
months after Inflectra was introduced, Remicade still accounts for over
96 percent of all infliximab sales. Indeed, J&J has confirmed that
``biosimilar competition'' has had ``very little impact'' on
Remicade.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Johnson & Johnson, Q1 2017 Results Earnings Call Transcript
(Apr. 18, 2017), available at https://seekingalpha.com/search/
transcripts?term=johnson+%26+Johnson+biosimilar.
83. As noted, infliximab is an infusion-administered TNF-inhibiting
immunosuppressant with FDA approved indications for rheumatoid
arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, ulcerative
colitis, Crohn's disease, and plaque psoriasis (together, the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``Relevant Indications'').
84. The broadest appropriate relevant product market is infusion-
administered drugs whose approved labeling from the FDA (a) encompasses
one or more of the Relevant Indications, and (b) is without restriction
for the applicable Relevant Indication, that is to say, the labeling
does not specify that the drug may be used for the applicable Relevant
Indication only after the patient has not responded to another therapy
(the ``Relevant Product Market'').\26\ Remicade enjoys a share of over
60 percent in the Relevant Product Market, nearly the same share it had
before Inflectra entered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ For example, the FDA approved Rituxan for the treatment of
moderate to severe active rheumatoid arthritis in adults only after
treatment with at least one other TNF antagonist has been used and did
not work well enough.
85. The following infusion-administered therapies have been
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
approved as unrestricted therapies for the Relevant Indications:

Rheumatoid Arthritis:
Remicade (infliximab) (J&J) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Simponi Aria (golimumab) (J&J) (TNF-
inhibiting immuno-suppressant)
Inflectra (infliximab) (Pfizer) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Renflexis (infliximab) (Merck) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Orencia IV (abatacept) (Bristol-Myers Squibb)
(synthetic recombinant DNA technology immune-suppressant)
Actemra IV (tocilizumab) (Roche)
(interleukin-6 blocker) (IL-6 blocker)

Psoriatic Arthritis:
Remicade (infliximab) (J&J) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Stelara IV (ustekinumab) (J&J) (human
interleukin-12 and -23 antagonist)
Inflectra (infliximab) (Pfizer) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Renflexis (infliximab) (Merck) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Orencia IV (abatacept) (Bristol-Myers Squibb)
(synthetic recombinant DNA technology immuno-suppressant)

Ankylosing Spondylitis:
Remicade (infliximab) (J&J) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Inflectra (infliximab) (Pfizer) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Renflexis (infliximab) (Merck) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)

Plaque Psoriasis:
Remicade (infliximab) (J&J) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Stelara IV (ustekinumab)(J&J) (human
interleukin-12 and -23 antagonist)
Inflectra (infliximab) (Pfizer) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Renflexis (infliximab) (Merck) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)

Crohn's Disease:
Remicade (infliximab) (J&J) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Stelara IV (ustekinumab) (J&J) (human
interleukin-12 and -23 antagonist)
Inflectra (infliximab) (Pfizer) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Renflexis (infliximab) (Merck) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Entyvio (vedolizumab) (Takeda) (integrin
receptor antagonist monoclonal antibody)

Ulcerative Colitis:
Remicade (infliximab) (J&J) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Inflectra (infliximab) (Pfizer) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Renflexis (infliximab) (Merck) (TNF-
inhibitingimmuno-suppressant)
Entyvio (vedolizumab) (Takeda) (integrin
receptor antagonist monoclonal antibody)
These infusion therapies are referred to collectively as the ``Relevant
Products.''
86. Certain non-infusion drugs are also indicated to treat the
Relevant Indications. None of those drugs, however, is a reasonable
substitute for the infusion-
administered products. None significantly constrains the prices J&J is
able to charge for Remicade.
87. The non-infusion products approved for the Relevant Indications
include oral medications (e.g., Xeljanz) and self-injectables (e.g.,
Humira, Enbrel). These products are patient-administered. Infusion
drugs, by contrast, must be delivered by healthcare professionals in a
clinical setting (e.g., hospitals or infusion centers) during infusion
sessions that take upwards of two hours.
88. Physicians are not likely to switch from prescribing their
patients infliximab to prescribing those non-infusion products in
response to a small but significant non-transitory change in the price
of infliximab.
89. Not only are the infusion and non-infusion treatments different
kinds of therapies, but they are most often sold to different buyers,
on different contracts, and are distributed by different means:

Infliximab is, as described above, sold primarily to
hospitals and clinics and is almost never stocked by retail
pharmacies (only rarely being stocked by certain specialty
pharmacies). After administering the infusion treatments to
their patients, the hospitals and clinics seek reimbursement
from the patients' insurers or government payers.

By contrast, non-infusion drugs such as Xeljanz, Humira, and
Enbrel are primarily sold to and distributed in the pharmacy
channels. Physicians who prescribe these non-infusion drugs
generally do not administer the treatments and do not bear
financial risk with respect to the drug selected.

Non-infusion drugs are also typically covered by insurance
through a pharmacy benefit plan. These are products that
insured patients obtain using their ``pharmacy'' cards. Such
drugs are put out for bid periodically by insurers and/or
pharmacybenefit managers. The bidding process generally does
not even include infusion and other therapies not stocked in a
retail pharmacy.

By contrast, infusion therapies generally are treated as
part of the basic medical coverage provided by health insurers.
Infusion therapies are thus generally put out for bid
separately from self-administered therapies.
90. Beyond the medical reasons physicians may have for prescribing
an infusion therapy as opposed to a non-infusion therapy, patients
exhibit strong preferences for one form of therapy over another.
Patients with active lifestyles often prefer self-administered
treatments. Infusion therapy, on the other hand, is often preferred by
patients with needle aversions, or by patients who prefer to have their
treatments administered by medical professionals.
91. In addition, infusion and non-infusion therapies are offered at
very different price points: On an annual basis, Enbrel and Humira
(which are self-administered therapies) at list price are at least
twice as expensive as Remicade (which is an infusion therapy) for
patients stabilized on them.
92. Because of these various factors, a small but significant non-
transitory increase in price of infusion therapies would not have a
meaningful impact on the demand for non-infusion therapies, and vice-
versa.
93. As noted, the Relevant Product Market includes certain segments
that qualify themselves as Relevant Markets, in which J&J also
possesses monopolypower. For example:
94. Specific-use product markets. Specific-use product markets are
predicated on infusion-administered therapies for the Relevant
Indications. A small but significant nontransitory increase in price
for an infusion product in each of these specific-use product markets
would not cause substitution to non-infusion medicines approved for the
same indication. In each category, Remicade has been the dominant
infusion-administered therapy. The categories are as follows:

Infusion-administered therapies for Crohn's disease.
Remicade accounts for over 70 percent of prescriptions to
patients of infusion-based drugs indicated for Crohn's disease.

Infusion-administered therapies for rheumatoid arthritis.
Remicade accounts for nearly 55 percent of prescriptions to
patients of infusion-based drugs indicated for rheumatoid
arthritis. When combined with the share of its product Simponi
Aria, J&J commands an aggregate of nearly 65 percent of
prescriptions to patients in this category.

Infusion-administered therapies for ulcerative colitis.
Remicade accounts for nearly 70 percent of prescriptions to
patients of infusion-based drugs indicated for ulcerative
colitis.

Infusion-administered therapies for psoriatic arthritis.
Remicade accounts for over 95 percent of prescriptions to
patients of infusion-based drugs indicated for psoriatic
arthritis.

Infusion-administered therapies for ankylosing spondylitis.
Remicade accounts for over 95 percent of prescriptions to
patients of infusion-based drugs indicated for ankylosing
spondylitis.

Infusion-administered therapies for plaque psoriasis.
Remicade accounts for over 95 percent of prescriptions to
patients of infusion-based drugs for plaque psoriasis.
95. Clinic-based product market. The Relevant Product Market
encompasses a submarket consisting of sales of the Relevant Products to
non-hospital clinics (including freestanding clinics and physician
offices with infusion chairs) that administer infusion therapies to
patients. Such a submarket is properly treated as a relevant submarket
among other reasons because J&J is able to price discriminate between
hospitals and non-hospital clinics. The U.S. antitrust enforcement
agencies and economists recognize that relevant antitrust product
markets can be based on categories of customers against whom sellers
can exercise price discrimination, i.e., differential pricing.\27\ Non-
hospital clinics are subject to successful price discrimination by J&J.
J&J can and does identify and target clinics for differential pricing.
There are significant differences in the rebates and discounts J&J
makes available to non-hospital clinics as compared to hospital
customers. Moreover, a small but significant non-transitory increase in
the price of Remicade or other Relevant Products will not induce
infusion clinics to switch to self-administered therapies. A very
substantial percentage of provider accounts that purchase infliximab
are non-hospital clinics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\
See, e.g., U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade
Commission Horizontal Merger Guidelines (2010), Sec. 3.
96. Product markets for new and existing patients. As described
above, J&J has a substantial base of existing Remicade patients, the
substantial majority of whom are not likely to switch to another
therapy, even a biosimilar, if they have achieved relief with
Remicade--even in response to a small but significant non-
transitory increase in price for Remicade. By contrast, for new
patients who are candidates for infusion-administered therapies for the
Relevant Indications, Inflectra is a reasonable substitute for
Remicade. Thus, there is a distinct product market for sales of
Relevant Products to new patients in need of infusion-administered
therapies for the Relevant Indications. There is also a distinct
product market for patients already stabilized on Remicade--a market
dominated by Remicade. As described above, J&J's scheme has bundled its
control over the latter market (for patients stabilized on Remicade) to
thwart competition in the former market (for new patients in need of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
infusion therapy).
97. Infliximab product market. After discovery, the data may also
support an infliximab-only product market. Among other things, J&J has
been able to raise prices for Remicade consistently without losing
significant sales to other branded drug products. Both J&J and Pfizer
consider Remicade and Inflectra to be particularly close substitutes.
For example, J&J's marketing materials focus on comparisons of price
and clinical effectiveness between Remicade and infliximab biosimilars,
and do not reference any other therapies, and its ``Biosimilar
Readiness Plan'' similarly ignores other therapies, focusing instead on
the unique competitive threat posed by biosimilars. Inflectra's
marketing materials likewise focus on Remicade, not on other therapies.
98. Barriers to entry. Substantial barriers to entry exist to
developing other infusion-administered drug therapies for the Relevant
Indications generally, and infusion-administered TNF inhibitors
specifically. The development of a new therapy requires tens if not
hundreds of millions of dollars and substantial risk, as any new
product must survive years of research and development, clinical
trials, and FDA approval. If left unchecked, J&J's conduct will serve
as an additional barrier to entry, as potential new entrants will
recognize that they will be unable to break J&J's ``rebate trap'' and
thus to profitably enter the Relevant Markets--and consequently will
not invest the resources necessary to develop biosimilars.
99. While a second biosimilar to Remicade has been approved--called
Renflexis, sponsored by Merck and Samsung--the sponsoring firms had to
overcome just the kind of substantial burdens noted above, and began
the effort long before J&J commenced its scheme to exclude biosimilar
competition. J&J itself has expressed confidence in maintaining its
Remicade dominance despite the potential entry of Renflexisbased on its
exclusionary contracting strategy. Pfizer has received marketplace
feedback that Renflexis will face the same access challenges from J&J's
scheme as Inflectra.
100. J&J's scheme--including coercive contracts bundling the
incontestable demand (existing patients) with contestable demand (new
patients), and promoting the results of its exclusionary insurer-level
contracts to create uncertainty about Inflectra among providers--has
led directly, with J&J's active encouragement, to nearly all provider
accounts that use infliximab declining to purchase Inflectra at all.
Even if some portion of a provider's patient base may be covered,
providers are unwilling to risk using Inflectra only to ultimately be
denied coverage. A single denied claim can cost a provider in excess of
$4,000, whereas the typical provider savings in product acquisition
cost for a covered Inflectra claim is $200-300. Because Remicade is
nearly universally covered, providers have taken the ``safe'' option
and stocked Remicade over Inflectra, thus increasing the already-
substantial foreclosure caused by J&J's exclusionary contracts. Thus,
as a practical matter, J&J's scheme has foreclosed Inflectra from
approximately 90 percent of provider accounts using infliximab, the
essential channel of distribution for infliximab. And, as noted, in
terms of sales, Remicade continues to control over 96 percent of
infliximab unit sales.
101. Geographic market. The relevant geographic market for the
Relevant Markets alleged herein is the United States of America and its
possessions and territories, as these products are marketed and sold on
a national basis.
J&J's CONDUCT HAS STIFLED COMPETITION IN THE RELEVANT MARKETS, THEREBY
MAINTAINING AND ENHANCING ITS MONOPOLY POWER AND INJURING PFIZER
102. J&J's scheme has led to the near total foreclosure of
Inflectra with patients across the country. First, its exclusionary
contracts with health insurers alone--including with most of the
largest health insurers in the country--have foreclosed Pfizer's
ability to compete for at least 70 percent of patients covered by
commercial health insurance plans in the United States. Second, J&J's
exclusionary contracts with certain providers have foreclosed Pfizer's
ability to compete even for patients covered by plans that do provide
reimbursement for Inflectra. And, as discussed, the reimbursement
challenges (created by J&J) have led most provider accounts to decline
to purchase Inflectra at all, with approximately 90 percent of provider
accounts that use infliximab across the country not stocking Inflectra
at all. As of September 2017, J&J maintained over 96 percent share of
infliximab unit sales in the U.S.
103. Despite vigorous efforts to compete--including offering
guarantees that Inflectra would be less expensive unit-for-unit than
Remicade--Pfizer has been foreclosed from gaining a competitive
foothold as a direct result of J&J's scheme. In the absence of
Remicade's exclusionary practices, Inflectra's growth in the Relevant
Markets would be substantially greater than it has been, and would be
substantially larger in the future. J&J's conduct has deprived Pfizer
of (a) past profits; (b) future profits; and (c) the value of invested
capital from unrealized efforts to enter and expand in the Relevant
Markets. Further, Pfizer's current and prospective customer
relationships and goodwill have been, and will continue to be,
impaired. J&J's conduct, if allowed to continue, will also dampen the
incentives of Pfizer and other biosimilar developers to invest the
substantial resources needed to bring biosimilars to the market. Thus,
the aims of the BPCIA will have been thwarted.
104. J&J's activities have not only harmed Pfizer, they have caused
substantial harm to the competitive process as well as to government
payers and to consumers, who have been deprived of the principal
benefits of competition--more choices and lower prices. The
anticompetitive effects of J&J's conduct are evident in its pricing of
Remicade since Inflectra's entry. Despite the fact that Pfizer has
offered substantial discounts and a lower ASP to compete for business
with insurers and healthcare providers, J&J has been able to increase
the price of Remicade without losing any significant share or volume of
sales to Pfizer (or any other competitor). J&J's prices for Remicade
have been increasing by every measure. J&J has increased Remicade list
prices twice since FDA approval of Inflectra. These increases alone
raised Remicade's list price nearly 9 percent. Remicade's actual ASP
(which, as noted above, is net of discounts, rebates, and other price
concessions) has also increased since Inflectra's entry-- negating any
claim that J&J's rebates qualify as meaningful price competition.
105. There is no efficiency or cost-reducing justification for
J&J's coercive and exclusionary insurer- or provider-level contract
terms. J&J has not achieved improved production costs, or economies of
scale or scope through its contracting strategies. J&J also has
achieved no improvements in the Remicade treatment through its
contracting strategies.
106. If J&J's conduct is not prohibited, it will be adopted by
other originator biologics firms aiming to preserve their dominant
positions. As the first major biosimilar approval, this case will be a
bellwether for the success of Congress's biosimilars initiative, as
embodied in the BPCIA.
CLAIMS FOR RELIEF
FIRST CLAIM FOR RELIEF
Violation of 15 U.S.C. Sec. 2
Monopolization of All Relevant Markets
107. Pfizer repeats and realleges Paragraphs 1 through 106 as set
forth herein.
108. J&J has monopolized the Relevant Markets in violation of
Section 2 of the Sherman Act.
109. J&J has monopoly power in the Relevant Markets.
110. Through the scheme described above, and other conduct likely
to be revealed in discovery, J&J has willfully and unlawfully
maintained and enhanced its monopoly power in violation of Section 2 of
the Sherman Act. J&J's scheme constitutes exclusionary conduct within
the meaning of Section 2 of the Sherman Act.
111. J&J's scheme has stifled competition in the Relevant Markets
and thwarted Congress's purpose in enacting the BPCIA.
112. Among other things, given that (a) J&J imposed explicit
conditions that insurers and providers eliminate (or almost completely
curtail) their dealings with infliximab biosimilars, and (b) J&J's ASP
for Remicade has actually increased since the biosimilar entered, J&J's
pricing is not the clearly predominant means by which competition has
been foreclosed in the Relevant Markets.
113. Even if price were deemed to be the clearly predominant means
by which competition has been foreclosed, when the total amount of
discounts and rebates that J&J offers to insurers and providers under
the contracts described herein, including multi-product bundle
contracts, is attributed to the portion of Remicade sales that is
contestable by a biosimilar like Inflectra, J&J is pricing Remicade
below its own average variable cost.
114. As a result of J&J's conduct, and the harm to competition
caused by that conduct, Pfizer has suffered substantial and continuing
injuries.
SECOND CLAIM FOR RELIEF
Violation of 15 U.S.C. Sec. 2
Attempted Monopolization of All Relevant Markets
115. Pfizer repeats and realleges Paragraphs 1 through 114 as set
forth herein.
116. J&J has attempted to monopolize the Relevant Markets in
violation of Section 2 of the Sherman Act.
117. J&J is violating Section 2 of the Sherman Act by attempting to
implement the anticompetitive scheme set forth above with the specific
intent to monopolize the Relevant Markets. J&J's scheme constitutes
exclusionary conduct within the meaning of Section 2 of the Sherman
Act.
118. There is a dangerous probability that J&J will succeed in
monopolizing the Relevant Markets through its anticompetitive scheme.
119. J&J's scheme has stifled competition in the Relevant Markets and
thwarted Congress's purpose in enacting the BPCIA.
120. Among other things, given that (a) J&J imposed explicit
conditions that insurers and providers eliminate (or almost completely
curtail) their dealings with infliximab biosimilars, and (b) J&J's ASP
for Remicade has actually increased since the biosimilar entered, J&J's
pricing is not the clearly predominant means by which competition is
dangerously likely to be foreclosed in the Relevant Markets.
121. Even if price were deemed to be the clearly predominant means
by which competition is dangerously likely to be foreclosed, when the
total amount of discounts and rebates that J&J offers to insurers and
providers under the contracts described herein, including multi-product
bundle contracts, is attributed to the portion of Remicade sales that
is contestable by a biosimilar like Inflectra, J&J is pricing Remicade
below its own average variable cost.
122. As a result of J&J's conduct, and the harm to competition
caused by that conduct, Pfizer has suffered substantial and continuing
injuries.
THIRD CLAIM FOR RELIEF
Violation of 15 U.S.C. Sec. 14
Sale on Condition to Exclude Inflectra and Other Infliximab Biosimilars
or Impose a Fail First Requirement and to Force Use of Remicade in All
Relevant Markets
123. Pfizer repeats and realleges Paragraphs 1 through 122 as set
forth herein.
124. J&J has entered into agreements with insurers (which reimburse
Remicade) and providers (which purchase Remicade), whereby it has
conditioned the availability of discounts, rebates, and/or other price
concessions on insurers and/or providers eliminating or drastically
curtailing their dealings with Inflectra (or any other infliximab
biosimilar).
125. J&J's agreements function as exclusive agreements, what are
for all practical purposes sole-source agreements, the effect of which
is to foreclose substantially competition from rivals, such as Pfizer,
in the sale of the infliximab to medical providers, in violation of
Section 3 of the Clayton Act.
126. The essence of the J&J-insurer contracts is to pay the
insurers to exclude biosimilar alternatives from their prescription
drug or medical benefits coverage, whereby the insurers either deny
coverage altogether or restrict coverage to only the rarest of
circumstances. The insurers, as the payers for the treatment, have the
ability to exclude selected drugs from coverage and as a result,
patients and providers do not have a practical ability to choose
Inflectra or other infliximab biosimilars over Remicade where coverage
is not available. Moreover, because insurers wield power over providers
with the ability to grant or withhold coverage for treatment, and
because providers are risk-averse when it comes to buying and stocking
medications such as infliximab, the providers are effectively compelled
to stock Remicade exclusively.
127. The intent and effect of the insurers' performance of these
contracts is to cause providers to forgo alternatives and to drive all
treatment sales to J&J. The result of the J&J insurer contracts thus is
the amplification of foreclosure, such that Inflectra and other
biosimilars are denied access to approximately 90 percent of provider
accounts and foreclosed from competition in the Relevant Markets.
128. Because providers and insurers are the gateway for the
distribution and sale of the Relevant Products, there are no viable
alternative means of distribution or sale and substantial foreclosure
exists. Biosimilar competitors to J&J have no practical alternative
means of selling infliximab to patients.
129. These de facto exclusive arrangements are in effect durable
long-term agreements because the incentives J&J has exploited are not
likely to change. So long as J&J's contracts remain in place,
biosimilars will not be able to dent J&J's base of existing patients,
and the incentives underlying J&J's contracts will remain. No insurer
can practically walk away from and not continue to perform under the
J&J agreement due to the above-discussed penalties.
130. The effect of each such agreement is and has been to
substantially lessen competition in the Relevant Markets. The aggregate
impact of such agreements is and has been to substantially lessen
competition or tend to create a monopoly in the Relevant Markets.
131. By imposing such conditional contracts, J&J is directly and
proximately foreclosing Pfizer and other competitors from a substantial
portion of the Relevant Markets.
132. J&J's conduct has had anticompetitive effects in the Relevant
Markets, including, without limitation, the effects described above in
Paragraphs 102 through 106.
133. As a result of J&J's conduct, and the harm to competition
caused by that conduct, Pfizer has suffered substantial and continuing
injuries.
FOURTH CLAIM FOR RELIEF
Violation of 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1
Agreements in Restraint of Trade in All Relevant Markets
134. Pfizer repeats and realleges Paragraphs 1 through 133 as set
forth herein.
135. J&J has entered into agreements with insurers and providers of
Remicade with the purpose and effect of unreasonably restraining trade
and commerce in the Relevant Markets.
136. J&J's solicitation and enforcement of the exclusionary
contracts described above constitute unlawful agreements, contracts,
and concerted activity that unreasonably restrain trade in the Relevant
Markets in violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act.
137. J&J's conduct has had anticompetitive effects in the Relevant
Markets, including, without limitation, the effects described above in
Paragraphs 102 through 106.
138. Among other things, given that (a) J&J imposed explicit
conditions that insurers and providers eliminate (or almost completely
curtail) their dealings with infliximab biosimilars, and (b) J&J's ASP
for Remicade has actually increased since the biosimilar entered, J&J's
pricing is not the clearly predominant means by which competition has
been foreclosed in the Relevant Markets.
139. Even if price were deemed to be the clearly predominant means
by which competition has been foreclosed, when the total amount of
discounts and rebates that J&J offers to insurers and providers under
the contracts described herein, including multi-product bundle
contracts, is attributed to the portion of Remicade sales that is
contestable by a biosimilar like Inflectra, J&J is pricing Remicade
below its own average variable cost.
140. As a result of J&J's conduct, and the harm to competition
caused by that conduct, Pfizer has suffered substantial and continuing
injuries.
PRAYER FOR RELIEF
141. WHEREFORE, Pfizer respectfully prays that the Court enter
judgment against J&J and in favor of Pfizer, as follows:
a.
Awarding Pfizer money damages, trebled pursuant to
law, in an amount in excess of $150,000.00 (exclusive of
interest and costs);
b.
Awarding Pfizer the costs of the lawsuit, including
its reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs;
c.
Declaring J&J's conduct unlawful and in violation of
the above-
referenced statutes;
d.
Entering appropriate preliminary and permanent
injunctive relief barring J&J from continuing to undertake its
anticompetitive scheme, including its exclusionary contracts;
and
e.
Ordering such other and further relief as the Court
may deem just, proper, and equitable.
JURY TRIAL DEMANDED
142.
Pfizer demands a trial by jury for all issues triable by
jury.
Dated:
September 20, 2017 .
Respectfully submitted,
Philadelphia, PA
Robert Fiebach, Esq. (PA 02812)
Peter M. Ryan, Esq. (PA 81816)
Cozen O' Connor
One Liberty Place
1650 Market Street, Suite 2800
Philadelphia, PA 19103
Tel: +1 215 665 4166
Fax: +1 215 665 2013
[emailprotected]
[emailprotected]
Robert A. Milne, Esq. (Pro Hac Vice
forthcoming)
Michael J. Gallagher, Esq. (Pro Hac
Vice forthcoming)
Bryan D. Gant, Esq. (Pro Hac Vice
forthcoming)
White & Case LLP
1221 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10025-1095
Tel: (212) 819-8200
Fax: (212) 354-8113
[emailprotected]
[emailprotected]
[emailprotected]
Elliott E. Dionisio, Esq. (Pro Hac
Vice forthcoming)
White & Case LLP
555 S. Flower Street, Suite 2700
Los Angeles, CA 90071 2433
Tel: (213) 620-7700
Fax: (213) 452-2329
[emailprotected]
Counsel for Pfizer Inc.
______
Prepared Statement of Olivier Brandicourt, M.D.,
Chief Executive Officer, Sanofi
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Senate
Committee on Finance to discuss pharmaceutical pricing, affordability,
and patient access in the United States. I am Dr. Olivier Brandicourt,
the chief executive officer of Sanofi.
At Sanofi, we work passionately every day to understand and address
the health care needs of patients around the world. We are dedicated to
solving patients' most serious health challenges in numerous
therapeutic areas, including diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
immunology, oncology, multiple sclerosis (MS), rare diseases, and rare
blood disorders. We are also devoted to preventing diseases through the
research, development, and delivery of vaccines. And we contribute to
improving the health of people around the world through our broad
portfolio of consumer health products.
Sanofi's U.S. subsidiaries have a rich history in the United States
dating back over 100 years. We currently employ more than 13,000
professionals across the United States in a broad range of critical
roles, including business operations, research and development, and
manufacturing, with our most significant presence in Massachusetts,
where we are the largest employer in the life sciences industry, and
major centers of operation in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee.
Last year, Sanofi spent almost $7 billion on research and
development, an increase of approximately 7 percent from 2017, which
reflects our commitment to bringing better therapies to patients.
Sanofi plans to maintain this level of R&D investment through 2021, and
our R&D pipeline now contains 81 projects, including 33 new molecular
entities in clinical development, and 35 projects that are in Phase III
or have been submitted to regulatory authorities. This investment means
that Sanofi potentially will seek approval for nine new medications in
the next three years, primarily in therapeutic areas where Sanofi sees
the greatest nexus between our expertise and patient need: diabetes,
vaccines, oncology, immunology, rare diseases, and rare blood
disorders.
Our work in R&D includes more than a dozen compounds for the
treatment of various kinds of cancers, and we are employing cutting-
edge approaches in an effort to make significant advances for patients.
Our research includes potential treatments to help the body's own
immune system fight cancer, and antibody drug conjugates that we
believe can deliver cytotoxic drugs to tumors while sparing normal
tissue. Earlier this month, we announced successful results with one
such candidate in a mid-stage trial in lung cancer, and we intend to
initiate a pivotal study later this year.
i. rising costs for patients
While the research and development landscape has fundamentally
changed, the landscape in which patients access medications has also
fundamentally changed, and not for the better. Affordability of
medicines is a real and growing challenge for too many Americans. We
understand the anger of patients who cannot afford the medicines they
or their loved ones need due to rising out-of-pocket drug costs.
There is no single root cause to the problem of rising patient out-
of-pocket costs, and in order to develop meaningful solutions for
patients, it is critical to take a comprehensive look at what is
driving rising costs for patients. Given the number of factors that
contribute to determining out-of-pocket costs for patients, every part
of the supply chain, including manufacturers, has a role to play in
solving this problem.
We want everyone--including patients, providers, payers, pharmacy
benefit managers (PBMs), policy makers, and regulators--to understand
why we set prices as we do, and to reaffirm our commitment to our core
principles of access, affordability and innovation. An important
component of pricing includes the intersection between the list prices
of our medicines, the net prices we actually receive after accounting
for all rebates and other discounts, and out-of-pocket costs.
While list prices often receive the most attention, they reflect
the initial price we set for our medicines. They are not the amount
Sanofi receives nor the prices typically paid by government and
commercial insurers, employers, or PBMs. Under the current system,
players within the supply chain--including PBMs, plans, wholesalers,
distributors, and group purchasing organizations--receive either
rebates and/or fees based on a percentage of the list price. Their
economic incentives are therefore directly linked to the list price.
And as long as the net price grows at a predictable rate, the greater
the list price, the greater the economic returns for many players in
the supply chain. Manufacturers, in turn, must account for anticipated
rebates and other discounts when setting their list price.
Thus, list price is the starting point for negotiations with
payers, and it is often the basis for patient out-of-pocket costs. But
focusing solely on the list price does not tell the whole story. In the
current system, manufacturers pay significant rebates as a percentage
of the list price to both government and private payers, as well as
other intermediaries, in an effort to improve access for patients. In
2018, 55 percent of Sanofi's gross sales were given back to payers as
rebates, including $4.5 billion in mandatory rebates to government
payers and $7.3 billion in discretionary rebates. As described later in
my testimony, due to these rebates, the average aggregate net price of
our products, including our insulin products, actually has declined
over the last number of years.
Sanofi provides rebates to PBMs and health plans to improve patient
access to, and affordability for, Sanofi medicines. We want these
rebates, which lower net prices, to benefit patients. Unfortunately,
under the current system, savings from rebates are not consistently
passed through to patients in the form of lower deductibles, co-
payments or coinsurance amounts.
For some patients, out-of-pocket costs are calculated based on a
medicine's list price. However, based on variability in plan design,
the list price alone does not explain patients' increasing
affordability issues.
Sanofi and Sanofi Genzyme U.S. Gross to Net 2018 Breakdown *
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Below are the summarized categories (by type) for various
transactions:
Mandatory Rebates: Medicaid, VA-DOD, Tricare, 340B, Medicare Coverage
Gap
Discretionary Rebates: Commercial, Medicare, Managed Medicaid, Medicaid
Supplemental, GPO, Institutional Discounts
Government Purchasing Organization (GPO) Fees & Coupons: Fees paid for
administration of Sanofi's agreements with Group Purchasing
Organizations on behalf of their members and various copay assistance
programs
DPA Fees: Performance based fees earned by wholesalers for providing
complete sales information and maintaining targeting inventory rates
Cash Discounts: Trade discounts offered to wholesalers for prompt
payment of invoices
Sales Returns: Netted with Clawback, Other Corrections/Credit Memos
------------------------------------------------------------------------
For instance, in some cases, affordability issues are the result of
changes in health plan designs, such as the increase in the number of
high deductible health plans. Among those with private health
insurance, enrollment in high deductible health plans (HDHPs) has
generally increased since 2010. The design of these plans generally
requires patients to pay the full list price of medicines during the
deductible phase of the program, rather than the negotiated drug price
available when the insurance portion kicks in.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
In other cases, affordability issues are caused by changes in
insurance design which increasingly ask patients to pay higher cost-
sharing for their medicines, even when the price of those medicines has
stayed relatively flat or has declined for the health plan. For
example, as noted later in my testimony, the average net price of
Lantus, our most prescribed insulin, has declined by over 30 percent
since 2012, while the average out-of-pocket burden for patients with
commercial insurance and Medicare has increased by approximately 60
percent over that same period. In this case, not only are discounts
apparently not being passed on to patients, but patients are in fact
being asked to pay more when PBMs and health plans are paying less for
the medicine. This situation defies logic and should not happen.
Increasing out-of-pocket costs also can result from changes to
prescription drug formularies, which have a significant impact on the
amount of out-of-pocket costs a patient will be asked to pay. A recent
opinion piece in The New York Times \1\ powerfully highlights how
changes to prescription drug formularies not only can create confusion
and frustration for providers and patients, but also ultimately
increase costs for patients when the medicines they need are not
covered on a formulary's preferred tier.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/18/opinion/cost-insurance-
diabetes-insulin.html.
The impact of the role each of these factors plays in out-of-pocket
costs for any individual patient is highly variable, thus compounding
the complexity of this issue. Out-of-pocket costs for a medicine for
any particular patient depend on a number of factors in addition to
list price, including: (1) what portion, if any, of a manufacturer's
rebates a PBM or payer passes through to the patient, (2) the benefit
design of the patient's health plan, and (3) the level of reimbursement
negotiated between the patient's plan and the particular pharmacy. Each
of these factors varies significantly among plans and pharmacies--even
within the same health insurance company or PBM receiving the same
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
manufacturer rebate--creating confusion and frustration for patients.
Given the complexity in the system and number of factors that
impact out-of-
pocket costs, every part of the health-care system has an obligation to
work to solve this problem. I am grateful that this Committee--and
others--are taking a holistic approach to collecting information both
on what is causing the problem for patients, and also on solutions to
address patient access and affordability without undermining the
incentives and rewards for scientific risk-taking and discovery that
are the hallmark of the United States ecosystem and economy.
I am here today to share Sanofi's story, the actions we have taken
to improve patient access and affordability, and our ideas about what
more can be done.
ii. sanofi actions to improve patient access and affordability
As a global health-care leader, Sanofi has a long-standing
commitment to promoting health-care systems and policies that make our
treatments accessible and affordable to patients in need. We believe we
can play an important role in the development of constructive solutions
that will benefit both patients and the health-care system as a whole.
I will address some of our ongoing initiatives and recommendations for
solutions in my testimony.
Sanofi's ultimate goal, detailed below, is to encourage a
transition to a value-
driven health-care system that provides incentives for continued
improvements in patient care while increasing access and affordability.
Given the complexities of the current system, changes must be
approached thoughtfully, with a focus on establishing processes that
will both enable affordable access to treatment and protect innovation
in an era of potentially transformative scientific advancements.
Sanofi is--and will continue to be--an industry leader in helping
to address this challenge. While many factors, including decisions
affecting patient out-of-pocket spending and insurance coverage, are
influenced or controlled by others in the health-care system, including
other manufacturers, we recognize that there are actions we can take to
help improve access and affordability for patients. For our part, we
recognize that we must price our medicines transparently and according
to their value, while at the same time contributing to broader
solutions that improve patient outcomes and the financial
sustainability of the U.S. health-care system.
Policy changes are required across the entire health care system.
But we are not waiting for systemic change to arrive before taking
action. Sanofi has adopted a variety of approaches to work within the
current system to improve access and affordability for patients.
Whether it has been launching new medicines in multiple sclerosis and
rheumatoid arthritis at disruptively low prices, limiting price
increases to an external benchmark of overall medical spending, or
lowering the net price of a medicine, Sanofi has approached the
challenge of access and affordability not with words, but with actions.
iii. sanofi pricing principles and actions
Two years ago, Sanofi announced our progressive and industry-
leading pricing principles to help stakeholders understand our pricing
decisions and to advance a more informed discussion of issues related
to the pricing of medicines.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See https://www.sanofi.us/-/media/Project/One-Sanofi-Web/
Websites/North-America/Sanofi-US/Home/corporateresponsibility/
Prescription_Medicine_Pricing_2019.pdf.
These principles include a pledge to keep annual list price
increases at or below the projected U.S. National Health Expenditure
(NHE) growth rate, an estimate of medical spending calculated by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and often used as a
measure of healthcare inflation. These principles apply to all of our
prescription medicines if a pricing decision results in more than a $15
annual increase in the price of the medication. In addition, we
committed to making both our average aggregate list and net price
changes across our portfolio transparent to help illustrate how revenue
accrues to Sanofi versus other parts of the pharmaceutical supply
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
chain.
In 2018, all of our price increases were consistent with our
policy, as are all pricing actions we have taken in 2019. Across our
entire portfolio of medicines, the average aggregate list price
increase was 4.6 percent while the average aggregate net price--that
is, the actual price paid to Sanofi--declined by 8.0 percent.
The declining average aggregate net price in 2018 represents the
third consecutive year the amount that health plans and PBMs pay Sanofi
for our medicines has declined.
U.S. Portfolio Annual Average Aggregate Price Changes *
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Average Aggregate List
Average Aggregate Net
Year
Price
Price
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016
4.0% Increase
2.1% Decrease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017
1.6% Increase
8.4% Decrease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018
4.6% Increase
8.0% Decrease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Average aggregate across Sanofi's prescription product portfolio.
Specific to insulin, the average aggregate net price across all
Sanofi insulin products has declined over the past four years. For our
entire insulin portfolio, the average net price is 25 percent lower
today than it was in 2012.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Based on internal review of pricing actions and payer
contracting.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
In addition to our pledge to limit price increases in the U.S.,
Sanofi's pricing policy includes a commitment to transparency in how we
price new medicines coming to the market for the first time. When we
set the price of a new medicine, we hold ourselves to a rigorous and
structured process that includes consultation with external
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
stakeholders and considers four factors:
(1)
A holistic assessment of value, including (a) clinical
value and outcomes, or the benefit the medicine delivers to
patients, and how well it works compared to a standard of care;
(b) economic value, or how the medicine reduces the need--and
therefore costs--of other health care interventions; and (c)
social value, or how the medicine contributes to quality of
life and productivity. Our assessments rely on a range of
internal and external methodologies, including health
technology assessment (HTA) approaches and other analyses that
help define or quantify value and include patient perspectives
and priorities.
(2)
Similar treatment options available or anticipated at the
time of launch in order to understand the competitive landscape
within the disease areas in which the medicine may be used.
(3)
Affordability, including the steps we must take to promote
access for patients and contribute to a more sustainable system
for payers and health-care delivery systems.
(4)
Unique factors specific to the medicine at the time of
launch. For example, we may need to support ongoing clinical
trials to provide additional critical information on the value
of the product (e.g., longer-term outcomes studies), implement
important regulatory commitments, or develop sophisticated
patient support tools that improve care management and help
decrease the total cost of care.
Using this approach, Sanofi has launched a number of highly
innovative products at prices well below the competition, some even
before our principles were officially adopted.

In 2012, Sanofi launched Aubagio ', a medicine
used to treat relapsing forms of MS, at a list price more than
25 percent below the other approved oral MS medication on the
market at the time.

In 2017, we launched Kevzara ', a second line
medication used to treat certain types of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA), at a list price 30 percent below other leading treatments
for RA. After completing a head to head study against the
market-leading anti-TNF, Kevzara was found superior in RA
patients.

In 2017, we launched Dupixent ', the first drug
of its kind for moderate to severe atopic dermatitis,
specifically within the cost-effectiveness range provided by
the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (ICER) of
$37,000, compelling the Chief Medical Officer for a leading PBM
to say ``this is how pricing should work.'' While we have
concerns about ICER's methodology in many of their drug
reviews, our willingness to work with ICER is further
demonstration to our commitment to price our medicines based on
the value they provide with consideration of input from a
third-party analysis.

In 2018, we launched Admelog ' at the lowest list
price of any mealtime insulin.

In February 2019, Sanofi and Regeneron announced that
Praluent ' will be made available at a new reduced
U.S. list price. Beginning in early March, new U.S. National
Drug Code (NDC) option will be available at approximately 60
percent less than the original list price for the drug. This
action follows our earlier announcement in March 2018, when
Sanofi and Regeneron committed to lowering the U.S. net price
for payers in return for reducing burdensome access barriers
for appropriate patients.\4\ Sanofi and Regeneron took the
additional step of announcing a new NDC to further assist
patients, particularly in Part D, who still face cost-sharing
linked to the list price, and who were thus not helped by the
earlier net price reduction. With the new lower-priced
Praluent, most Medicare Part D patients are expected to save as
much as $345 per month, depending on their insurance plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See http://www.news.sanofi.us/2018-03-10-Sanofi-and-Regeneron-
announce-plans-to-make-Praluent-R-more-accessible-and-affordable-for-
patients-with-the-greatest-health-risk-and-unmet-need.
With the right incentives in the system, our approach to setting
launch prices for these new medicines would have had the effect of
ensuring affordable access for patients. Unfortunately, because of the
way the U.S. health care system is currently constructed, our
experience has shown that pricing medicines at lower list prices has
failed to result in adequate access or affordability for most patients.
For instance, since Dupixent was launched, rebates have been required
in most cases to secure access for patients. Despite the responsible
list price and subsequent rebates, 8 commercial and 2 Medicaid plans
nevertheless implemented a step edit requiring patients to try
immunosuppressant therapy first before using Dupixent. They implemented
this step edit notwithstanding the fact that immunosuppressant therapy
is not FDA approved for use in atopic dermatitis and is referenced as a
worst-case scenario for patients in practice guidelines due to its
questionable benefit-risk profile.
iv. sanofi's insulin products: a case study
We feel a special obligation to address the pressing issues around
access and affordability of insulin products. In my time as CEO, Sanofi
has made a concerted effort to improve both system sustainability and
patient affordability in our approach to our portfolio of insulin
products, which includes six different products to meet individualized
patient needs. And it is important to note the evolution and innovation
of insulin, as we are often asked if anything has changed in the last
100 years that warrants pricing action.
Sanofi's groundbreaking discovery of insulin glargine, and its
development of a novel pre-filled disposable injection pen to deliver
insulin glargine, have profoundly improved the lives of millions of
patients living with diabetes in the United States and worldwide.
Sanofi's insulin glargine drug products are sold under the trade names
Lantus ', Lantus SoloSTAR ', Toujeo SoloSTAR
', and Toujeo Max SoloSTAR ', each of which
represents a significant leap forward in the treatment of diabetes.
Sanofi has been awarded patents for its innovative technologies on each
of these products.
These novel drug products began with Sanofi's discovery of insulin
glargine. Despite having ``insulin'' in its name, Sanofi's insulin
glargine is markedly different from prior insulin products, which had a
relatively short duration of action and required patients to inject
themselves multiple times a day and wake up at night for injections in
order to control blood glucose levels. Each injection of prior insulin
products caused a sharp spike in the patient's insulin levels, which
could cause symptoms of low blood sugar ranging from shakiness and
confusion to, in the extreme, coma or death. Injections also had to be
timed before every meal, disrupting patient's lives, sleep times, and
ability to eat with friends and family. As such, the consistent goals
of insulin therapy over the last century have included reducing the
frequency of insulin administration and flattening the post-
administration peak of insulin in the bloodstream. Prior attempts to
achieve these goals included cumbersome mechanical pumps that had to be
worn on the body for constant infusion, and NPH insulin, which had an
intermediate duration of action but still caused a pronounced peak in
insulin levels.
Glargine changed all of that. Sanofi scientists, in a remarkable
feat of protein engineering, succeeded in fundamentally altering the
human insulin molecule at the amino acid level, changing its
pharmacological characteristics to give patients a steady release of
insulin with just a single daily administration. Unlike anything that
came before it, glargine forms tiny solid crystals upon injection that
dissipate over time to provide a flatter, stable, long-lasting effect
that mimics the flat profile of insulin release from a healthy pancreas
and reduces the risks caused by low blood sugar. The once-daily
administration of glargine also proved a significant boon to patient
lifestyles.
Insulin is also an excellent example of list prices not reflecting
the actual prices paid by insurance companies, and out-of-pocket costs
that continue to rise despite lower net prices. The net price of our
insulin product Lantus ', for example, has fallen over 30
percent since 2012; yet, over this same period, average out-of-pocket
costs for patients with commercial insurance and Medicare--before the
benefit of any Sanofi financial assistance program--has risen 60
percent.
v. sanofi's financial assistance programs
Our commitment to affordability for patients extends beyond
responsible launch pricing, limited price increases, and transparency.
We offer a suite of traditional and innovative patient assistance
programs to enable appropriate patient access and to help patients
afford the Sanofi medicines prescribed to them. We publicize our
programs in a number of ways to ensure patients and providers are aware
of our offerings, including through advertising online, on television,
as well as in provider office settings and at pharmacies.
As noted previously in my testimony, rising out-of-pocket costs for
patients is a complex problem with many causes. In some cases, access
issues are linked to lack of insurance. But having insurance is no
longer a guarantee of affordable care, and Sanofi believes it is also
critical to address the needs of patients who may be exposed to
excessive cost-sharing based on insurance plan design or other
deficiencies in the system.
Because patient situations are different, we have carefully
tailored our assistance programs for insulin products to meet a variety
of patient needs:

Commercially insured patients qualify for our co-pay
assistance program, which reduces the financial burden for
insulin products. Through this program, over 90 percent of
participating commercially insured patients pay either $10 or
$0 per month for their Sanofi-manufactured insulin products.
Last year, our co-pay assistance programs for commercially
insured patients provided more than 400,000 eligible patients
with $342 million in patient savings.

For diabetes patients who do not qualify for one of our co-
pay assistance programs, we created the Insulins ValYOU Savings
Program in 2018. The purpose of this program is to provide
relief for those patients who currently pay high variable
retail prices for insulin and do not qualify for other
assistance programs. Through this program, eligible individuals
can access all Sanofi insulins for $99 per 10 mL vial or $149
for a pack of SoloStar pens, approximately a one-month supply
of insulin,\5\ at a discount of up to 60 percent discount below
the list price, resulting in potential savings of up to $3,000
per year. There are no income requirements and the program is
available at U.S. pharmacies. Last year (its first year), the
program resulted in $6.2 million in patient savings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Patients with type 1 diabetes require insulin replacement with
both long-acting (basal) and mealtime (bolus) insulin. An average adult
with type 1 diabetes who weighs 70 kg (155 pounds) should be taking
anywhere from 0.5-1.0 u/kg/day--depending upon activity levels, and
meal choices. Using the higher daily dose of 1.0 u/kg/day, this patient
would need a total of 70 units/day of insulin, of which approximately
half should be mealtime (bolus) insulin and half should be long-acting
(basal) insulin. For this average patient, one vial of long-acting
(basal) and one vial of mealtime (bolus) insulin could provide a
monthly supple of insulin.
Many patients with type 2 diabetes require long-acting (basal)
insulin only. Our internal data shows the average daily dose is
approximately 45 units per day, resulting in a monthly requirement of
1350 units of long-acting (basal) insulin per month. Lantus SoloSTAR
' pack contains 1500 units of insulin (5 pens x 300 units
per pen) and Toujeo SoloSTAR ' pack contains 1350 units of
insulin (3 pens x 450 units per pen). For the average patient with type
2 diabetes, the ValYOU Savings Program would meet the monthly insulin
requirement with one payment of $149. Patients on lower doses of Lantus
may opt for the 10ml vial, which would meet the monthly insulin
requirement with one payment of $99.

For eligible low-income patients, Sanofi offers many of our
medicines, including our insulin products, at no charge through
its Sanofi Patient Connection patient assistance program. We
are proud that, in 2018, more than 93,000 patients participated
in the Sanofi Patient Connection program, receiving free
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
medicine valued at $508 million.
While Sanofi alone cannot eliminate the issue of patient
affordability, no matter how comprehensive or innovative our patient
assistance programs, we believe that our efforts can make a meaningful
difference for many patients. We are committed to maintaining these
programs and raising awareness of these options to the patients who
need them.
vi. policy proposals
Over the past few years, we have led by example and made decisions
to help improve access and affordability for patients. I am here today
to tell you that I know our actions, while well-intentioned, have not
been enough. I hope we can all agree on market-based policy solutions
that will incentivize a high-value, sustainable health-care system that
improves the affordability of innovative medicines in the U.S.
Based on our experience, targeting list price controls alone will
not be sufficient to address patient access and affordability. That is
why the solution to drug pricing must include protections for patients,
tying responsible pricing to both access and affordability for
patients.
There are obviously a variety of ways to accomplish this, and
Sanofi could support any number of options that align to our core
principles:
(1)
The U.S. should continue to maintain a strong ecosystem
for innovation. As such, any policy proposals should strictly
avoid directly and artificially controlling the price of
medicines, either through price controls set by the Federal
Government, or worse, outsourcing that decision to foreign
governments. Policy proposals that we believe would
fundamentally undermine the unique innovation ecosystem of the
United States include reference pricing, importation, or price
controls set by CMS. Based on our experience, these approaches
may be effective at controlling budgets for central payers but
come at a steep cost for patients--namely limiting access to
innovative treatments. Additionally, given that the U.S. is the
world's leader in science and innovation--and the jobs that
come with it--these approaches pose additional risks to the
U.S. economy and future scientific discovery. Finally, and most
importantly, given the differences between systems, these
approaches may do little to improve access and affordability
for patients.
As we have experienced, within the current system,
declining prices for payers or new treatments priced at
responsibly lower list prices are no guarantee that those
actions will translate to affordability or access for patients.
(2)
Changes to the pricing system must be holistic, and the
majority of benefits should accrue to patients. As noted
previously, simply enacting price controls--either set by a
State, Federal, or foreign government--will not solve the
problem of access and affordability for patients. We believe
system incentives need to change to encourage smaller list
price increases, or even list price reductions, by requiring
health plans to cover those medicines that meet these standards
at an affordable co-pay level and only allow access
restrictions consistent with the label and accepted evidence-
based best clinical practice.
If policies are enacted that solely target the list price
of medicines without these common-sense patient protections,
our shared goal of lowering drug costs--for both government and
patients while maintaining the engine of innovation in the
United States to bring new innovative medicines to patients
will not be fully achieved. To appropriately accomplish this
objective, Sanofi is willing to trade price for access and
affordability and share accountability for offsetting the
financial impact on the Medicare programs.
Sanofi supports and recommends several policy solutions to
incentivize responsible pricing behavior. To ensure that these
changes do not create a windfall for manufacturers or health
plans and PBMs, Sanofi recommends applying these policies only
to medicines that satisfy certain limits on price increases.
This approach will shift the current incentives in the system
to reward ``good'' behavior in a manner that truly helps
patients. Several of the solutions outlined below are also
priorities for Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden and
other members of this committee and I look forward to the
opportunity to work with you on advancing these and other
policy initiatives:
First, reducing out-of-pocket costs for patients is our top
priority. As we have experienced, limiting list price of
medicines alone is not sufficient to fully solve this problem.
Sanofi has identified a number of ways to effectively reduce
out-of-pocket costs for consumers and broadly supports
tradeoffs between price and access to help patients, including:

Implementation of the Anti-Kickback Safe Harbor rebate
proposed rule in a manner that directly lowers out-of-pocket
costs for patients without creating loopholes that would
undermine the proposed rule's intent.

Requiring a portion of the discounts and rebates paid by
manufacturers to reduce costs for patients at the pharmacy
counter.

Changing government price reporting rules and the Anti-
Kickback statute in a manner that would promote value-based
contracting.

Implementing an annual out-of-pocket cap for Medicare
beneficiaries.

Allowing manufacturers to offer co-pay assistance to
Medicare beneficiaries.

Changing or clarifying government price reporting rules
to make it easier to reduce list prices on medicines that have
been on the market for a long time--namely by (1) making clear
that the government pricing metrics for the new, lower list
price drug do not have to be averaged with the metrics for
older, higher list price drug and (2) permitting a company to
treat the new lower price drug as a new product for purposes of
Medicaid rebate calculations, which will help to link the
rebate liability for the new drug to the new drug's lower price
as opposed to the higher price for the old drug.
Second, Sanofi supports policies that cultivate a highly
competitive free market system and rewards the type of
entrepreneurial risk-taking necessary to the discovery and
development of life-saving new medicines. A key element of that
system is a strong and predictable intellectual property
system. However, after a reasonable period of time--which I
believe is already reflected in U.S. law--generic and
biosimilar medicines should quickly enter the market to offer
long-term access at lower costs. To help accomplish these
goals, Sanofi supports:

Legislation that promotes competition, such as the
CREATES Act, and prohibitions on ``reverse payment''
agreements. While some changes may be needed to avoid
unintended consequences, we support moving forward with
policies that limit manufacturers' ability to unfairly avoid
competition. At Sanofi, we make product supply available to
generic and biosimilar manufacturers developing data necessary
for FDA applications for their products. We do this in a timely
manner and on reasonable terms.

Increased system-wide transparency, which would improve
competition across health care by making relevant information
available to patients and policymakers. Providing more
information about what is driving costs in the system and how
money is flowing through the system will allow for increased
competition and better-informed decision making. Policies like
the SPIKE Act, which appropriately include a threshold for
reporting to incentivize responsible pricing behavior and the
C-THRU Act, are potential approaches.
vii. conclusion
I look forward to having a productive conversation about the
complexities of the current prescription drug pricing system and
proposals to improve affordable patient access to high quality,
innovative medications to drive optimal health outcomes.
Thank you for the invitation to speak with you today and I look
forward to working with you.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Olivier Brandicourt, M.D.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' proposed
rule, ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates
Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees,'' envisions that drug manufacturers will offer up-front
discounts rather than the back-end rebates that are now commonly
provided. Some observers argue that a 1996 court case called into
question whether manufacturers could offer up-front discounts,
resulting in today's rebate-based system. I've heard differing opinions
as to whether the issues related to the initial court case are still
relevant. If the HHS proposed rule is finalized, can you assure the
committee that your company will offer up-front discounts? If not, why?
Answer. As the question notes, one of the practical implications of
the Proposed Rule is to incentivize a shift from back-end rebate
payments to up-front discounts that are passed through at the point-of-
service to the patient (at least in part). We understand that some in
the health care industry have raised concerns that the nation's
antitrust laws, specifically the Robinson-Patman Act, and long-running
antitrust litigation involving drug manufacturers, wholesalers, and
pharmacies could prevent or reduce discounting under a pricing
structure without rebates. But, the Robinson-Patman Act focuses on
price discrimination--involving any dimension of price--and it does not
distinguish between up-front discounts and rebates. In addition, the
referenced litigation, In re Brand Name Prescription Drugs Antitrust
Litigation, did not result in any change in the ability of a
prescription drug manufacturer to offer an up-front discount.
Consequently, because Sanofi's view is that the antitrust laws apply
equally to up-front discounts and back-end rebates, we do not believe
that they present any impediment to offering up-front discounts to
patients at the point of sale. Sanofi is committed to working with
other stakeholders to lower patient out-of-pocket costs, and the
company will carefully review any final rule issued by HHS regarding
the Anti-Kickback Statute and its safe harbor regulations--with the
goal of providing point-of-sale discounts to patients in a compliant
manner to help lower patient out-of-pocket costs.
Question. Please describe how you expect your company to respond to
the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor protection for back-end
rebates in Medicare Part D that is referenced above if it is finalized.
Assuming you are confident that antitrust laws do not prevent your
company from offering up-front discounts, specifically, do you envision
that your company lowers the list price of a drug to the current after-
rebate net price, offer discounts equal to the current rebate amount,
or a combination of both?
Answer. Sanofi is committed to working with other stakeholders to
lower patient out-of-pocket costs, and the company will carefully
review any final rule issued by HHS regarding the Anti-Kickback Statute
and its safe harbor regulations--with the goal of providing point-of-
sale discounts to patients in a compliant manner to help lower patient
out-of-pocket costs.
With respect to list price, if (1) the proposed changes to the
anti-kickback statute safe harbors were codified, and (2) Congress
implemented similar changes to the commercial insurance market, Sanofi
would lower the list prices of its prescription medications for
products in competitive categories for which there is currently a
material difference between list price and net price on the assumption
that patient access and affordability would be improved. Sanofi also
supports policy changes that would de-link other payments in the
pharmaceutical supply chain from list price.
We support extending the intent behind the anti-kickback statute
safe harbor proposed rule to the commercial market so that incentives
are aligned across the marketplace. Together, we believe these changes
would facilitate Sanofi's ability to lower our list prices. However, we
recommend a step-wise approach, implementing changes to the commercial
market after the safe harbor rule is implemented on January 1, 2020.
Such an approach would provide an opportunity for stakeholders and the
government to identify unintended consequences, and address them, prior
to extending these policies to the commercial market.
We want to ensure that the new system achieves its goal of
improving affordability for patients. For instance, CMS should monitor
and evaluate how the new system affects formulary access, utilization
management, and patient cost-sharing, particularly with respect to
medicines with a lower list price. We also have concerns that changes
to the rebate system may lead to new fees, which simply require
manufacturers to pay previous rebate values in new ways, rather than
creating savings for patients.
Without a better understanding of how these policy changes
ultimately would affect the competitive marketplace, patient access,
and affordability, we are unable to quantify the amount of up-front
discounts or any potential list price reduction.
Question. To what extent are the back-end rebates your company
currently offers contingent on the amount of market share realized for
your drugs as a result of Part D plan formulary placement and other
techniques?
Answer. Sanofi negotiates rebates with PBMs and Part D plans to
secure better formulary position for our products, which in turn
provides the best possible access and cost sharing for the majority of
Medicare Part D beneficiaries. When evaluating what level of rebates to
offer, Sanofi considers the potential business impact of such
arrangements.
Question. Please provide a breakdown of percentage of sales that go
to each payer (including Medicare, Medicaid, private pay, other) and a
similar percentage by volume of the total number of each drug compared
to total volume. Please provide this data for the most recent year
available.
Primary Care Products
Percentage of Sales by Payer Channel \1\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Channel
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSS Others
Product
Commercial
Medicare
Medicaid
Tricare
340B
\2\
Institutional \3\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lantus
25%
36%
10%
0%
5%
19%
4%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Toujeo
47%
39%
7%
0%
4%
2%
0%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soliqua 100/33
77%
15%
3%
0%
3%
1%
0%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Apidra
16%
1%
66%
0%
8%
7%
2%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Admelog
0%
0%
91%
0%
9%
0%
0%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multaq
24%
57%
2%
0%
3%
12%
2%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Praluent
22%
32%
1%
0%
2%
5%
38%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Based on gross sales.
\2\ This category includes the VA, DOD, and other purchases through Sanofi US's Federal Supply Schedule (FSS).
\3\ This category includes Hospital/GPO, Long-Term Care, Outpatient, and Staff Model.
Percentage by Volume by Payer Channel
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Channel
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Commercial
Medicare
Medicaid
Tricare
340B
FSS Others
Institutional
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lantus
25%
36%
10%
0%
5%
19%
4%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Toujeo
47%
39%
7%
0%
4%
2%
0%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soliqua 100/33
77%
15%
3%
0%
3%
1%
0%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Apidra
16%
1%
67%
0%
7%
7%
2%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Admelog
0%
0%
91%
0%
9%
0%
0%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multaq
24%
57%
2%
0%
3%
12%
2%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Praluent
22%
32%
1%
0%
2%
5%
38%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specialty Care Products
Percentage of Sales by Payer Channel \4\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Channel
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commercial/
Medicaid/VA /
Non-Contracted
Product
Managed Care
Medicare
DOD/Tricare
PHS/340B
Sales
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cerdelga
0%
12%
6%
4%
78%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cerezyme
0%
15%
15%
22%
48%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aldurazyme
0%
6%
29%
23%
42%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fabrazyme
0%
13%
10%
26%
51%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Myozyme
0%
18%
15%
31%
36%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thyrogen
0%
4%
5%
25%
66%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Caprelsa
0%
6%
10%
0%
84%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aubagio
47%
33%
11%
2%
7%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lemtrada
0%
35%
10%
41%
14%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kevzara
69%
15%
4%
3%
9%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dupixent
75%
9%
6%
3%
7%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eloctate
0%
5%
33%
37%
25%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alprolix
0%
5%
27%
39%
29%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jevtana
0%
70%
1%
30%
0%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zaltrap
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Elitek
0%
15%
1%
7%
77%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mozobil
0%
25%
6%
45%
24%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thymoglobulin
0%
0%
0%
4%
96%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The data used to derive this information is contracted sales data. Because many of these products are
purchased through non-contracted sales, Sanofi has a limited view regarding through which channels these
products are purchased. Percentage by volume by channel results in similar percentages to percentage by sales
so a separate chart is not provided.
Question. Do your companies hire consultants or lobbyists to
promote products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committees? To whom do you disclose advocacy activities surrounding
State Medicaid programs, if at all?
Answer. Sanofi does not hire external consultants or lobbyists to
advocate for coverage of our products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committees. Sanofi employees do attend State Medicaid
Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committees meetings. Relevant advocacy
activities to support Medicaid access and coverage of our medicines, if
any, are disclosed to States in accordance with individual State laws.
Question. Please describe how the costs of patient assistance
programs are accounted for within your company's financial statements.
Please also describe the types of market information, such as
prescribing and use patterns, that your company collects from different
types of patient assistance programs and patient hub services.
Answer. Within Sanofi's financial statements, Sanofi includes the
administrative costs of the company's co-pay assistance programs, other
point-of-sale programs, and free drug patient assistance program
(Sanofi Patient Connection) in the ``Selling and general expenses''
line item. For co-pay assistance and other point-of-sale programs,
Sanofi records the pharmacy reimbursement amount paid by the company as
a reduction in sales. Sanofi records free product provided through
Sanofi Patient Connection within ``Cost of Sales.'' Sanofi Care North
America, the 501(c)(3) operating foundation that donates free product
to Sanofi Patient Connect, records the free goods as a ``Contribution''
when received from Sanofi and as a ``Donation'' when donated to Sanofi
Patient Connection.
With regard to market information associated with its patient
assistance programs and hub services, Sanofi generally collects data
that aids in the efficient administration and operation of these
programs. For example, the vendors operating Sanofi Patient Connection
and the hubs collect information provided by patients on enrollment
forms, including patient and provider demographic information, patient
insurance information, patient diagnosis, and prescription information
necessary to evaluate patient program eligibility and/or administer the
program. (Sanofi does not itself receive patient protected health
information except in very limited circumstances, such as when a
patient reaches out to Sanofi directly when they do not agree with
their patient assistance eligibility determination or when Sanofi
monitors vendor calls for compliance with company policies and
procedures.) With respect to Sanofi Patient Connection, Sanofi does not
use this information for purposes other than administering the patient
assistance program. With respect to hub services, in addition to using
this information to administer hub programs, Sanofi may use this data
to develop market and business insights.
With respect to Sanofi's point-of-sale patient assistance programs,
Sanofi also receives anonymized program utilization data, including
information about patient out-of-pocket costs, the average amounts that
Sanofi reimburses pharmacies through the program, abandonment rates,
dispensing pharmacies, and the prescribers writing the prescriptions
associated with program utilization. This information is used to
administer the program. Sanofi may also use this data to develop market
and business insights.
Question. Please provide a list of all contributions since January
1, 2014, that your company has made to any tax exempt organizations
working on issues related to drugs within your product lines, including
but not limited to patient groups, disease awareness groups, medical or
professional societies, universities or hospitals, industry
associations or leagues. For each contribution, please provide the name
of the organization that received the donation, the date the donation
was made, the amount of the donation, and a description of the purpose
of the contribution (i.e., was the contribution for the general fund, a
specific purpose to a specific program, or continuing medical
education). Please also note whether the contribution was unrestricted
or restricted; if it was restricted, please explain all restrictions.
Finally, if your company maintains a foundation or other separate
charitable arm, please provide the name of all such entities, and list
all donations made from that entity or entities.
Answer. In the attached documents, we have provided information for
the period January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2018 regarding payments
made by Sanofi US to tax-exempt organizations.\5\ The information is
provided in a number of documents consistent with how Sanofi maintains
this information. In some cases, this information may be over-inclusive
and include non-tax exempt organizations (e.g., contributions for
independent medical education into both non-profit and other entities).
The information includes contributions and sponsorships to various tax-
exempt health-care-oriented organizations, including patient groups.
The information also includes contributions made for independent
medical education grants, and to teaching hospitals for investigator-
sponsored trials and for physician fellowship payments. On March 8,
2018, Sanofi acquired Bioverativ, Inc., a biopharmaceutical company
focused on therapies for hemophilia and other rare blood disorders. The
attached documents also describe the monetary contributions to tax
exempt organizations made by Bioverativ since March 8, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ These contributions may not relate to particular drug products.
Sanofi US supports programs and initiatives of external, independent,
not-for-profit organizations that align with Sanofi US's corporate
vision and values. These organizations are generally healthcare-
oriented and focus on one or more therapeutic areas in which Sanofi US
is actively involved. The attached information focuses on Sanofi US
entities that manufacture and sell drug products and does not include
entities that manufacturer and sell consumer health products or
vaccines. Contribution information prior to 2015 is archived in
databases and systems that Sanofi does not currently maintain and which
are not easily accessible. The information available does not
distinguish between restricted and unrestricted grants.
With respect to any foundations or charitable arms of Sanofi, from
January 1, 2014 through the end of 2017, Sanofi maintained an entity
called Sanofi Foundation of North America, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
operating foundation that was closed at the end of 2017. Donations made
from that entity are included in the attachments described above.
Currently, Sanofi maintains an entity called Sanofi Cares North
America, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit operating foundation that makes
donations of Sanofi products free of charge to eligible financially-
needy uninsured and underinsured patients through a program known as
the Sanofi Patient Connection. Sanofi Cares North America also donates
product to five non-governmental organization partners for the purpose
of emergency disaster relief--Americares, DirectRelief, Heart to Heart
International, MAP International, and Project Hope, and to
approximately one hundred summer camps with 501(c)(3) status for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
children with diabetes.
Question. Pay for delay agreements cost consumers and taxpayers
billions in higher drug costs every year. The FTC has gone after drug
companies that enter into these settlements where the brand pays the
generic company to keep its lower cost alternative off the market. I'm
the lead Republican sponsor of S. 64, the ``Preserve Access to
Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act,'' which would help put an end
to these deals.
Do you agree that these pay-off agreements keep drug costs high for
patients because they delay competition?
Answer. With respect to patent litigation, Sanofi believes it is
inappropriate to presume that any settlement of patent litigations
related to pharmaceutical products is anticompetitive. Patent
settlements are often the most efficient and effective way to resolve
disputes regarding patented drugs, and they often lead to the earliest
appropriate entry of generic products into the market, which benefits
patients. In fact, settlements permit entry of a generic alternative
into the market earlier than expiration of the relevant branded
product's patent. Each patent litigation and potential settlement
presents unique factors and must be considered individually and in
light of the relevant circumstances.
Question. Has your company ever entered into these kinds of
settlements with a generic company?
Answer. No, Sanofi does not enter into ``pay for delay'' or
``reverse payment'' agreements that prohibit generic drug or biosimilar
development after the expiration of a patent. Sanofi has reached
settlements in patent infringement cases, and these agreements have
allowed the generic company to commercialize its product before the
expiration of the branded product's patent(s).
Question. Do you support the pay for delay bill?
Answer. We support the intent behind this legislation to promote
competition, including prohibitions on ``reverse payment'' agreements.
However, we have significant concerns with the way that this bill is
drafted, and therefore we do not support this particular legislation.
We believe that it is inappropriate to make settlements of patent
litigations presumptively illegal or to classify such settlements as
anticompetitive. Such settlements can be the most efficient and
effective way to resolve legitimate disputes regarding patented drugs,
and they often lead to the earliest appropriate entry of generic
products into the market, which in turn benefits patients. As stated
above, each patent litigation and potential settlement presents unique
factors and must be considered individually and in light of the
relevant circumstances.
Additionally, we have concerns that this bill could apply
retroactively to agreements entered into after June 17, 2013. For
clarity and certainty in the marketplace, any new legislation governing
the settlement of patent litigation should apply prospectively only.
rebate traps/walls
Question. I'm increasingly concerned about the effect of so-called
``rebate traps'' or ``rebate walls'' on patients' access to quality,
lower cost medicine. I understand there is ongoing litigation
challenging these practices as anti-competitive.
Does your company engage in the bundling of rebates over multiple
products? If so, why? And what benefit does the consumer gain from
that?
Answer. Sanofi offers discounts in bundled sales arrangements only
in limited circumstances. For example, Sanofi may offer bundled
discounts on its products Toujeo' and Lantus' to
ensure that both products attain a formulary position that benefits
patients. This is especially important because the products may serve
patients with different medical needs.
Question. Does your company view these practices as anticompetitive
or harmful to patients' access to quality, lower cost medicine?
Answer. Sanofi prioritizes patient access to medications at a
reasonable cost. Sanofi's arrangements with individual PBMs or insurers
promote this goal by maintaining stability of supply at affordable
prices. In competitive drug markets, Sanofi may enter into arrangements
with particular PBMs or insurers that permit Sanofi to further reduce
its prices on one or more medications in exchange for greater certainty
regarding the amount of those medications it will sell over a specified
term. These arrangements promote patient access to quality, affordable
medications, are procompetitive, and comply with the antitrust laws.
Moreover, in competitive drug markets Sanofi's ability to ensure
patient access to affordable medications is affected both by PBMs and
insurers (who may have considerable negotiating leverage over
manufacturers) and by other manufacturers (who may respond to
competition from Sanofi in a variety of ways). While some manufacturers
may respond by building ``rebate walls'' or ``rebate traps'' around
their products, Sanofi shares the Committee's concern about practices
that are harmful to patients' access to quality, affordable medication.
Question. If a policy were adopted to eliminate rebates, or to
require that rebate savings be passed on to the consumer, would that in
and of itself solve the issue of rebate ``traps'' and ``walls''? And
would consumers benefit from such a policy?
Answer. The elimination of safe harbor protection for rebates would
remove incentives for manufacturers to attempt to influence formulary
placement through such discounts. It is also possible that competitive
products would be launched at lower list prices and more readily
incorporated into formularies on the basis of their clinical benefits
in a world without rebates. This would benefit the system overall,
including consumers.
drug pricing
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider regulatory costs or compliance? If so, how specifically do
those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least
one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. The primary factors that Sanofi considers in setting list
price include the value of the product, the competitive environment,
patient affordability and access, investment in further product
development or needs to reinvest in R&D more generally. In certain
limited cases, Sanofi also will consider regulatory costs when setting
the list price of a product. These factors may be considered, for
example, where ongoing clinical trials are needed for a particular
therapy or when the FDA mandates a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation
Strategy (``REMS'') for a product--such as with Sanofi's drug
Lemtrada. Sanofi does not, however, consider our routine and ongoing
regulatory compliance efforts within the cost of our products. Rather,
those efforts are considered part of Sanofi's operating costs.
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider the risk of liability or litigation? If so, how specifically
do those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at
least one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. When conducting its pricing analysis for a new drug, Sanofi
does not specifically consider the risk of liability or litigation
associated with such product.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. What role do you see Value Based Arrangements (VBAs)
playing in the effort to reduce prescription drug costs? What potential
do these arrangements have to find the ``sweet spot'' between
controlling costs to patients and encouraging innovation of new drugs?
How can VBAs help lower what patients pay out-of-pocket?
Can Congress do more to allow for and encourage the use of VBAs?
Answer. Sanofi believes that encouraging an environment that is
supportive of value-based arrangements would help promote drug
affordability, increase patient access to medicines, and improve
patient adherence and outcomes. Although there are different types of
these agreements, value-based contracts generally tie prices and
payments to the value of a particular prescription drug product--while
potentially reducing patient out-of-pocket costs and providing patients
with better access to the most innovative drug products. A manufacturer
could, for example, condition payment for a product on its success in
meeting a predefined clinical outcome, and this type of arrangement
could make drugs more affordable and lower healthcare costs throughout
the system.
Facilitating value-based arrangements also could encourage new drug
innovation, control costs for such new products, and recognize the full
value of complex and personalized treatments. Nevertheless, despite the
promise of these arrangements, industry stakeholders--including
manufacturers and payers--need better legal and regulatory clarity. For
example, we support the creation of a safe harbor from Anti-Kickback
Statute liability to protect value-based agreements. We also are
supportive of any legislation that would facilitate value-based
arrangements and protect them from legal enforcement, such as the
Patient Affordability, Value, and Efficiency Act (PAVE Act).
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. We continue to hear that rebates negotiated off of the
list price of a drug are both good and bad.
Pharmacy benefit managers and plans have argued that rebates are
used to lower premiums across the board and that it is the best way to
seek a price concession on otherwise expensive drugs.
Your industry argues that these payers are insisting on higher
rebates that can only be achieved by raising list prices.
But patients often lose under this system, with out of pocket costs
being tied to list price. Insulin patients appear to be routinely
impacted by this perversity in the system.
Please explain to the committee how your company would reduce list
prices if rebates were no longer a part of the equation?
What assurance can you provide that you would in fact lower your
prices?
What actions should be taken to ensure that patients are actually
seeing the benefits of lower out of pocket costs?
Answer. If (1) the proposed changes to the anti-kickback statute
safe harbors were codified, and (2) Congress implemented similar
changes to the commercial insurance market, Sanofi would lower the list
prices of its prescription medications for products in competitive
categories for which there is currently a material difference between
list price and net price on the assumption that patient access and
affordability would be improved. Sanofi also supports policy changes
that would de-link other payments in the pharmaceutical supply chain
from list price.
We support extending the intent behind the anti-kickback statute
safe harbor proposed rule to the commercial market so that incentives
are aligned across the marketplace. Together, we believe these changes
would facilitate Sanofi's ability to lower its list prices. However, we
recommend a step-wise approach, implementing changes to the commercial
market after the safe harbor rule is implemented on January 1, 2020.
Such an approach would provide an opportunity for stakeholders and the
government to identify unintended consequences, and address them, prior
to extending these policies to the commercial market.
We want to ensure that the new system achieves its goal of
improving affordability for patients. For instance, CMS should monitor
and evaluate how the new system affects formulary access, utilization
management, and patient cost-sharing, particularly with respect to
medicines with a lower list price. We also have concerns that changes
to the rebate system may lead to new fees, which simply require
manufacturers to pay previous rebate values in new ways, rather than
creating savings for patients.
Without a better understanding of how these policy changes
ultimately would affect the competitive marketplace, patient access,
and affordability, we are unable to quantify the amount of any
potential list price reduction.
With respect to actions that should be taken to ensure patients are
seeing the benefit of lower out-of-costs, we support legislation that
would incentivize manufacturers to lower list prices by connecting
better patient access and affordability to such pricing actions.
Question. If rebates are driving high list prices for drugs as drug
manufacturers' claim, why do you think that Part B drugs, which have no
PBM rebates, are also seeing significant price increases? Whose fault
is that?
Answer. Sanofi considers a variety of factors when setting or
raising its list prices. These factors include the value of the
product, the competitive environment, patient affordability and access,
investment in further product development or needs to reinvest in R&D
more generally. Within this framework, any list price increase is made
consistent with our pricing principles, including our commitment to
limit the total annual increase to a level at or below the NHE
projected growth rate, as estimated by CMS.
Although we agree that one factor in price increases across the
industry may be the increased demand for rebates at the PBM and health
plan level, that is not the only factor. In fact, Sanofi believes that
reducing incentives for high prices throughout the supply chain by
delinking payments from list price would have a meaningful impact on
price and patient costs. This is true, for example, with group
purchasing organizations (GPOs) that negotiate pricing for Part B
providers. As with PBMs, these GPOs negotiate rebates and
administrative fees that are linked to the list price of the product.
These structures thus create the same misalignment of interests as in
the PBM setting. It is important to note, as well, that the current
average sales price (ASP)-based system for Medicare Part B works to
moderate price growth because reimbursement reflects the weighted
average of discounts given to providers, payers, and other commercial
purchasers. This means that the Medicare program and its beneficiaries
benefit from the discounts health plans and providers negotiate on
these drugs. Due to this market-based competition, ASP reimbursement
rates often are substantially lower than list prices.
biosimilar competition/insulin
Question. Biosimilars have been much anticipated as a solution to
the drug pricing crisis. In particular, the FDA is moving to make
insulin a biologic that would be subject to biosimilar competition in
the future.
But we are hearing from all of you that the biosimilar market
doesn't work and the benefit of these cheaper but equally effective
alternatives are really not available to U.S. patients.
Can a biosimilar version of insulin be part of the solution for
diabetes patients?
If so, what changes need to be made to the system so that patients
and the taxpayer can realize the benefit of biosimilars? (Merck gave up
on pursuing a biosimilar to Sanofi's Lantus.) \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/merck-ditches-biosimilar-
lantus-but-will-ease-path-for-mylan-s-rival-insulin-product.
Answer. Sanofi believes that biosimilars currently--and will
continue to--result in increased competition. In fact, this type of
competition has grown among insulin manufacturers in recent years, and
we expect that it will continue to lower prices for patients with
diabetes. For example, in 2016, Eli Lilly introduced a follow-on
biologic to Sanofi's drug Lantus. Additionally, in 2018, Sanofi
introduced Admelog, a follow-on biologic of Humalog, at a list price
that was 15% lower than the reference product. Mylan also is developing
a second follow-on insulin glargine that references Lantus, and Sanofi
is developing a biosimilar insulin aspart, a rapid-acting insulin,
which we expect to introduce in 2021. Sanofi expects that the already
highly competitive diabetes drug market will become increasingly robust
over time--including with the anticipated introduction of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
interchangeable biosimilar basal and rapid acting insulins.
There are changes already in place that will help patients and
taxpayers realize the benefit of biosimilars. Specifically, in March
2020, certain biologics that are currently regulated as drugs,
including long acting insulins, will be regulated as biologics and
therefore will be subject to the existing biosimilars pathway. We
expect the change in insulin regulation to spur the continued
development of substitutable or interchangeable insulin products, and
to increase competition in this space generally.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
re-evaluating business strategies in foreign countries
Question. Since taking office, President Trump has made reducing
drug prices one of his highest priorities--and has repeatedly spoken
about his frustration with the U.S. subsidizing the costs of
pharmaceuticals for the rest of the world. He has gone so far as to
issue proposals, like the International Pricing Index (IPI) Model, in
an attempt to bring down prescription drug prices.
With the increased scrutiny of the industry and of the drug supply
chain as a whole in the United States, have any of your companies re-
evaluated your business strategy in foreign countries? If not, then
why?
Answer. No, Sanofi has not reevaluated its business strategy in
foreign countries. Other countries have implemented systems, such as
price controls or reference price regimes, to directly and artificially
regulate the price of medicines. In our experience, there is not an
opportunity for Sanofi to negotiate prices with these foreign
government payers. Sanofi's only choice is to accept the government-
mandated price, or to not sell the pharmaceutical in that country,
which not only hurts a company financially, but more importantly harms
patients.
We note that, although these systems may be effective at
controlling budgets for central payers, they come at a steep cost for
patients, including severe access restrictions and rationing. For
instance, one analysis of the report released to justify the
International Pricing Index found that 96 percent of new cancer
medicines are available in the U.S. compared to 71 percent in the
United Kingdom and 65 percent in France.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ http://phrma-docs.phrma.org/download.cfm?objectid=0C19E240-
19C7-11E9-87D20050569A4
B6C.
As a Sanofi specific example, Dupixent is the first drug to be
approved for moderate to severe atopic dermatitis (eczema) in the US.
FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy designation to Dupixent as preliminary
clinical evidence indicated that ``the drug may demonstrate substantial
improvement over available therapy on clinically significant
endpoint(s).'' Dupixent was approved by FDA in March 2017 under
Priority Review, which means that FDA's goal is to take action on this
application within 6 months (compared to 10 months under standard
review). Within 24 hours of FDA approval, Sanofi shipped orders for
Dupixent to be made available to U.S. patients. In contrast, Health
Canada approved Dupixent in November 2017. However, Dupixent is still
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
not publicly reimbursed in Canada.
Question. If a proposal, like IPI, were implemented, would it force
your companies to potentially ``walk away from the negotiating table
when other countries demand low prices subsidized by America's
seniors,'' as HHS Senior Advisor for Drug Pricing Reform John O'Brien
has said?
Answer. In our experience, there is not an opportunity for
manufacturers to negotiate with a government. Sanofi's only choice is
to accept the government-mandated price, or to not sell the product in
that country, which, as noted above, not only hurts Sanofi financially,
but more importantly harms patients.
Question. What are some of your ideas on how we can ensure
Americans aren't shouldering the full cost of pharmaceuticals?
Answer. While we understand the concern that Americans are
shouldering more than their fair share of the cost of innovation in the
pharmaceutical sector, the list price discrepancy between the U.S. and
other countries is due, in primary part, to the different health care
systems. Because Sanofi pays significant rebates to payers and PBMs,
the difference between the price in other developed countries and the
net price in the U.S. is not nearly as large.
Sanofi's top priority is reducing out-of-pocket costs for patients.
We believe that there need to be reforms to the current system to
better align incentives, including market-based approaches to pricing
that promote competition and ensure patients have affordable and
sustainable access to innovative medicines. Currently, payers and PBMs
inconsistently pass through the growing savings that they receive from
increased negotiated rebates. Accordingly, despite increasing rebates
and lower net prices, out-of-pocket costs for many patients have
continued to grow. Sanofi supports policies that pass PBM and payer
rebate savings to patients at the pharmacy counter through lower copays
and coinsurance. Sanofi would also support policies that would
incentivize responsible pricing by tying smaller list price increases,
or even list price reductions, to both access and affordability for
patients.
foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
Question. President Trump and Secretary Azar have both repeatedly
described their frustrations with ``foreign freeloading'' of U.S. drugs
in the last year.
``When foreign governments extort unreasonably low prices from U.S.
drug makers, Americans have to pay more to subsidize the enormous cost
of research and development. . . . It's unfair and it's ridiculous, and
it's not going to happen any longer.''
Do you agree that because of foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems, U.S. patients and innovators are shouldering the
burden for financing medical advances?
Answer. It is true that the U.S. is the main engine in
pharmaceutical and biotechnology innovation in the world. Although
U.S.-based manufacturers manage clinical trials globally, there are
substantially more research and development dollars invested in the
U.S. than in any other country. To illustrate, in 2015, PhRMA member
companies spent over $47 billion in domestic R&D and only $12 billion
in R&D abroad. For Sanofi, in 2018, we spent nearly $7 billion on R&D
globally--a substantial portion of which in the U.S.--and we expect
that our annual R&D spend will be consistent through 2021. These
investments in research, in turn, create significant and important job
opportunities in the United States.
However, it is important to note that while other countries'
pricing and reimbursement systems may help to contain costs in those
countries, they come at a steep cost for patients, including severe
access restrictions and rationing. For instance, one analysis of the
report released to justify the International Pricing Index found that
96 percent of new cancer medicines are available in the U.S. compared
to 71 percent in the United Kingdom and 65 percent in France.\8\
Moreover, the list price discrepancy between the U.S. and other
countries is due, in part, to the different health-care systems.
Because Sanofi pays significant rebates to payers and PBMs, the
difference between the price in other developed countries and the net
price in the U.S. is not nearly as large.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ http://phrma-docs.phrma.org/download.cfm?objectid=0C19E240-
19C7-11E9-87D20050569A4
B6C.
Question. How do foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
systems affect our prescription drug costs?
Answer. Pricing and reimbursement systems in other countries do not
affect how Sanofi prices its medicines in the United States. Consistent
with our pricing principles, when Sanofi sets the price of a new
medicine in the U.S., we hold ourselves to a rigorous and structured
process that includes consultation with external stakeholders. In our
view, an objective measure of a new product's value considers the
benefit to patients, compared to a standard of care; the reduced need--
and therefore costs--of other health-care interventions; and any
increase in quality of life and productivity. We believe our pricing
reflects these factors. We also consider factors such as the
affordability for patients and any unique factors specific to the
medicine, like the need to support ongoing clinical trials, implement
important regulatory commitments, or develop sophisticated patient
support tools that improve care management and help decrease the total
cost of care. Additionally, under our pricing principles, we have
pledged to limit price increases at or below the National Health
Expenditure (NHE), which is the projected annual health-care spending
growth rate as estimated by CMS.
Question. Are foreign governments taking note of the concerns being
raised by the Trump administration and have they responded in any way?
Answer. Sanofi is not aware of any responses by foreign governments
to U.S. drug pricing policy proposals advanced by the Trump
administration.
Question. Has there been any noticeable change in any of our trade
agreements since these concerns have been raised by the Trump
administration?
Answer. Sanofi is not aware of any such changes.
medicaid closed formulary proposals
Question. In an attempt to bring down drug costs, various States
have been exploring whether to exclude certain drugs from their
Medicaid program. For example, the State of Massachusetts recently
asked CMS for permission to create a closed formulary where the State
Medicaid program would pick at least one drug per therapeutic class.
CMS denied their waiver request citing violation of Federal law, but
this proposal does bring up important questions on how to contain drug
prices in State Medicaid programs.
If the principles of the Medicare Part D program--including the
necessary patient protections--were applied to State Medicaid programs,
do you think it would lower drugs costs while ensuring access to
patients?
Answer. The Part D program encourages strong competition in the
marketplace, including by providing beneficiaries with choice of
different plans and encouraging drug manufacturers to compete for
formulary position to support broad access to their medicines (in part
by securing lower cost-sharing obligations for patients in preferred
formulary tiers). By contrast, State Medicaid programs are obligated,
as a condition of a manufacturer's participation in the Medicaid Drug
Rebate Program, to cover company's products (subject to certain narrow
exceptions). Consequently, although we believe that increased
competition in the Medicaid program could help to lower drug prices,
including if Medicaid implemented certain of the Part D program's
principles, it is not immediately clear how these changes would further
enhance patient access.
medicaid ``best price''
Question. In the Trump administration's Blueprint, they suggested
that because drug manufactures have to give Medicaid the ``best price''
on drugs, there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers--both government and commercial--than what is already offered
under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Does the Medicaid ``best price'' requirement encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices?
Answer. The Medicaid Rebate Act, and CMS's corresponding rules,
require drug manufacturers to pay rebates to the State Medicaid
Programs for units of drug dispensed to their beneficiaries. Medicaid
``Best Price'' generally is defined as the lowest price offered to
commercial purchasers in the United States, and it is one of two key
metrics used for setting the level of rebates that manufacturers must
pay to each state Medicaid program for Medicaid beneficiary
utilization. Best Price does not, therefore, reflect a price point at
which manufacturers sell products to Medicaid, and Sanofi does not view
the Medicaid Best Price requirements as encouraging manufacturers to
set higher initial prices. However, Medicaid Best Price considerations
are a factor in assessing whether to offer higher rebate amounts to our
commercial (Best Price-eligible) customers.
Question. What, if any, changes would you suggest we make to the
program?
Answer. With regard to the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program and the
determination of Best Price, the Trump administration's Pricing
Blueprint highlights the impediments that exist under current rules
with regard to value-based discounting arrangements. Sanofi would like
to pursue more innovative product discounting strategies--including
arrangements in which we would stand behind the value or outcomes that
our products provide to patients and to the healthcare system
generally. But, current Medicaid rebate calculation rules regarding
bundled discount arrangements, and the manner in which manufacturers
must account for discounts that are incurred over long periods of time,
present significant obstacles to adopting these arrangements. If the
rules for the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program were amended to permit
manufacturers to exclude certain appropriately-structured value-based
discounts from their Best Price calculation, it is likely that Sanofi
could adopt more innovative value-based discount contracts, and that
these arrangements in turn could result in significant savings for
patients and the system.
outcomes-based contracts
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you highlight your
support of outcomes-based contracts and how we need to be shifting our
system toward that approach.
How will these contracts lower drug costs for patients in both the
near term and long-term?
How will they lower overall health-care costs for our Federal
programs?
What have the preliminary results looked like so far?
Answer. Sanofi believes that encouraging an environment that is
supportive of value-based arrangements would help promote drug
affordability, increase patient access to medicines, and improve
patient adherence and outcomes. Specifically, value-based arrangements
tie prices and payments to value while reducing patient out-of-pocket
costs and providing patients with better access to the most innovative
drug products. For example, value-based arrangements can be premised
upon the effectiveness of a manufacturer's product, which may help to
secure payer coverage for new and innovative therapies. Where payment
to a manufacturer is conditioned on the value or clinical outcomes of a
product, value-based arrangements also may help to improve patient
cost-sharing challenges. Additionally, value-based arrangements could
encourage new drug innovation while controlling costs for such new
products by aligning the price of the drug to the value the drug brings
to the patient.
Recently, Sanofi has executed value-based contracts related to
Soliqua 100/33, Praluent, and Kevzara. These arrangements are in their
nascent stages, and we do not have sufficient information to assess the
results.
Despite the promise of these and similar arrangements, Sanofi
strongly believes that better legal and regulatory clarity would
facilitate greater proliferation of value-based contracts. For example,
we support the creation of a safe harbor from Anti-Kickback Statute
liability to expressly protect value-based agreements. We also are
supportive of legislation that would remove Best Price-barriers to
value-based contracts, such as the Patient Affordability, Value, and
Efficiency Act (PAVE Act).
transparency/point of sale
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you express your
support for the Trump Administration's proposal to allow manufacturers
to provide PBMs up-front discounts that are passed onto patients at the
point-of-sale.
Do you feel like this proposal will make the transactions within
the drug supply chain more transparent?
If so, would this transparency bring down drug costs--overall and
for specialty drugs?
Answer. Because the proposed rule would require manufacturer
discounts to be provided at the pharmacy counter, the proposal will
facilitate increased transparency with respect to the arrangements
between manufacturers and PBMs, and with respect to the discounts
manufacturers offer on their medicines. We believe such increased
transparency would result in lower patient costs.
However, Sanofi believes that HHS's proposal does not go far enough
in creating the kind of systemic change needed to create a more
transparent drug supply chain throughout the entire U.S. health-care
system. We believe that increased, system-wide transparency, that
appropriately protects competitively sensitive information, would
improve competition by making relevant information available to
patients and policymakers. Providing more information about what is
driving costs in the system, and taking steps to curtail misaligned
incentives related to the flow of money through the system, for
instance through legislation like the C-THRU Act, would allow for
increased competition and better-informed decision making.
the relationship between wholesalers and manufacturers
Question. When talking about the pharmaceutical supply chain, a lot
of focus has been placed on the Pharmacy Benefit Manager. But there's
another side of the equation that I'd like to ask about.
How do wholesalers negotiate pricing with manufacturers?
What impact does this have on drug costs?
What incentives or disincentives do they have to contain price
increases?
Answer. Wholesalers do not typically negotiate pricing with
manufacturers. Wholesalers are merchant-middlemen in the supply chain,
and they generally facilitate the efficient distribution of drugs and
biologicals to end customers (such as pharmacies or clinics). While
Sanofi may offer a prompt pay discount to wholesalers, wholesalers
generally purchase product at Wholesale Acquisition Cost (i.e., list
price) and they facilitate the acquisition of products by end
purchases--frequently at prices that are negotiated between Sanofi and
the end purchaser. If wholesalers sell to end purchasers at a loss
based on the negotiated price, wholesalers will issue a ``chargeback''
to the manufacturer for the difference. In addition, Sanofi pays
service fees to wholesalers to operationalize this distribution and
chargeback process, and those fees typically are based on a percent of
WAC. As with fees paid to PBMs, Sanofi's view is that flat pricing for
wholesaler administrative services could exert downward pressure on
drug prices by delinking list price from fee payments.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
proposed rebate rule
Question. As has been done in many other settings, drug
manufacturers said during the hearing that one reason list prices for
drugs are high is that pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) demand
larger and larger rebates in order for the drug to receive favorable
placement on a formulary. You and your colleagues who testified during
the hearing stated if the administration's proposal on changes to the
anti-kickback safe harbor for pharmaceutical rebates took effect, your
company would likely lower list price.
Like many Oregonians, I am skeptical drug manufacturers would
voluntarily lower their prices. Therefore, would you support
legislation that would (1) make similar changes the administration has
put forward related to Part D and Medicaid managed care, (2) change the
rebate system in a similar way to the proposal for the commercial
market, and (3) require drug makers to lower the list price of their
drugs equal to the amount of rebates provided today?
Answer. If (1) the proposed changes to the anti-kickback statute
safe harbors were codified, and (2) Congress implemented similar
changes to the commercial insurance market, Sanofi would lower the list
prices of its prescription medications for products in competitive
categories for which there is currently a material difference between
list price and net price on the assumption that patient access and
affordability would be improved. Sanofi also supports policy changes
that would de-link other payments in the pharmaceutical supply chain
from list price.
We support extending the intent behind the anti-kickback statute
safe harbor proposed rule to the commercial market so that incentives
are aligned across the marketplace. Together, we believe these changes
would facilitate Sanofi's ability to lower our list prices. However, we
recommend a step-wise approach, implementing changes to the commercial
market after the safe harbor rule is implemented on January 1, 2020.
Such an approach would provide an opportunity for stakeholders and the
government to identify unintended consequences, and address them, prior
to extending these policies to the commercial market.
We want to ensure that the new system achieves its goal of
improving affordability for patients. For instance, CMS should monitor
and evaluate how the new system affects formulary access, utilization
management, and patient cost-sharing, particularly with respect to
medicines with a lower list price. We also have concerns that changes
to the rebate system may lead to new fees, which simply require
manufacturers to pay previous rebate values in new ways, rather than
creating savings for patients.
Without a better understanding of how these policy changes
ultimately would affect the competitive marketplace, patient access,
and affordability, we are unable to quantify the amount of any
potential list price reduction.
We support legislation that would incentivize manufacturers to
lower list prices by connecting better patient access and affordability
to such pricing actions. The U.S. market-based approach to drug pricing
has been successful in reducing net prices, but in the current system,
that value is not being passed on to patients. We expect that the
reforms we note above would address that issue while preserving a
market-based approach that promotes competition and ensures patients
have affordable and sustainable access to innovative medicines.
medicaid drug rebate program
Question. The Medicaid Drug Rebate Program (MDRP) requires
manufacturers to provide a basic rebate and an additional inflationary
rebate for both brand and generic drugs. The inflationary rebate is an
increasingly substantial part of total rebates due in large part to
large increases in drug prices that exceed inflation. Under current
law, this inflationary rebate is capped at 100 percent of Average
Manufacturer Price (AMP). This is the case even when manufacturers
continue to raise their prices well above inflation.
Please provide a list of all of your pharmaceutical products that
have reached the Medicaid AMP rebate cap in any of the 20 quarters from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
For each drug listed in response to question 1, please also provide
a list of which quarters and years each drug hit the cap.
Answer. Sanofi takes steps to ensure that it complies with all
applicable laws related to the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, including
that it is paying rebates to the state Medicaid programs in accordance
with law. Sanofi sells NDCs in 29 product families for which it pays
Medicaid rebates at 100 percent of AMP. Respectfully, Sanofi's view is
that the detailed information requested by this question is
confidential and proprietary. We would be happy to work with the
Committee to provide this information in a way that mitigates against
competitive harms that could arise from public disclosure of this
information.
medicaid drug rebate program compliance
Question. I am concerned about recent reports and legal settlements
surrounding drug manufacturers' failure to comply fully with the
requirements of the MDRP. For example, an analysis by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General
found that between 2012 and 2016 taxpayers may have overpaid by as much
as $1.3 billion for 10 potentially misclassified drugs. That is why I
introduced the Right Rebate Act with Chairman Grassley to prevent drug
manufacturers from manipulating Medicaid to increase their profits.
However, I continued to be concerned about oversight and manufacturer
compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Accordingly, please describe the following:
Your company's current compliance plan and procedures used to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program including internal audits or other checks you use to identify
compliance vulnerabilities.
Answer. Sanofi takes steps to ensure that it complies with all
applicable laws related to its participation in the Medicaid Drug
Rebate Program (MDRP). These steps include, for example, documenting
Medicaid rebate calculation methodologies, processes, and reasonable
assumptions as appropriate. Sanofi's government price reporting
personnel also hold weekly meetings with the Sanofi legal department,
including with support from outside counsel as needed, to ensure that
compliance questions are discussed and addressed in a timely manner.
Sanofi's MDRP compliance is tested through several audits, including
biannual Sarbanes-Oxley Act audits, biannual external audits,
conversations with an external consultant government pricing advisory
team, and annual calculation audits of Average Manufacturer Price and
Best Price.
Question. Any past or ongoing issues of non-compliance.
Answer. Given the complexity of the MDRP and applicable law and
guidance, Sanofi routinely reviews its calculation methodologies and
reasonable assumptions. In the normal course of business, questions may
arise as to specific Sanofi compliance processes for the MDRP. When
such questions arise, Sanofi takes prompt steps to engage with CMS
about appropriate next steps, including a restatement of any of the
components of the Medicaid rebate calculation if needed. Such
restatements are administrative in nature and expressly contemplated by
the CMS regulations.
Question. Any corrective actions taken to address identified
problems or issues of noncompliance with the MDRP and how such steps
were communicated to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Answer. As noted above, in the event that Sanofi identifies any
compliance questions that it believes warrant review by CMS, Sanofi
promptly engages with CMS. This may occur, for example, in the event of
statutory or regulatory changes, or if CMS releases new sub-regulatory
guidance.
Question. Any steps taken to improve compliance and ensure that all
Medicaid drug rebates owed to the federal government and the states are
paid in full.
Answer. Sanofi's government price reporting team routinely works
with in-house and outside counsel regarding compliance with the
Medicaid Drug Rebate Act and CMS rules. As part of this continuing
compliance, the company assesses its calculation processes and
reasonable assumptions for purposes of calculating Average Manufacturer
Price, Best Price, and Unit Rebate Amount. In certain cases, moreover,
Sanofi engages directly with CMS to seek the agency's view of Sanofi's
reasonable assumptions or compliance processes. In any instance in
which Sanofi would determine that the State Medicaid Programs were
underpaid rebates, Sanofi would engage with CMS to determine the
appropriate way forward, including restating pricing metrics and paying
additional rebates to the States.
bonus payments tied to specific drugs
Question. I am concerned by the potential for employee financial
incentives to encourage high launch prices and price increases for
prescription drugs.
Is your salary, bonus or other compensation tied to sales or
revenue targets of a single product your company sells? Has it ever
been? If yes, please state the product or products to which your
salary, bonus or other compensation was tied.
Is your salary, bonus or other compensation tied to either revenue
or net income of the company as a whole? Has it ever been? If yes,
please explain what assumptions about price increases are used when the
compensation committee sets revenue or net income goals. Does the
compensation committee provide any guidance to executives in regards to
the amount of revenue that the company will generate from price
increases versus volume growth?
Answer. The Sanofi board of directors, acting on the recommendation
of the Compensation Committee, sets the compensation for the chief
executive officer (CEO). That compensation structure includes fixed
compensation, variable compensation, options, performance shares, and
benefits in kind.
Sanofi's overall compensation policy is designed to motivate and
reward performance by ensuring that a significant portion of
compensation is contingent on the attainment of financial, operational,
and extra-financial criteria aligned with the corporate interest and
with the creation of shareholder value. Therefore, in 2017 (the most
current year in which public information is available), as Sanofi's
CEO, Dr. Brandicourt was eligible for up to 250 percent of his target
fixed compensation in variable compensation. Several factors are
considered in determining his variable compensation; 40 percent is
based on financial indicators, and 60 percent is based on specific
individual objectives, including external growth, product launches,
operational transformation, organization and staff relations, and new
product pipeline.
Dr. Brandicourt's compensation package also includes equity-based
compensation, which is medium-term and aims to align the interests of
the CEO with those of the shareholders and other stakeholders. In 2017,
he received a set number of options to subscribe for shares, based on
performance conditions measured over a 3-year period, as well as
performance shares based on business net income, return on assets, and
total shareholder return.
net prices
Question. In your testimony, you stated, ``we have increased
transparency by providing, each year, information about our list and
net prices across all of our medicines,'' and that ``in 2018, the
average aggregate list price increase across all Sanofi medicines in
the U.S. was 4.6 percent . . . the price actually paid to Sanofi,
declined by 8 percent. So declining average aggregate net price in
[2018] represents the third consecutive year in which the amount paid
by payers across all of our medicines went down.'' Please describe how
the company's year-over-year aggregate net price is calculated. Please
also specifically address the following questions.
Answer. Sanofi calculates the aggregate net price as follows: Brand
net sales are divided by common units for the appropriate period. This
amount--``net price per unit''--is then compared to the prior period.
This amount establishes any increase or decrease for the brand for the
period being calculated. Once this is done for all brands, the
increase/decrease is weighted by gross sales (i.e., volume) to show the
aggregate net price impacts for Sanofi's portfolio of medicines.
Question. How many products are included in the calculation of the
average net price change? What was the median net price change?
Answer. This analysis is done on 79 separate products, covering 76
brands. Some brands have multiple product forms with different prices;
Sanofi separates these product forms when calculating average net
price.
The median net price change in 2018 was zero percent across all
products. Removing products with no net price change, the median net
price change in 2018 is -1.0%. This calculation is not weighted by
gross sales.
Question. Is net price weighted? If so, how? For example, in
determining the aggregate net price does the company assign different
weights to different products based on volume or other factors? Are
``on patent'' and ``off patent'' drugs weighted identically? Are other
statistical weights used or are all products treated equally?
Answer. All products are weighted by gross sales (i.e., volume),
irrespective of whether Sanofi has any current patents related to the
product. No other statistical weights were used.
Question. Does the figure that you provided during your testimony
account for U.S. prices, international prices, or both? Generally
speaking, when your company reports net price changes, does it
differentiate between U.S. and international prices?
Answer. The data Dr. Brandicourt provided regarding average
aggregate list price and average aggregate net price accounted for U.S.
prices. Sanofi's annual pricing report \9\ and related reporting on net
price consider U.S. prices only.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://mediaroom.sanofi.com/-/media/Project/One-Sanofi-Web/
Websites/Global/Sanofi-COM/mediaroom/pdf/2019/
Prescription_Medicine_Pricing_2019.pdf.
Question. Please list the five drugs your company sold in the U.S.
that had the greatest year-over-year net price increase in 2018, noting
the increase for each drug by dollar figure and percentage. Please list
the five drugs your company sold in the U.S. that had the lowest year-
over-year net price increase (and/or the greatest decrease) in 2018,
noting the increase (or decrease) for each drug by dollar figure and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
percentage.
Products with Greatest Average Net Price Increases in 2018 \10\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YOY Percentage
YOY U.S. Dollar
Product
Change
Change by Unit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Renvela \11\
40%
$1.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Imovax \12\
15%
30.10
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Caprelsa \13\
12%
1,536.60
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hectorol \14\
11%
0.03
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zaltrap \15\
9%
0.60
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ We have excluded products that were discontinued/divested in 2018,
have no sales in 2018, or if the reason for net price increase was due
to changes in prior accounting estimates or assumptions (as opposed to
changes in rebates and discounts).
\11\ Sanofi did not take any list price increases on Renvela in 2018.
The net price increase is due to (1) changes in prior accounting
estimates/assumptions, and (2) increasing use of generics in class,
resulting in (i) change in the mix of business, and (ii) a reduction
in rebate payments.
\12\ Sanofi took a 5-percent list price increase on Imovax in 2018.
\13\ Sanofi took a 5-percent list price increase on Caprelsa in 2018.
\14\ Sanofi reduced the list price of Hectorol by 47 percent in October
2018. The net price increase was due to a reduction in rebate
payments.
\15\ Sanofi did not take any list price increases on Zeltrap in 2018.
Products with Greatest Average Net Price Decreases in 2018 \16\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YOY Percentage
YOY U.S. Dollar
Product
Change
Change by Unit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Renvela AG
-74%
-1.57
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zolpidem CR
-68%
-0.26
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leflunomide
-63%
-0.59
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clolar
-48%
-894.26
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Priftin
-26%
-0.54
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ We have excluded products that were discontinued/divested, have no
sales in 2018, or if the reason for net price decline was due to
changes in prior accounting estimates or assumptions (as opposed to
changes in rebates and discounts).
Question. For 2018, what was the average net price change in the
U.S. market for (1) drugs with no competition, (2) drugs with only
branded competition, and (3) drugs with generic competition?
Answer. (1) Drugs with no competition:\17\ 0.0%.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ We define a product as having no competition if there are no
other products in the therapeutic class.
(2) Drugs with only branded competition:\18\ -2.1%.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ We define a product as having only branded competition if
there is no generic, follow-on biologic, or biosimilar product in the
therapeutic class.
(3) Drugs with AB-rated generic/follow-on biologic/biosimilar
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
competition: -13.5%.
Question. In its most recent pricing report, Sanofi states that it
``increased the price of 35 of our 76 prescription medicines'' in the
United States. This statement appears to be in regards to list price.
How many of these medicines had their net price increase?
Answer. Seventeen of the 35 prescription medicines with list price
increases also had average net price increases.
Question. In its most recent pricing report, Sanofi states that
``in 2018, 55 percent of our gross sales were given back to payers as
rebates, including $4.5 billion in mandatory rebates to government
payers and $7.3 billion in discretionary rebates.'' For each product,
please disclose the gross sales and the amount of rebates paid.
Answer. Product-level rebate information is confidential and
proprietary information for competitive reasons and falls within the
definition of ``trade secret'' under the Trade Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C.
Sec. 1905, Exemption 4 of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C.
Sec. 552(b)(4), and the Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016, 18 U.S.C.
Sec. 1836. Public disclosure of this information would cause
significant harm to Sanofi and Sanofi's customers, and competitors
would gain unfair competitive advantage if they were to obtain this
information through public disclosure.
We note that congressional and executive agencies have historically
expressed concern that disclosure of such information could inhibit
competition. For example, in 2007 when then-chairman Waxman asked
several Medicare Part D prescription drug plans (``PDPs'') to submit to
the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee information on the
negotiated price discounts, rebates and other price concessions that
they obtained from drug manufacturers, the CBO issued a report
concluding that public disclosure of that information could reduce the
rebates that PDPs received and thus raise Medicare costs.\19\
Specifically, the CBO found that the disclosure of rebate data could
cause the variation in rebates among purchasers to decline. Because
PDPs generally secure rebates that are somewhat larger than the average
rebates observed in commercial health plans, the disclosure of Part D
rebates to competitors could create pressure to reduce those rebate
amounts, which in turn could increase costs for the Medicare program
and, on average, the costs for Medicare beneficiaries.\20\
Specifically, the CBO found that the disclosure of rebate data could
cause the variation in rebates among purchasers to decline. Second, CBO
concluded that disclosure of rebates could facilitate tacit collusion
among the manufacturers of competing brand-name drugs, reducing the
rebates to PDPs and thus increasing net drug prices.\21\ Similarly, the
Federal Trade Commission (``FTC'') has cited concerns regarding the
anti-competitive effects of disclosing net pricing and other price-
sensitive information. In the context of the healthcare industry
generally, the FTC noted:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\
CBO, Letter to the Hon. Joe Barton and the Hon. Jim McCrery
(March 12, 2007), available at https://www.cbo.gov/system/
files?file=2018-10/03-12-drug-rebates.pdf; see also CBO, ``Increasing
Transparency in the Pricing of Health Care Services and
Pharmaceuticals'' (June 5, 2008), available at https://www.cbo.gov/
sites/default/files/110th-congress-2007-2008/reports/06-05-
pricetransparency.pdf.
\20\ Id., at 3.
\21\ Id., at 4.
[Price transparency] can actually harm competition and
consumers. Some types of information are not particularly
useful to consumers, but are of great interest to competitors.
We are especially concerned when information disclosures allow
competitors to figure out what their rivals are charging, which
dampens each competitor's incentive to offer a low price, or
increases the likelihood that they can coordinate on higher
prices.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ FTC, Office of Policy Planning, ``Price Transparency or TMI?''
(July 2, 2015), available at https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/
competition-matters/2015/07/price-transparency-or-tmi.
Moreover, in describing its concerns about a New York state bill
that would have required pharmacy benefit managers (``PBMs'') to
disclose their rebate arrangements with drug manufacturers, the FTC
explained that disclosure of this information could ``facilitate
collusion, raise prices, and harm the patients the Bill is supposed to
protect.'' \23\ The FTC further explained that, without knowledge of
such competitor rebate information:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ FTC, Office of Policy Planning, Bureau of Competition and
Bureau of Economics, Letter to Hon. James L. Seward re: New York Senate
Bill 58, at 5 (March 31, 2009), available at https://www.ftc.gov/sites/
default/files/documents/advocacy--documents/ftc-staff-comment-
honorable-james-l.seward-concerning-new-york-senate-bill-58-pharmacy-
benefit-managers-pbms/v090006newyorkpbm.pdf.
[M]anufacturers have powerful incentives to bid aggressively
for formulary position, because preferential formulary
treatment may yield increased sales. Unprotected disclosures
thus may raise the price that New York consumers pay for
pharmaceutical coverage by undermining competition among
pharmaceutical companies for preferred formulary treatment.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Id. See, also, FTC, Office of Policy Planning, Bureau of
Competition, and Bureau of Economics, to Assemblyman Greg Aghazarian
re: California Assembly Bill No. 1960 (September 7, 2004) (concluding
that, if manufacturers learn the exact amount of the rebates offered by
their competitors through required PBM disclosures, then tacit
collusion among manufacturers is more feasible, which may lead to
higher prices for PBM services and drugs), available at https://
www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/advocacy_documents/ftc-
comment-hon.greg-aghazarian-concerning-ca.b.1960-requiring-pharmacy-
benefit-managers-make-disclosures-purchasers-and-prospective-
purchasers/v040027.pdf.
For these reasons, in public settings, we have provided rebate
information at an aggregate level only, to prevent reverse engineering
by competitors to learn our net pricing information for specific
products. We would be happy to work with the committee to provide this
information in a way that mitigates against competitive harms that
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
could arise from public disclosure of this information.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. When new products enter the market, do drug companies set
high initial prices and then provide deep rebates in order to gain
access to insurance plan's formularies?
Answer. We can only speak for Sanofi. Consistent with our pricing
principles, when Sanofi sets the price of a new medicine, we hold
ourselves to a transparent, rigorous, and structured process that
includes consultation with external stakeholders. In our view, an
objective measure of a new product's value considers the benefit to
patients, compared to a standard of care; the reduced need--and
therefore costs--of other health care interventions; and any increase
in quality of life and productivity. We believe our pricing reflects
these factors. We also consider factors such as the affordability for
patients and any unique factors specific to the medicine, like the need
to support ongoing clinical trials, implement important regulatory
commitments, or develop sophisticated patient support tools that
improve care management and help decrease the total cost of care.
Additionally, under our pricing principles, we limit annual list price
increases to the National Health Expenditure, which is CMS's projected
annual health-care spending growth rate. Since we established our
pricing principles in 2017, all price increases for our insulin
products have been at or below NHE.
Sanofi offers rebates to health plans and PBMs in order to help
secure and maintain favorable formulary positions. Our aim in these
negotiations is to establish affordable access to patients. Currently,
however, payers and PBMs inconsistently pass through to patients the
growing savings they receive from increased negotiated rebates and
discounts. Accordingly, despite increasing rebates and lower net
prices, out-of-pocket costs for many patients have continued to grow.
Sanofi supports policies that would pass through PBM rebate savings to
patients at the pharmacy counter in the form of lower cost-sharing.
Question. If CMS finalizes the rebate rule, do you anticipate
future products entering the market with significantly lower initial
list prices?
Answer. We can only speak for Sanofi. If (1) the proposed changes
to the anti-kickback statute safe harbors were codified, and (2)
Congress implemented similar changes to the commercial insurance
market, Sanofi would lower the list prices of its prescription
medications for products in competitive categories for which there is
currently a material difference between list price and net price on the
assumption that patient access and affordability would be improved.
Sanofi also supports policy changes that would de-link other payments
in the pharmaceutical supply chain from list price.
We support extending the intent behind the anti-kickback statute
safe harbor proposed rule to the commercial market so that incentives
are aligned across the marketplace. Together, we believe these changes
would facilitate Sanofi's ability to lower our list prices. However, we
recommend a step-wise approach, implementing changes to the commercial
market after the safe harbor rule is implemented on January 1, 2020.
Such an approach would provide an opportunity for stakeholders and the
government to identify unintended consequences, and address them, prior
to extending these policies to the commercial market.
We want to ensure that the new system achieves its goal of
improving affordability for patients. For instance, CMS should monitor
and evaluate how the new system affects formulary access, utilization
management, and patient cost-sharing, particularly with respect to
medicines with a lower list price. We also have concerns that changes
to the rebate system may lead to new fees, which would simply require
manufacturers to pay previous rebate values in new ways, rather than
creating savings for patients.
Without a better understanding of how these policy changes
ultimately would affect the competitive marketplace, patient access,
and affordability, we are unable to quantify the amount of any
potential list price reduction. When setting the price of a new
medicine, Sanofi's decision making will continue to be guided by our
pricing principles framework, which are discussed in Part 1 of this
response.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
Question. What are your recommendations for lowering prices for the
40 percent of drugs that do not offer rebates in Medicare Part D? In
the health insurance plans that you offer your employees, do you ask
your insurers to pass through the full manufacturer rebates to the
beneficiaries?
Answer. To address prices of drugs that are not subject to rebates
in Medicare Part D, Sanofi supports policies that would incentivize
responsible pricing by tying smaller list price increases, or even list
price reductions, to both access and affordability for patients. Sanofi
also believes that value-based discounting arrangements could drive
down the price of prescription drugs in all contexts, regardless of the
existence of rebates, including for Medicare Part D. Sanofi favors
reforms in applicable statutes and regulations to permit manufacturers
and payers to adopt these arrangements more broadly than is the case
today.
The Sanofi medical plan is self-insured; as such, the company pays
the majority (approximately 80 percent) of the health-care claims that
are incurred by our employees and their dependents. Sanofi does not,
therefore, pass rebates through to members. Importantly, the Sanofi PPO
medical/Rx plan, which covers 90 percent of our employees who elect
medical coverage, maintains very low member cost-sharing for
prescriptions. For example, members incur no cost ($0 co-pays) for
Sanofi and partner prescription drugs. For non-Sanofi prescriptions,
the out-ofpocket expense varies for generic ($15/prescription),
preferred brand ($25/prescription) and non-
preferred brand ($40/prescription).
Question. The systems for pricing and distributing drugs are opaque
and difficult to understand. What are your recommendations for
increasing transparency in how your companies set the list prices for
drugs, and for improving transparency in the supply chain for
prescription drugs? Would you support federal standards for
transparency in setting the list prices for drugs?
Answer. Sanofi supports increased system-wide transparency, which
would improve competition by making relevant information available to
patients and policymakers. Two years ago, Sanofi announced our
progressive and industry-leading pricing principles to help
stakeholders understand our pricing decisions and to advance a more
informed discussion of issues related to the pricing of medicines.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ https://mediaroom.sanofi.com/en/articles/2017/sanofi-pricing-
principles-for-the-u-s/.
Sanofi's pricing policy includes a commitment to transparency in
how we price new medicines coming to the market for the first time.
When Sanofi sets the price of a new medicine, we hold ourselves to a
transparent, rigorous, and structured process that includes
consultation with external stakeholders. In our view, an objective
measure of a new product's value considers the benefit to patients,
compared to a standard of care; the reduced need--and therefore costs--
of other health care interventions; and any increase in quality of life
and productivity. We believe our pricing reflects these factors. We
also consider factors such as the affordability for patients and any
unique factors specific to the medicine, like the need to support
ongoing clinical trials, implement important regulatory commitments, or
develop sophisticated patient support tools that improve care
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
management and help decrease the total cost of care.
Tied to our pledge to keep annual list price increases at or below
the projected U.S. National Health Expenditure growth rate, Sanofi has
committed to providing its rationale should Sanofi increase any list
price above the NHE growth rate, highlighting clinical value, real
world evidence, regulatory change, new data, or other circumstances
that support our decision. Sanofi also has committed to disclose
annually our aggregate U.S. gross and net price changes from the prior
calendar year. These data may help illustrate how pricing changes
accrue to manufacturers versus others in the value chain, highlighting
our discrete role in the broader U.S. health care system.
We support Federal standards for transparency in the rationale for
price increases above a certain threshold, provided that there are
appropriate guardrails. Sanofi believes that increased transparency
should accomplish three goals:
(1)
Preempt similar state laws, as was done with the Sunshine
Act, to create a consistent reporting process.
(2)
Ensure information that if released publically could be
anti-competitive is kept confidential.
(3)
Take a holistic approach to transparency, such as
requiring PBMs to disclose when the net price of a medicine has
declined and whether the increased rebates are used to lower
costs for patients or for other reasons.
We would be willing to work with this Committee on appropriate
policy solutions.
Question. In nearly every sector of the health-care industry,
Medicare, Medicaid, employers, and insurers are moving away from fee-
for-service payments to reimbursements based on value and performance.
Prescription drugs and medical devices were the glaring exceptions to
this trend until recently. How many of your drugs are included in
value-based contracts and how many patients are benefiting from them?
How do these value-based contracts work to lower drug prices for both
patients and taxpayers?
Answer. At this time, Sanofi has entered into value-based
arrangements involving three Sanofi products: Soliqua 100/33, Praluent,
and Kevzara. At present, we are not able to identify the specific
number of patients who benefit from these arrangements.
Sanofi believes that encouraging an environment that is supportive
of value-based arrangements would help promote drug affordability,
increase patient access to medicines, and improve patient adherence and
outcomes. Specifically, although there are different types of these
agreements, value-based contracts generally tie prices and payments to
the value of a particular prescription drug product--while potentially
reducing patient out-of-pocket costs and providing patients with better
access to the most innovative drug products. A manufacturer could, for
example, condition payment for a product on its success in meeting a
predefined clinical outcome, and this type of arrangement could make
drugs more affordable and lower costs throughout the system.
Question. Last year, Senator Portman and I did an investigation on
the pricing of an opioid overdose reversal drug called EVZIO,
manufactured by Kaleo. Kaleo increased the price of EVZIO from $575 in
2014 to $4,100 in 2017. We found that the best price Medicare was able
to get for EVZIO, about $4,000, was much higher than the price other
Federal programs and private insurers were able to get. It seemed that
Kaleo was able to get this higher price of $4,000 from Medicare by
helping doctors fill out paperwork showing that the drug was medically
necessary, even though there are cheaper alternatives on the market. As
a result of the investigation, Kaleo announced it will bring a generic
version of the drug to market at only $168 per pack. Are any of your
companies providing medical necessity paperwork to doctors in order to
get your drugs covered by Medicare?
Answer. No. Sanofi does not provide patient-specific clinical or
medical necessity information to physicians in furtherance of the
Medicare coverage of any of Sanofi's products for particular patients.
Consistent with guidance from the Department of Health and Human
Services Office of Inspector General (OIG), Sanofi typically provides
physicians with a copy of an applicable blank prior authorization form,
or in some cases, the form with only the physician's demographic
information filled out, along with separate instructions for filling
out the form. Also, in keeping with OIG guidance, Sanofi provides
physicians with template appeals letter for instances in which a
physician needs to appeal non-coverage for a Sanofi product. These
template letters do not include any patient medical information, and
instead are provided only as a guide for physicians to describe the
reasons that the patient requires his or her prescribed Sanofi
product.\26\ Similarly, Sanofi provides physicians with template
letters of medical necessity, which do not offer medical information on
specific patients. Instead, these documents provide a general framework
pursuant to which physicians may prepare their own, patient-specific
letters of medical necessity.\27\ These measures comply with the OIG
guidance in that they provide ``limited support'' in connection with a
purchase or prescribing decision for a Sanofi product.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ See, e.g., https://www.visitspconline.com/servlet/
servlet.FileDownload?file=00P3600000Q1T
boEAF.
\27\ See, e.g., https://www.visitspconline.com/servlet/
servlet.FileDownload?file=00P3600000Q1T
byEAF.
Question. In 2017, the Rand Corporation estimated that biosimilar
drugs, which are competitors to complex, biologic drugs, could save the
United States more than $50 billion over the next decade. Some of you
have also argued that increasing the use of biosimilar drugs would help
lower drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers. What is delaying the
uptake of biosimilar drugs in the United States? What policies do you
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
recommend to increase the development of biosimilar drugs?
Answer. Sanofi supports the entry of biosimilar medicines in the
market after a reasonable period of time after the innovator biologic
is developed, which we believe is already reflected in U.S. law. There
are changes already in place that will help patients and taxpayers
realize the benefit of biosimilars. Specifically, in March 2020,
certain biologics that are currently regulated as drugs, including long
acting insulins, will be regulated as biologics and therefore will be
subject to the existing biosimilars pathway. We expect the change in
regulation to spur the continued development of substitutable or
interchangeable products, and to increase competition in this space
generally. Further, we believe that as health-care providers become
more familiar with biosimilars, the uptake of biosimilar drugs will
increase. Findings from a recent review show that there is an overall
lack of biosimilar familiarity among U.S. and European health-care
providers, leading to low prescribing comfort as well as safety and
efficacy concerns.\28\ The study concludes that, to realize the full
cost-saving potential of biosimilar medicines, clinician-directed
biosimilar education is necessary to address the gaps in biosimilar
knowledge, facilitate prescribing changes, and ultimately increase
biosimilar use.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ See ``Factors Affecting Health Care Provider Knowledge and
Acceptance of Biosimilar Medicines: A Systematic Review,'' 25 J.
Managed Care & Specialty Pharm. 102-112 (Jan. 2019), available at
https://www.jmcp.org/doi/10.18553/jmcp.2019.25.1.102.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
Question. The United States is one of the only countries in the
world to allow prescription drug manufacturers to advertise directly to
consumers through magazines, billboards, radio, and television
commercials. While I will not argue that it is beneficial to educate
consumers about an unfamiliar disease and encourage them to seek
medical help, most commercials from all of your companies recommend
asking about a specific brand name drug, not a medical condition.
Furthermore, even if your advertisements follow all FDA rules and list
medication side effects, they also almost always list these while a
smiling, apparently healthy person is walking on a beach.
Researchers say that this type of imagery, combined with viewing
hours of drug commercials each month, leads consumers to underestimate
the risks associated with medications. For the past decade, studies
have shown that aggressive direct-toconsumer advertising is associated
with rising drug prices and an increase in inappropriate drug
prescriptions.
Since researchers have concluded that consumers are
misunderstanding the benefits and risks described in your ads, what
further policies could help you and your colleagues ensure that you are
educating patients in a clear manner?
Answer. Sanofi believes DTC advertisements can play an important
role in both raising awareness about a disease and educating patients
about their treatment options. The benefits of DTC advertisements are
reflected in the results of a recent survey conducted by Princeton
Survey Research Associates International, which found that DTC
advertisements often prompt conversations about alternatives such as
generics or lifestyle changes, and prompt positive behaviors, such as
information-seeking and medicine adherence.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ https://www.phrma.org/report/2017-direct-to-consumer-
advertising-survey-results.
When DTC advertisements solely discuss a particular disease or
condition without mentioning or alluding to a specific drug, FDA
considers the advertisements disease awareness communications. Disease
awareness communications are not considered promotional labeling or
advertising, and thus such communications are not subject to the
requirements of the Federal, Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) or FDA
regulations. In contrast, DTC advertisements that make claims about a
drug are subject to requirements governing disclosure of risk and other
information, including a statutory requirement to include a brief
summary relating to side effects, contraindications, and effectiveness.
FDA's prescription drug advertising regulations distinguish between
print and broadcast advertisements, which require a ``brief summary''
for print advertisements and what is referred to as a ``major
statement'' of risks for broadcast advertisements. FDA regulations also
set forth additional requirements for information to be included in
both print and broadcast advertisements. Certain broadcast
advertisements, including the initial television advertisement for a
prescription drug and all television advertisements for prescription
drugs subject to a Risk Evaluation Mitigation Strategy with elements to
assure safe use, are subject to pre-dissemination review by FDA. Even
where a television advertisement is not subject to mandatory review,
sponsors may elect to voluntarily submit the advertisement to FDA for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
advisory review.
While the time-limited nature of broadcast DTC advertisements can
present challenges in ensuring a drug advertisement presents all
information required by the FDCA and FDA regulations in a manner easily
digestible to a consumer, or even HCP, audience, Sanofi strives to
disseminate balanced DTC advertisements that clearly and effectively
communicate a product's benefits and risks. To that end, prior to
airing any DTC television advertisement, Sanofi submits each
advertisement to FDA for pre-dissemination review and incorporates
FDA's comments, even when such review is not required for the
advertisement in question. To further the objective of ensuring that
DTC advertisements educate consumers about potential treatment options
in a non-misleading manner, we believe industry would benefit from a
regulatory framework that allows for greater flexibility in the risk
and other information required to be included in broadcast
advertisements, including, for example, the flexibility to focus on
select significant risks in the advertisement itself while directing
consumers to a website for a more fulsome discussion of a product's
risks. FDA has acknowledged that its regulations provide ``only limited
flexibility'' for risk disclosure in broadcast advertisements. Thus,
allowing for greater flexibility in content control in DTC
advertisements would likely require amending existing FDA regulations,
as well as potentially the underlying statutory provisions governing
the information required to be disclosed in advertisements.
pharmaceutical companies continue to raise prices
Question. As you are well aware, high prescription drug prices are
the number one concern for Americans and their families. According to
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the average
American spends around $1,208 annually on prescription drugs. There
have been several instances where brand name or even generic drugs that
have been on the market for years continue to increase in price.
One of the most well-known examples is Mylan's increase of the
price of EpiPen from less than $100 in 2007 to more than $600 in 2016.
Another example, is the ever-increasing price of insulin. Sanofi
increased the price of a vial of Lantus from $88.20 in 2007 to $307.20
in 2017. And those are just a small sample of price increases.
Why don't we see price decreases for drugs that have been on the
market for years without new formulations or added benefit?
Answer. Current regulations, including price reporting
requirements, create uncertainty about the implications of lowering a
list price. We are working with CMS on alternatives that could enable
us to put lower list price versions of our products on the market.
Until such system changes are implemented, we are working to improve
the affordability of our products for those who are uninsured or
underinsured through our many patient support programs.
It is important to note, as well, that revenues from existing
therapies are used to fund future R&D across therapeutic areas.
Sanofi's R&D strategy is to allocate resources to priority therapeutic
areas based both on scientific opportunity and unmet medical need,
leveraging multiple therapeutic modalities and accelerating early
development. Our R&D pipeline currently contains 81 projects, including
33 new molecular entities in clinical development, and 35 projects are
in Phase III or have been submitted to regulatory authorities. From
2008 to 2017, Sanofi invested over $55 billion dollars globally in R&D.
Last year we invested almost $7 billion globally, or approximately 24%
of our gross profits, in our research and development activities. We
expect to continue to spend around the same on R&D in the coming years.
pay for delay
Question. Pay for delay is a tactic that more and more branded drug
manufacturers have been using to stifle competition from lower-cost
generic manufacturers. This allows you to sidestep competition by
offering patent settlements that pay generic companies not to bring
lower-cost alternatives to market.
These ``pay-for-delay'' patent settlements benefit both brand-name
pharmaceutical companies by helping them avoid costly patent litigation
and general manufacturers by rewarding them a hefty sum to delay
entering the market with a cheaper drug alternative. However, these
deals do not benefit consumers. According to an FTC study, these
anticompetitive deals cost consumers and taxpayers $3.5 billion in
higher drug costs every year.
Does your company partake in pay-for-delay settlements?
Answer. No, Sanofi does not enter into ``pay for delay'' agreements
that prohibit generic drug or biosimilar development after the
expiration of a patent. Sanofi has reached settlements in patent
infringement cases, and these agreements have allowed the generic
company to commercialize its product before the expiration of the
applicable patent covering Sanofi's innovator product.
Question. Why would a pharmaceutical company enter into a pay-for
delay agreement?
Answer. We can only speak for Sanofi, and we do not enter into
``pay-for-delay'' settlement agreements.
Question. Do you think these agreements stifle competition and
prevent generic alternatives to your branded medications?
Answer. With respect to patent litigation, generally, Sanofi
believes it is inappropriate to presume that any settlement of patent
litigations related to pharmaceutical products is anticompetitive. Such
settlements are often the most efficient and effective way to resolve
disputes regarding patented drugs. Additionally, they often lead to the
earliest appropriate entry of generic products into the market thereby
benefiting patients--earlier than expiration of the relevant patents.
Each patent litigation and potential settlement presents unique factors
and must be considered individually and in light of the relevant
circumstances.
drug rebate rule
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services'
(HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG) promulgated a new regulation to
remove regulatory safe harbor protections under the Anti-Kickback
Statute (AKS) for rebates on prescription drugs rebates paid by
manufactures to PBMs under Medicare Part D and for Medicaid managed
care organizations (MCOs). The OIG proposal attempts to ban most
rebates by eliminating their regulatory protections.
The rule is predicted to increase net drug costs in its early
years. The CMS actuaries estimate it would cost $196 billion over 10
years. Despite this high price tag, the beneficiary benefits are
limited. The proposed rule notes that under the CMS Actuary's analysis,
the majority of beneficiaries would see an increase in their total out-
of-pocket payments and premium costs; reductions in total cost sharing
will exceed total premium increases.
I wanted to ask a question about the administration's rebate rule,
which I understand that many of the drug manufacturers, and your main
trade association, strongly support. According to an analysis of the
rule by the Office of Actuaries at CMS, drug manufacturers are likely
to initially retain 15 percent of the current rebates as higher net
drug prices.
Given that estimate, can you provide the committee with any
assurances that prices will not increase under this proposed rule?
Answer. At this time, it is difficult to predict the effect of the
administration's proposed rule. It is our expectation that it will
result in lower out-of-pocket costs for patients by protecting only
manufacturer rebates to Medicare Part D and Medicaid MCO plans and
their PBMs that are reflected in the point-of-sale price. Without a
better understanding of how these policy changes ultimately would
affect the competitive marketplace, patient access, and affordability,
however, we are unable to provide assurances regarding how prices might
change.
We want to ensure that the new system achieves its goal of
improving affordability for patients. For instance, CMS should monitor
and evaluate how the new system affects formulary access, utilization
management, and patient cost-sharing, particularly with respect to
medicines with a lower list price. We also have concerns that changes
to the rebate system may lead to new fees, which simply require
manufacturers to pay previous rebate values in new ways, rather than
creating savings for patients.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. According to an article recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, medical marketers spent nearly $30
billion dollars in 2016, up from $17 billion in 1997. Direct-to-
Consumer (DTC) advertising had the biggest percentage increase: from
$2.1 billion, or 11.9% of all medical marketing, in 1997 to $9.6
billion, or 32% of total spending, in 2016.
Can each of you please provide what your ratio of spending on sales
and marketing to research and development is today?
Answer. In 2018, Sanofi's global ratio of spending on sales and
marketing \30\ to research and development was approximately 117
percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ ``Sales and marketing'' includes, but is not limited to: sales
force, promotion, and marketing management.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
price-gouging
Question. Sanofi, as I understand it, has made a pledge to the
public to limit its price increases to the national health expenditures
growth projection.
As the chair of the board of directors at PhRMA would you support
membership requirements that would cap annual price increases for drugs
sold as part of Medicare, similar to what Sanofi has pledged?
Given that PhRMA members are considering creating higher standards
for themselves, would you support an industry-wide standard on annual
price increases that applies to all pharmaceutical corporations,
whether or not they are members of PhRMA?
Answer. Dr. Brandicourt appeared before the committee on behalf of
Sanofi; we cannot speak on behalf of PhRMA or any other company. We
note that pricing discussions among PhRMA members, or pharmaceutical
manufacturers more generally, could implicate federal antitrust laws
and therefore would be inappropriate.
Two years ago, Sanofi announced our progressive and industry-
leading pricing principles, which include a pledge to keep annual list
price increases at or below the projected U.S. National Health
Expenditure (NHE) growth rate, as calculated by CMS. In 2018, all of
Sanofi's price increases across its medicines were consistent with
those pricing principles, as are all pricing actions taken in 2019.
Question. What policies would you propose to help ensure lower
launch prices for new drugs?
Answer. For Sanofi, the key requirement for any policy solution is
that it should result in improved access and lower prescription out-of-
pocket drug costs for patients, while maintaining incentives for
innovations. To reform the current misaligned incentives in the current
system, Sanofi supports de-linking payments to PBMs, payers and others
in the supply chain from the list price. Additionally, we support
policies that would incentivize lower launch prices, smaller list price
increases, or even list price reductions, by requiring health plans to
cover those medicines at an affordable co-pay level and only allow
access restrictions consistent with the label and accepted best
clinical practice.
transparency
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mentioned that the
current system of pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) back-end rebates do
not rarely results in a scenario where the PBM passes on savings to
consumers at the point of sale (POS). The Administration recently
proposed a rule to eliminate the anti-kickback statute safe harbor
protections for these drug rebates.
Do you agree that greater transparency should be required to
understand how manufacturers and PBMs are negotiating prices and
rebates to ensure that savings are passed down to beneficiaries?
Answer. Yes. Sanofi supports policies, such as those proposed in
the C-THRU Act, that would encourage or require PBMs and payers to be
transparent regarding how they use manufacturer rebates and pass
through manufacturer rebates to patient at point of sale in the form of
lower out-of-pocket costs.
As part of our pricing principles, Sanofi voluntarily discloses
annually our aggregate U.S. gross and net price changes from the prior
calendar year. These data help illustrate how pricing changes accrue to
manufacturers versus others in the value chain, highlighting our
discrete role in the broader U.S. health care system.
pbms
Question. An Axios article from March 7, 2019 highlights the fact
that, while ``pharmaceutical companies put a lot of the blame for high
drug prices on pharmacy benefit managers,'' many large pharmaceutical
companies ``rely on PBMs to manage their own health-care benefits.''
In your role as an employer, does your company contract with a
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) to administer the prescription
drug benefits for your employees and negotiate lower drug costs on your
behalf?
Answer. Yes, we do.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, how do you utilize the
rebates your PBM negotiates to lower health-care costs or drug costs
for your employee plans and what does your company do with that
savings? Specifically, do the savings go toward lowing premiums?
Answer. The Sanofi medical plan is self-insured; as such, the
company pays the majority (approximately 80 percent) of the health-care
claims that are incurred by our employees and their dependents.
Therefore, Sanofi uses rebates to defray the overall cost of its health
plan, which allows us to keep plan costs stable for all participants.
We offer our employees generous healthcare coverage and have been
able to keep the deductibles of our PPO, which covers 90% of our
employees who elect medical coverage, at $200 for single coverage and
$400 for family coverage over the past few years. With respect to our
PPO prescription drug benefit, members incur no cost ($0 co-pays) for
Sanofi and partner prescription drugs. For non-Sanofi prescriptions,
the out-of-pocket expense varies for generic ($15/prescription),
preferred brand ($25/prescription) and non-preferred brand ($40/
prescription). The Sanofi plan's actuarial value is around 90%, which
puts it at the ``platinum'' level.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, does your PBM offer
point-of-sale rebates to your employees?
Answer. Yes, our PBM does offer point-of-sale rebates, however only
around 8 percent of its clients currently are enrolled in point-of-sale
rebates.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. Please describe any policy changes you support that would
result in your company lowering the list prices of its drugs.
Answer. For Sanofi, the key requirement for any policy solution is
that it should result in improved access and lower prescription out-of-
pocket drug costs for patients, while maintaining incentives for
innovations. To reform the current misaligned incentives in the current
system, Sanofi supports de-linking payments to PBMs, payers and others
in the supply chain from the list price. Additionally, we support
policies that would incentivize lower launch prices, smaller list price
increases, or even list price reductions, by requiring health plans to
cover those medicines at an affordable co-pay level and only allow
access restrictions consistent with the label and accepted best
clinical practice.
Sanofi also supports the intent behind legislation like the SPIKE
Act, which would impose price transparency requirements on companies
that increase the list price of a particular drug over a certain
threshold. We believe that increased transparency should accomplish
three goals: (1) preempt similar state laws, as was done with the
Sunshine Act, to create a consistent reporting process; (2) ensure
information that if released publically could be anti-competitive is
kept confidential; and (3) take a holistic approach to transparency,
such as requiring PBMs to disclose when the net price of a medicine has
declined and whether the increased rebates are used to lower costs for
patients or for other reasons.
Question. How much does your company's research and development
portfolio rely on taxpayer-funded research conducted by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)? How many of your company's products are
based, at least in part, on NIH research, and how many are the result
of research funded solely by your company?
Answer. In identifying targets for new drugs, Sanofi relies on
global science, which often includes NIH-funded research. Sanofi has
collaborated with NIH on various research and development (R&D)
initiatives on projects related to HIV,
Epstein-Barr virus, influenza, and respiratory syncytial virus.
While there is no question that NIH plays a vital role in basic
research and early discovery, the majority of Sanofi's current
portfolio of products in the pre-development to development phases do
not rely on NIH funding. Sanofi reinvests a significant portion of its
revenue into the R&D of new or improved medicines and vaccines. Last
year, Sanofi globally spent almost $7 billion on R&D globally, an
increase of approximately 7 percent from 2017, which reflects our
commitment to bringing better therapies to patients. Sanofi plans to
maintain this level of R&D investment through 2021, and our R&D
pipeline now contains 81 projects, including 33 new molecular entities
in clinical development, and 35 projects that are in Phase III or have
been submitted to regulatory authorities. This investment means that
Sanofi potentially will seek approval for nine new medications in the
next three years, primarily in therapeutic areas where Sanofi sees the
greatest nexus between our expertise and patient need: diabetes,
vaccines, oncology, immunology, rare diseases, and rare blood
disorders.
Question. In each of the last 5 years, how much has your company
spent on research and development versus the advertising and marketing
of your products?
Answer.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research and
Advertising and
USD \31\
Development
Marketing \32\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018
$6,954,920,000
$4,519,400,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017
$6,238,080,000
$3,764,280,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016
$5,689,200,000
$3,006,300,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2015
$5,590,200,000
$2,773,100,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2014
$6,160,440,000
$2,673,000,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Sanofi reports its financials in Euros. All financial figures
reported in this document have been converted from Euros into U.S.
dollars. These are Sanofi global financial figures.
\32\ Includes global spending on ``promotion'' and ``marketing
management.''
Question. During the hearing, you mentioned that your company would
be likely to lower the list prices of its drugs if the recent proposal
by the Trump administration to change the current system of rebates was
extended to the private market.
If the policy was extended to the private market, how large would
the list price reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
Answer. If (1) the proposed changes to the anti-kickback statute
safe harbors were codified, and (2) Congress implemented similar
changes to the commercial insurance market, Sanofi would lower the list
prices of its prescription medications for products in competitive
categories for which there is currently a material difference between
list price and net price on the assumption that patient access and
affordability would be improved. Sanofi also supports policy changes
that would de-link other payments in the pharmaceutical supply chain
from list price.
We support extending the intent behind the anti-kickback statute
safe harbor proposed rule to the commercial market so that incentives
are aligned across the marketplace. Together, we believe these changes
would facilitate Sanofi's ability to lower its list prices. However, we
recommend a step-wise approach, implementing changes to the commercial
market after the safe harbor rule is implemented on January 1, 2020.
Such an approach would provide an opportunity for stakeholders and the
government to identify unintended consequences, and address them, prior
to extending these policies to the commercial market.
We want to ensure that the new system achieves its goal of
improving affordability for patients. For instance, CMS should monitor
and evaluate how the new system affects formulary access, utilization
management, and patient cost-sharing, particularly with respect to
medicines with a lower list price. We also have concerns that changes
to the rebate system may lead to new fees, which simply require
manufacturers to pay previous rebate values in new ways, rather than
creating savings for patients.
Without a better understanding of how these policy changes
ultimately would affect the competitive marketplace, patient access,
and affordability, we are unable to quantify the amount of any
potential list price reduction.
Question. How will this proposal affect how your company sets the
list prices for new drug products?
Answer. When setting the price of a new medicine, Sanofi's decision
making will continue to be guided by our pricing principles framework.
When Sanofi sets the price of a new medicine in the U.S., we hold
ourselves to a rigorous and structured process that includes
consultation with external stakeholders. In our view, an objective
measure of a new product's value considers the benefit to patients,
compared to a standard of care; the reduced need--and therefore costs--
of other health-care interventions; and any increase in quality of life
and productivity. We believe our pricing reflects these factors. We
also consider factors such as the affordability for patients and any
unique factors specific to the medicine, like the need to support
ongoing clinical trials, implement important regulatory commitments, or
develop sophisticated patient support tools that improve care
management and help decrease the total cost of care.
To the extent reform of the anti-kickback statute safe harbors
results in changes in the competitive marketplace, patient access, and
affordability, the rule is likely to affect our pricing of new
medicines.
Question. If the proposal is finalized and not extended to the
private market, will your company make any list price reductions? If
so, how large would the reductions be relative to the size of the
rebates your company is currently providing?
Answer. Sanofi is committed to working with other stakeholders to
lower patient out-of-pocket costs, and the company will carefully
review any final rule issued by HHS regarding the Anti-Kickback Statute
and its safe harbor regulations--with the goal of providing point-of-
sale discounts to patients, in accordance with law, to lower their out-
of-pocket costs.
Without addressing the currently misaligned incentives across all
payer channels, it is unclear the extent to which Sanofi would be able
to lower list prices. We would need a better understanding of how the
rule ultimately would affect the competitive marketplace, patient
access, and affordability in both the government and commercial
insurance markets in order to quantify the amount of any potential list
price reduction.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan
Question. In June of 2018, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission (MACPAC) unanimously recommended under Recommendation 1.1 in
their annual report to Congress that Congress remove the statutory
requirement that manufacturers blend the average manufacturer price
(AMP) of a brand drug and its authorized generic.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ MACPAC, ``Improving Operations of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program,'' https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Improving-
Operations-of-the-Medicaid-Drug-Rebate-Program.pdf.
This requirement created an unintended loophole. Rather than use
the price of the authorized generic, drug companies can sell its
authorized generic to a corporate subsidiary at an artificially lower
price, and use that lower price to bring down the AMP, which in turn
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lowers the rebate obligation.
Does your company engage in this practice? Has your company ever
engaged in this practice in the past?
Answer. Sanofi currently markets authorized generic versions of
certain of its products, through corporate affiliates, under separate
National Drug Codes (``NDC''). Sanofi's general approach for these
products has been that if two products share the same drug, dosage
form, and strength, and both are sold by the same corporate entity or
Sanofi business unit, then their sales are blended for the calculation
of AMP and Best Price.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
Question. In October you were asked by a reporter whether you would
lower the price of insulin if point-of-sale rebates were enacted. Your
response was, ``We realize that some medicines remain economically out
of reach for some patients. We take this issue seriously and will
continue to seek innovative solutions to help make insulins more
affordable for patients.'' Please answer that question more
specifically: will you lower your list price in response to the rebate
rule?
Answer. If (1) the proposed changes to the anti-kickback statute
safe harbors were codified, and (2) Congress implemented similar
changes to the commercial insurance market, Sanofi would lower the list
prices of its prescription medications for products in competitive
categories for which there is currently a material difference between
list price and net price on the assumption that patient access and
affordability would be improved. Sanofi also supports policy changes
that would de-link other payments in the pharmaceutical supply chain
from list price.
We support extending the intent behind the anti-kickback statute
safe harbor proposed rule to the commercial market so that incentives
are aligned across the marketplace. Together, we believe these changes
would facilitate Sanofi's ability to lower its list prices. However, we
recommend a step-wise approach, implementing changes to the commercial
market after the safe harbor rule is implemented on January 1, 2020.
Such an approach would provide an opportunity for stakeholders and the
government to identify unintended consequences, and address them, prior
to extending these policies to the commercial market.
We want to ensure that the new system achieves its goal of
improving affordability for patients. For instance, CMS should monitor
and evaluate how the new system affects formulary access, utilization
management, and patient cost-sharing, particularly with respect to
medicines with a lower list price. We also have concerns that changes
to the rebate system may lead to new fees, which simply require
manufacturers to pay previous rebate values in new ways, rather than
creating savings for patients.
Without a better understanding of how these policy changes
ultimately would affect the competitive marketplace, patient access,
and affordability, we are unable to quantify the amount of any
potential list price reduction.
Question. As a portion of your revenue, for what percentage of the
drugs in your portfolio do you offer no rebates? Based on the drugs in
your pipeline, do you foresee that portion growing? For those drugs is
your list price equal to your net price?
Answer. When considering rebates paid by Sanofi in any form,
including those that are government-mandated, Sanofi offers rebates on
all of its products at some point in the distribution channel. We do
not expect that this will change based on the company's pipeline.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you generate in U.S. sales
revenue? Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, Sanofi spent $6,954,920,000 globally on R&D, a 7-
percent increase over 2017 and approximately 24 percent of its global
gross profits. In 2018, Sanofi's U.S. net sales were $13,617,200,000.
Answer. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? What company functions do you consider to be included
in administration? Please include specific figures.
Answer. Yes. In 2018, Sanofi spent $6,954,920,000 globally on R&D,
and $6,921, 880,000 globally on marketing and administration.
``Administration'' includes, but is not limited to: finance, human
resources, external affairs, legal, business services, business
development, and internal audit.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
sales? What company functions do you consider to be included in sales?
Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, Sanofi spent $6,954,920,000 globally on R&D, and
$8,154,980,000 globally on marketing and sales. The primary function
included in ``sales'' is the sales force.
Question. Why do you advertise for the drugs you manufacture? What
factors do you consider in choosing which drugs you advertise?
Answer. Sanofi believes that advertising is an important tool to
inform and educate the public about its medicines, while raising
general awareness of diseases that are frequently surrounded by stigma.
We are committed to ensuring that our advertisements provide accurate,
accessible, and useful health information to patients and consumers.
Our communications are designed to educate patients and consumers about
serious health conditions and the availability of treatments, and to
encourage them to seek guidance from their healthcare professionals
about appropriate treatment. We consider a variety of factors in
determining whether and how to advertise a product, including patient
needs and the unique aspects of an individual product or disease state.
______
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Jan 2015-30th June 2015
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
\2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academic CME, LLC Postgraduate
Incorporating Advancements in Monoclonal Antibody
$298,600.04
Institute for Medicine
Therapeutics into Patient Management Strategies
Collaboration \3\
within Dyslipidemia
Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy
The unmet needs of multiple sclerosis, and the
$6,500
principles and current evidence in the use of DMTs
Admin of the Tulane Educational Fund
7th Annual Tulane Symposium on Thyroid And Parathyroid
$10,000.00
on behalf of TUHSC CCE
Diseases
Collaboration \3\
AKH Inc. Advancing Knowledge and
American Society for Preventive Cardiology: Annual
$10,000.00
Healthcare
Cardiovascular Disease Prevention Conference
American Academy of Physician
AAPA Conference 2015--Neurology Track
$5,000.00
Assistants
American Academy of Physician
AAPA Conference 2015--Endocrinology Track
$5,000.00
Assistants
American Academy of Physician
AAPA Conference 2015--Nephrology Track
$3,500.00
Assistants
American Association of Clinical
Georgia-AACE 2015 Annual Meeting
$7,500.00
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
Lipids Sessions at Endocrine University: Disease
$5,000.00
Endocrinologists
Management and Technology Skills for Endocrinology
Fellows In Training
American Association of Clinical
Southern States--AACE 2015 Annual Meeting
$7,500.00
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
Diabetes Sessions At Endocrine University: Disease
$25,000.00
Endocrinologists
Management and Technology for Endocrinology Fellows
in Training
American Association of Clinical
AACE 24th Annual Scientific & Clinical Congress
$47,350.00
Endocrinologists
(Thyroid Sessions)
American Association of Clinical
AACE 24th Annual Scientific & Clinical Congress
$47,350.00
Endocrinologists
(Diabetes Session)
American Association of Clinical
Diabetes Sessions at AACE 24th Annual Scientific And
$47,350.00
Endocrinologists
Clinical Congress
American Association of Clinical
Mid Atlantic Chapter of The American Association of
$7,500.00
Endocrinologists
Clinical Endocrinologists 13th Annual Meeting &
Symposium
American Association of Clinical
Mid Atlantic Chapter of the American Association of
$7,500.00
Endocrinologists
Clinical Endocrinologists 13th Annual Meeting 7
Symposium
American Association of Clinical
California Chapter of The American Association of
$20,000.00
Endocrinologists
Clinical Endocrinologists Presents: Hot Topics in
Diabetes and Endocrinology for Primary Care
American Association of Clinical
LDL-C Reduction in the High-Risk Patient: How Low
$261,057.00
Endocrinologists Medtelligence, LLC
Should We Go?
Collaboration \3\
Association of Diabetes Educators
Diabetes Education and People with Diabetes: Partners
$15,000.00
in the Winners Circle, New York American State
Regional Conference
American Association of Diabetes
AADE 2015--Rumor has It? Demystifying the Use of Basal
$321,895.00
Educators
Insulin in Type 2 Diabetes Management
American College of Cardiology
ACC Rise and Shine Series: Just The Facts--An
$55,000.00
Foundation
Objective Overview of PCSK9 Inhibitors
Collaboration \3\
American College of Cardiology
Lipid Management Today: Unanswered Questions and
$125,000.00
Foundation Med-IQ, LLC
Unquestioned Answers
Collaboration \3\
American College of Surgeons American
36th Annual Meeting of the American Association of
$5,000.00
Association of Endocrine Surgeons
Endocrine Surgeons
American Diabetes Association
2015 Professional Educator Conference
$5,000.00
American Diabetes Association
ADA Inside: The Intelligent Use of Insulin Inspiring
$387,602.00
System Improvement with Diabetes Education
American Diabetes Association
Diabetes is Primary
$166,545.00
American Health Resources, Inc.
Focus on the Patient with Diabetes: Managing Co-
$6,000.00
Morbidities and Improving Outcomes
American Health Resources, Inc.
Identification and Resolution of Injection Technique
$12,600.00
Barriers in Patients with Diabetes
American Nephrology Nurses'
The Questions, Myths, and Facts Regarding the
$160,000.00
Association Rockpointe Corporation
Management Of CKD-MBD
American Neurological Association
2015 American Neurological Association 140th Annual
$25,000.00
Meeting
American Society of Nephrology
ASN Highlights 2015
$15,000.00
American Society of Nephrology
AST/ASN Transplant Nephrology Core Curriculum
$15,000.00
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's
Lysosomal Storage Disease Training Program for Genetic
$75,000.00
Hospital of Chicago
Counselors
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
Diabetes Monitor Conference Coverage (ADA 2015)
$50,000.00
at Eisenhower
Association of Black Cardiologists,
Lipid Management and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction:
$380,000.00
Inc. National Association for
The Evolving Treatment Paradigm
Collaboration \3\
Continuing Education
Association of Family Practice
Chronic Kidney Disease
$4,000.00
Physician Assistants
Association of Family Practice
Joint Injection
$6,100.00
Physician Assistants
Association of Family Practice
Diabetes--What Do I Prescribe After Metformin?
$3,150.00
Physician Assistants
Baylor University Medical Center dba
New Treatment Paradigms for Castrate Resistant
$15,330.00
A. Webb Roberts Center CancerNet,
Prostate Cancer
LLC
Baylor University Medical Center dba
New Treatment Paradigms for Castrate Resistant
$15,330.00
A. Webb Roberts Center CancerNet,
Prostate Cancer
LLC
BIDDM
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Renal Division
$5,500.00
Grand Rounds and Renal Biology Conference Series
Board of Regents of the University of
18th Annual Primary Care Update
$6,000.00
Oklahoma Health Science
Brigham and Women's Hospital Workshop
Kidney Disease Screening And Awareness Program (KDSAP)
$29,000.00
New Chapters Training Workshop
California Academy of Family
The Family Medicine Clinical Forum
$20,000.00
Physicians
Cardiovascular Institute of Sarasota
11th Annual Cardiovascular Symposium Cardiology Update
$10,000.00
Foundation for Education Florida
2015: Time to Focus on Early Cardiovascular Disease
Collaboration \3\
Medical Association
Prevention
Children Health and Research
Fellowship in Inherited Metabolic Disorders and
$75,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Lysosomal Storage Disorders
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Genetic Counselor Fellowship in lysosomal storage
$75,000.00
Foundation
disorders
Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Genetic Counseling Fellowship in the Lysosomal Storage
$74,987.00
Medical Center
Disorders
Cleveland Clinic Educational
Nephrology Update2015
$10,000.00
Foundation
Cleveland Clinic Educational
Diabetes and Thyroid Update--A Multidisciplinary
$10,000.00
Foundation
Symposium on Diabetes and Thyroid Diseases
Cleveland Clinic Educational
2015 Diabetes Day 20th Annual Symposium: Diabetes
$10,000.00
Foundation
Through The Ages
Cleveland Clinic Educational
18th Annual Intensive Review of Endocrinology and
$20,000.00
Foundation
Metabolism
Cleveland Clinic Educational
Mellen Center Update In Multiple Sclerosis
$5,000.00
Foundation
Colorado Foundation for Medical Care
3rd Annual Convention of The Cardio Renal Society of
$30,000.00
Cardio Renal Society of America
America
CME Outfitters, LLC
Risky Business: Understanding and Attenuating Risk
$207,090.00
Associated with Disease-Modifying Therapy in
Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Expert Debates in Multiple Sclerosis: Opposing Views
$125,000.00
Centers
in Management
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
PatientGPS TM: Clinical Paths to Explore Treatment
$100,000.00
Centers
Options and Individualize Therapy in Multiple
Sclerosis
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
A Practical Guide to Rehabilitation in MS (an AIMS
$190,765.00
Centers
Primer)
Creative Educational Concepts, Inc.
Achieving Equilibrium in Diabetes with GLP-1 Receptor
$142,875.00
Agonists: Avoiding Hypoglycemia When Treating
Postprandial Hyperglycemia
Duke University
Residency in Medical Genetics
$70,853.52
Educational Concepts Group, LLC
Advances in The Management Of GU Cancers: Highlights
$22,000.00
From the 2015 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium
Educational Review Systems National
Effective Management of Gaucher Disease? A Primer for
$35,000.00
Home Infusion Association
Home and Specialty Infusion Clinicians
Emory Genetics Laboratory
Multidisciplinary Extramural LSD Educational Talks on
$24,200.00
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
Emory Genetics Laboratory
The Paul M. Fernhoff Genetic Counseling Fellowship in
$75,000.00
the Lysosomal Storage Disorders
Emory University
Emory Latino Diabetes Education Program
$241,455.00
Endometriosis Association Inc.
Adhesion Awareness for Doctors and Patients:
$54,591.48
Communicating the Significance of Adhesion Disease
Fabry Support & Information Group
Eyes On Fabry-Illinois College of Optometry--Chicago
$2,550.00
Fabry Support & Information Group
Eyes on Fabry Southern College of Optometry Memphis,
$2,500.00
TN
Florida Academy of Physician
The Good, the Bad, and the Latrogenic: Renal
$9,000.00
Assistants
Medication Dosing?
Foundation for Care Management
Diabetes Mellitus: Detecting and Treating Type I & II
$50,000.00
Patients in a Type II Global Epidemic
Glens Falls Association for the Blind
Interesting Cases - Lessons Learned the Hard Way
$23,352.24
Horizon CME, Inc.
PCSK9 Inhibitors: Where Do They Fit in The Treatment
$163,300.00
of Dyslipidemia?
Collaboration \3\
Hospital for Special Surgery
Neurological Directions 2015: Update in Neuromuscular
$5,000.00
Medicine
Humboldt-Del Norte Consortium for
Multiple Sclerosis
$4,100.00
Continuing Medical Education
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Multiple Sclerosis and its Mimics
$1,920.00
Sinai
Imedex, LLC
Unraveling The Complexities of Treating Metastatic
$198,856.00
Colorectal Cancer with Anti-Angiogenesis Agents
Collaboration \3\
Across Multiple Lines of Therapy
Institute for Medical and Nursing
New Developments in Insulin Therapy: Expert Answers To
$222,519.33
Education
Your Clinical Questions--A Regional Meeting Series
Johns Hopkins University
The 11th Annual Johns Hopkins Multiple Sclerosis
$210,000.00
Symposium Series
Johns Hopkins University Advanced
The Future of Lipid Management: New Perspectives &
$174,400.00
Studies in Medicine
Targets For LOWERING LDL-C
Johns Hopkins University Medical
Innovations in Prandial Glucose Control for Patients
$133,000.00
Logix, LLC
with Type 2 Diabetes
Kidneys for Life Fund Raising for
4th Update on Fabry Nephropathy; Manchester UK, June 1-
$75,000.00
MINT
2, 2015
Joslin Diabetes Center, Inc.
Complementary Treatments To Enhance Insulin Efficacy:
$392,463.00
Integrated Learning Partners, LLC
Theory And Strategies
Letters & Sciences University of
MS Leadership Summit 2015-2016
$205,000.00
North Texas Health Science Center at
Fort Worth
Medical Education Resources CMEology,
Shifting the Treatment Paradigm for Multiple
$100,000.00
LLC
Sclerosis: Advances in Pathophysiology and Emergence
of Novel Disease Modifying Therapies
Medical Education Resources Tarsus
Best of the Cardiometabolic Health Congress: Regional
$80,000.00
Cardio Inc. dba Health Science Media
Conference Series and Virtual Highlights Activity
with Extended Distribution on Medscape Education
Medical Education Resources Tarsus
Best of the Cardiometabolic Health Congress: Regional
$65,000.00
Cardio Inc. dba Health Science Media
Conference Series and Virtual Highlights Activity
with Extended Distribution on Medscape Education
Medical Education Resources Tarsus
Novel Therapies for LDL-C Lowering in the Fight
$250,000.00
Cardio Inc. dba Health Science Media
Against Residual ASCVD Risk
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
Understanding the Evolution of MS Care: Optimizing
$43,186.00
Therapeutic Decision Making
Medical University of South Carolina
10th Annual Symposium on the Nephrology Update for
$2,500.00
Primary Care and Hospital Medicine
Med-IQ, LLC
The Top 10 Challenges in Managing High Risk Prostate
$192,276.00
Cancer
Med-IQ, LLC
Advancing the Management of Gaucher's Disease
$200,957.00
Med-IQ, LLC
The Evolving Therapeutic Landscape In Gaucher's
$147,963.00
Disease
Med-IQ, LLC
The Evolution of Science, Medicine and Patient
$315,090.00
Centered Care in CKD-MBD
Med-IQ, LLC
Medical Insiders: Emerging Science for the Management
$100,000.00
of Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer
Med-IQ, LLC
Moving Beyond the Guidelines in the Management of
$135,207.00
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer
Med-IQ, LLC
New Horizons In Dyslipidemia Management: An
$121,862.00
Interactive Digital Publication
Collaboration \3\
Med-IQ, LLC Taking Control of Your
New and Emerging Insulins: The Top 10 Things You Need
$568,909.00
Diabetes
to Know About Biosimilars and Other Novel Insulins on
the Therapeutic Horizon
Med-IQ, LLC Taking Control of Your
Practical Strategies to Address Postprandial
$722,362.00
Diabetes
Hyperglycemia in Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes: An
Collaboration \3\
Important Aspect of Overall Diabetes Care
Med-IQ, LLC Taking Control of Your
Making the Connection: Advancing Clinical Care and
$200,000.00
Diabetes
Improving Adherence for Patients with Diabetes
Medscape, LLC
Advances in Ultra Rapid-Acting Insulin
$732,600.00
Medscape, LLC
A Balancing Act in CKD-MBD: Managing Hyperphosphatemia
$377,300.00
and Cardiovascular Disease
Medscape, LLC
Anti-Vegf Therapy in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer:
$99,000.00
Where Are We and What Do We Know?
Collaboration \3\
Medscape, LLC
The Future of Basal Insulin: Improving Patient
$200,000.00
Outcomes by Addressing Unmet Needs
Medscape, LLC
Combination Therapy in The Modern T2D Era
$170,000.00
Medscape, LLC
Long-Term Efficacy and Safety of Phosphate Binders for
$209,500.00
Hyperphosphatemia in CKD-MBD
Medscape, LLC
Comprehensive Management of CKD-MBD: Hands-on Case
$192,000.00
Studies
Medscape, LLC
An Update on LDL-C Management: Current Guidelines,
$450,000.00
Treatment, and Future Recommendations
Medscape, LLC
Highlights on Multiple Sclerosis Management From AAN
$100,000.00
2015
Michigan Council of Nurse
Update in Arthritis Medication: Clearing Up the
$1,600.00
Practitioners
Confusion Michigan Council of Nurse Practitioners
Annual Conference
Michigan State Medical Society
2015 Diabetes and Lipid Updates
$5,000.00
Minnesota Optometric Association
Eyes on Fabry Minnesota Optometric Association's
$5,100.00
Fabry Support & Information Group
Metro Society
Montefiore Medical Center
Multiple Sclerosis: Exploring Treatment Options and
$85,000.00
Individualizing Therapy
National Association of Managed Care
Individualizing Treatment Strategies to Improve
$57,000.00
Physicians, Inc.
Patient Outcomes in the Management of Type 2 Diabetes
(T2DM)
National Committee for Quality
Strategies for Success As A Patient-Centered Medical
$100,000.00
Assurance (NCQA) Med-IQ, LLC
Home--Diabetes
National Committee for Quality
Strategies for Success As A Patient-Centered Medical
$250,000.00
Assurance (NCQA) Med-IQ, LLC
Home--Dyslipidemia
Collaboration \3\
National Comprehensive Cancer
NCCN 20th Annual Conference General Session: Advancing
$50,000.00
Network, Inc.
the Standard of Cancer CareTM
National Kidney Foundation
Getting Ahead of Metabolic and Mineral Disturbances in
$350,850.00
the Management of CKD-MBD: A Focus on Management
Strategies
National Kidney Foundation
Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI)
$10,000.00
2015
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
24th Annual Fellows Research Forum
$5,000.00
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
Charlotte Patient Empowerment Workshop
$3,500.00
National Lipid Association
Lipid Academy Course Series of 3
$15,000.00
National Lipid Association
Masters in Lipidology Course Series of 3
$15,000.00
National Lipid Association
National Lipid Association's 2015 Scientific Meeting
$55,000.00
Series
National Lipid Association
National Lipid Association's 2015 Scientific Meeting
$70,000.00
Series
Collaboration \3\
National Lipid Association
2015 National Lipid Association's Masters in
$30,000.00
Lipidology and Lipid Academy Course Series
Collaboration \3\
National Lipid Association Continuing
Dyslipidemia: New Challenges and Emerging Options in
$248,160.00
Education Alliance, LLC
Lowering CVD RISK
Collaboration \3\
National Tay-Sachs & Allied Diseases
NTSAD Science Symposium & Workshop For Researchers &
$10,000.00
Association, Inc.
Healthcare Professionals
Nebraska Academy of Physician
Renal Medication Dosing: The Good, the Bad and the
$4,000.00
Assistants
Latrogenic
New Jersey Academy of Family
The Future of Basal Insulin: Improving Patient
$399,550.00
Physicians Medscape, LLC
Outcomes by Addressing Unmet Needs
New Mexico Optometric Association
Genetics, Gene Therapy and Stem Cell Therapy in Eye
$2,500.00
Inc.
Care--The Future is Here
North American Center for Continuing
(CRS 2015) Therapeutic Advances in
$310,100.00
Medical Education, LLC Horizon CME,
Hypercholesterolemia: Examining the Role of PCSK-9
Collaboration \3\
Inc.
Inhibitors in Addressing Unmet Needs
North American Center for Continuing
Overcoming Systemic Barriers To Optimized
$274,805.00
Medical Education, LLC Horizon CME,
Hematopoeitic Stem Cell Transplants
Inc.
Nurse Practitioner Alternatives
Caring for the Patient 2015
$118,400.00
International Organization of
Multiple Sclerosis Nurses
Oakstone Publishing, LLC PeerVoice
When Statins Are Not Enough: State of the Science in
$256,350.00
America Limited
Targeting Residual CV Risk
Collaboration \3\
Ohio State University
Neuromuscular Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Penn State University Antidote
15th Annual Diabetes Symposium
$18,000.00
Education Company
Penn State University PeerView
Peerview Inplay: ``A Game-Based Approach to Patient-
$199,300.00
Institute for Medical Education,
Centered Hypercholesterolemia Management''
Collaboration \3\
Inc.
Penn State University PeerView
Peerview Video In session, ``Approved Disease-
$139,375.00
Institute for Medical Education,
Modifying Therapies For Multiple Sclerosis
Inc.
Management: What Can We Learn From Recently Presented
Data?''
Penn State University PeerView
Peerview Select-A-Scenario Live, ``Applying The Latest
$74,210.00
Institute for Medical Education,
Evidence To Guide Treatment Decision-Making in CRPC:
Inc.
Real Cases, Difficult Choices--You Make the Call''
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
Overcoming Challenges and Optimizing Insulin Therapy
$216,040.00
Professional Education
in Type 2 Diabetes
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
A Guide to Optimizing Insulin Therapy in Type 2
$175,730.00
Professional Education
Diabetes in the Managed Care Setting: Guidelines, New
and Emerging Insulin Analogs, and Challenges in
Management a Satellite Symposium at the 2015 AMCP
Annual Meeting
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
Overcoming Challenges of Insulin Therapy in Type 2
$128,495.00
Professional Education
Diabetes: Exploring Emerging Options
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
8th Annual Interdisciplinary Prostate Cancer Congress
$15,000.00
and Other Genitourinary Malignancies
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine C- New Frontiers and Treatment Advances for Atopic
$350,000.00
MEducation Resources, LLC
Dermatitis: Focus on the Role of Established and
Collaboration \3\
Evolving Biologic Therapies for Patients with
Moderate-to-Severe and Treatment-Resistant Atopic
Dermatitis
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
20th Anniversary Scottsdale Prostate Cancer Symposium
$15,000.00
Diversified Conference Management,
Inc.
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Differentiating Therapeutic Approaches for Relapsing
$50,000.00
Enquiring Minds LLC
Multiple Sclerosis
Primary Care Education Consortium
Managing Postprandial Hyperglycemia in Type 2
$230,465.30
Diabetes: Combining Basal Insulin and Glucagon-Like
Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists
Primary Care Education Consortium
Strategies for Intensifying Insulin Management in Type
$275,955.15
2 Diabetes
PRIME Education Inc. (PRIME)
Shifting Paradigms in Lipid Management
$215,850.00
Collaboration \3\
PRIME Education Inc. (PRIME)
New Therapies and Evidence for Patient-Centered
$205,000.00
Hypercholesterolemia Care--Evolving Roles for
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacists
PRIME Education Inc. (PRIME)
Evidence-Based Decisions and a Mock P&T: The Role of
$161,020.00
New LDL-C Reduction Therapy
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
Optimizing Insulin Therapy for Patients with Type 2
$805,275.00
Diabetes: Existing Challenges and New Opportunities
for Improved Care
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
Evolving Insulin Therapy: Optimizing Care Through
$812,950.00
Horizon CME, Inc.
Proper Selection & Use
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
Combining GLP-1 Receptor Agonists With Basal Insulin:
$797,090.00
Horizon CME, Inc.
Realizing the Potential in Type 2 Diabetes
ProCE, Inc.
Safe Use of Concentrated Insulin: Helping Patients to
$87,575.00
Get It Right
Purdue University Medikinetics LLC
Addressing Postprandial Glucose Excursions in Type 2
$363,648.00
Diabetes with Inhaled Insulin
Purdue University PeerView Institute
Peerview Video Inexchange, ``Contemporary Multiple
$38,000.00
for Medical Education, Inc.
Sclerosis Management: Identifying and Overcoming
Challenges in the Managed Care Setting''
Regents of the University of
5th Annual UC Irvine Health Neuromuscular Colloquium
$20,000.00
California
Regents of the University of Colorado
Practical Ways to Achieve Targets in Diabetes Care
$200,000.00
Regents of the University of Colorado
Aspen Lung Conference Asthma 2015: Mechanisms to
$5,000.00
Personalized Medicine/Thomas Petty Aspen Lung
Collaboration \3\
Conference
Regents of the University of
Pharmacotherapy of Inherited Metabolic Diseases PharmD
$75,000.00
Minnesota
Post-Doctoral Fellowship
Regents of the University of
Transplant Immunosuppression 2015: Improving Outcomes
$50,000.00
Minnesota
Research To Practice
Data + Perspectives: Clinical Investigators Review Key
$100,000.00
Publications And Current Cases in Advanced Prostate
Cancer? An Independent Satellite Symposium (ISS)
Series Held as Ancillary Events During The 2015
Genitourinary Cancers Symposium
Rush University Medical Center
Rush University Medical Center Thyroid Cancer
$20,000.00
Symposium
Saint Joseph's Regional Medical
Chronic Kidney Disease for the Excellent Internist
$2,700.00
Center
Saint Louis University School of
Role of Inflammation in Neurologic & Psychiatric
$5,850.00
Medicine
Diseases: Implications for Clinical Practice
Scripps Health
Type 2 DM-Emerging Therapeutic Trends in OADS and
$330,257.00
Insulin Combinations 2015: ADA Symposium
Scripps Health
Scripps' 35th Annual Conference: Clinical Hematology
$15,000.00
and Oncology 2015
Scripps Health
Advanced Therapeutic Interventions to Optimize Obesity
$50,000.00
and DM Care
Scripps Health
Emerging Therapeutic Trends to Optimize Diabetes Care
$50,000.00
Society for Urologic Nurses and
Expert Perspectives in Advanced Prostate Cancer:
$30,000.00
Associates (SUNA) Plexus
Practical Issues And Considerations for Nurses
Communications
Southeastern Regional Genetics
Lysosomal Storage Disease Workgroup Meeting
$2,000.00
Groups, Inc. (SERGG)
Southern Alliance for Physician
Comprehensive Management of Thyroid and Parathyroid
$8,500.00
Specialties CME
Diseases
St. Dominic-Jackson Memorial Hospital
Managing the Diabetes Spectrum in the Pediatric and
$10,000.00
Adult Populations: Pre-Diabetes, Type 1 and Type 2
Stony Brook University
Hands on Cadaver Training in Colon And Rectal Diseases
$5,000.00
Robotics, Laparoscopy, Endoscopy, Abdominal Wall
Reconstruction
Swedish Medical Center Foundation
Thyroid Cancer and Parathyroid Disease - A Practical
$8,000.00
Approach
Texas Academy of Family Physicians
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease in Primary Care
$3,000.00
At The 2015 C. Frank Webber Lectureship
The Board of Trustees of the
Fabry Nephrology Fellowship
$75,000.00
University of Alabama for the
University of Alabama at Birmingham
The Board of Trustees of the UA for
Mini-Symposium on Fabry Disease: Prospects for
$17,536.00
the UA at Birmingham
Improved Care
The Children's Mercy Hospital
12th Annual Great Plains Pediatric and Adult Endocrine
$3,000.00
Symposium
The Endocrine Society
Overcoming Barriers in Diabetes Management with
$512,978.00
Individualized Treatment Strategies
The Endocrine Society
PCSK9 Inhibition--A Revolution in Cholesterol Therapy
$272,029.00
Collaboration \3\
The Endocrine Society
Endo 2015 Thyroid Cancer Sessions
$73,000.00
Collaboration \3\
The Endocrine Society
Endo 2015 Diabetes Sessions
$50,000.00
The Endocrine Society
Maximizing Benefits of Incretin-Based Therapy in Type
$135,056.00
2 Diabetes
The Endocrine Society American
Diabetes Masters Series 2015--Solving The Puzzle:
$235,867.00
Association of Diabetes Educators
Current Approaches to Providing Quality T2DM Care
The France Foundation American
Diabetes: Making the Right Choice in a Sea of
$121,080.00
Academy of Physician Assistants
Treatment Options
The France Foundation
MS Clinical Dialogs: A Peer Discussion on Optimal
$76,547.00
Treatment (Phase 2)
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
The Eighth Annual Diabetes Symposium of Wisconsin
$5,000.00
Inc.
The Ohio State University,
Endocrine Update 2015
$10,000.00
The University of Texas MD Anderson
6th Current Concepts in the Management of Thyroid &
$20,000.00
Cancer Center
Parathyroid Neoplasms
The University of Texas Southwestern
37th Annual Carrell-Krusen Neuromuscular Symposium
$20,000.00
Medical Center at Dallas
The University of Texas Southwestern
Neuromuscular Medicine Fellowship
$74,100.00
Medical Center at Dallas
The University of Toledo
Outcomes of Myeloma: The Optimizing Sequenxe of
$3,000.00
Treatments Including Transplant
Trustees of Columbia University in
Renal Biopsy in Medical Diseases of the Kidneys
$3,500.00
the City of New York
UC Regents
Diabetes Update and Advances In Endocrinology And
$7,500.00
Metabolism
UC Regents
LSD Genetic Counseling Fellowship
$75,000.00
Ultimate Medical Academy, LLC dba
Cutting Edge Of Transplantation 2015
$30,000.00
Global Education Group American
Society of Transplantation
University of California Irvine
Genetic Neuromuscular Diseases Fellowship
$75,000.00
University of California, San Diego
34th Annual Advanced Nephrology: Nephrology for the
$10,000.00
Consultant
University of California, San Diego
20th International Conference on Advances in Critical
$5,000.00
CRRT Inc.
Care Nephrology--AKI & CRRT 2015
University of Cincinnati CORE Medical
Navigating the Evolving Therapeutic Landscape in
$65,500.00
Education, LLC.
Advanced Prostate Cancer
University of Cincinnati Paradigm
Multidisciplinary Approach to Charting a Treatment
$94,650.00
Medical Communications, LLC
Course for Men with Metastatic Castration-Resistant
Prostate Cancer
University of Cincinnati Paradigm
Advancing Treatment Strategies in Metastatic
$95,000.00
Medical Communications, LLC
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer: The Urologist's
Role
University of Florida
Pediatric Neuromuscular Fellowship
$75,000.00
University of Florida Foundation
Southern Salt, Water, and Kidney Club 56th Annual
$5,000.00
Scientific Meeting
University of Kansas Endowment
Neuromuscular Review Course Series 2015
$60,000.00
Association
University of Massachusetts Medical
MS Practice Update: Managing Walking Impairment,
$30,000.00
School
Neurogenic Bladder, Bowel and Sexual Dysfunction in
Multiple Sclerosis
University of Massachusetts Medical
Understanding and Applying New Advances in Basal
$303,080.00
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
Insulin Therapy
University of Massachusetts Medical
The IQ&A Interactive Diabetes Intelligence Zone: Focus
$152,000.00
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
on Inhaled Insulin, Combination Regimens, and
Postprandial Hyperglycemia
University of Massachusetts Medical
Novel Mechanisms and Advancing Therapeutic Paradigms
$336,000.00
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
for Optimizing LDL--Focused Management and
Collaboration \3\
Cardioprotection in the Diabetic Patient
University of Massachusetts Medical
New Frontiers and Treatment Advances for Atopic
$366,000.00
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
Dermatitis: Focus on the Role of Established and
Collaboration \3\
Evolving Biologic Therapies for Patients with
Moderate-to-Severe and Treatment-Resistant Atopic
Dermatitis
University of Massachusetts Medical
New Frontiers and Treatment Advances in Rheumatoid
$345,000.00
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
Arthritis: Focus on Mechanisms of Action, Cytokine-
Collaboration \3\
Mediated Inflammation and the Evidence for Safe and
Effective Therapy for RA Through Inhibition of the IL-
6 Cytokine and Other Signaling Systems
University of Massachusetts Medical
Novel Mechanisms and Advancing Therapeutic Paradigms
$465,900.00
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
for Optimizing LDL-Focused Management of Primary and
Collaboration \3\
Familial Hypercholesterolemia
University of Massachusetts Medical
Understanding and Applying New Advances in Basal
$971,000.00
School C-M Education Resources, LLC
Insulin Therapy
University of Massachusetts Medical
New Frontiers and Emerging Treatment Paradigms for
$347,000.00
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
Optimizing LDL-Targeted Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Collaboration \3\
University of Miami
Pediatric Nephrology Seminar XLII and Renal Pathology
$10,000.00
Course
University of Pittsburgh
Seventh Annual Multidisciplinary Thyroid Cancer
$3,250.00
Symposium: Integrating the New ATA Guidelines into
Clinical Practice
University of Rochester, School of
2015 Society for Investigative Dermatology Annual
$10,000.00
Medicine and Dentistry Society of
Meeting
Collaboration \3\
Investigative Dermatology
University of Southern California
37th Thyroid Symposium 2015: Practical Solutions To
$10,000.00
Complex Clinical Problems
University of the Pacific Horizon
Basal Insulin Therapy in the Treatment of Insulin
$223,275.00
CME, Inc.
Resistant Type 2 Diabetes: The Role of the Pharmacist
in Ensuring Their Safe and Effective Use
University of Virginia
The 39th Annual Fitz-Hugh Symposium: Contemporary
$10,000.00
Management and Cutting Edge Advances in
Otolaryngology--Head & Neck Surgery (Special Emphasis
on Laryngology and Head & Neck Endocrine Surgery)
USF Health Professions Conferencing
12th Annual Rocky Mountain Metabolic Syndrome
$5,000.00
Corporation CEConsultants, LLC
Symposium
VHA Inc.
Treating Elevated LDL-C: Beyond Statins
$85,000.00
Collaboration \3\
Wellmont Health System
13th Annual Diabetes Symposium
$4,000.00
Yale University
Diabetes 2015
$50,000.00
Yale University
2015 New England Thyroid Club Program
$10,000.00
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q3, 2015 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Jul 2015-30th Sep 2015
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academic CME, LLC
APPLYING ADVANCED TREATMENT STRATEGIES WITHIN
326,430
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Collaboration \3\
AKH Inc. Advancing Knowledge and
FLORIDA SOCIETY OF RHEUMATOLOGY 2015 ANNUAL CME
5,000
Healthcare Florida Society of
CONFERENCE
Rheumatology
American Academy of Continuing
TRANSLATING CLINICAL DATA INTO NEPHROLOGY PRACTICE IN
149,800
Medical Education, Inc.
THE MANAGEMENT OF HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA
American Association of Clinical
HEARTLAND-AACE 6TH ANNUAL MEETING
7,500
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
ILLINOIS CHAPTER OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
5,000
Endocrinologists
CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS 5TH ANNUAL METING
American Association of Diabetes
INHALED INSULIN A BREATH OF FRESH AIR FOR THE
62,800
Educators Horizon CME, Inc.
TREATMENT OF DIABETES
American Diabetes Association
30TH ANNUAL CLINICAL CONFERENCE ON DIABETES: BEYOND
25,000
THE NUMBERS
American Diabetes Association
DIABETES AND ENDOCRINE DISORDERS FOR THE GENERALIST
5,000
AND SPECIALIST
American Diabetes Association
TRANSITIONS OF CARE THROUGH THE DIABETES LIFESPAN
5,000
American Society of Nephrology
ASN BOARD REVIEW COURSE AND UPDATE
15,000
American Society of Nephrology
CALCIUM OR NO CALCIUM: THAT IS THE QUESTION
125,825
American Urological Association
ESTABLISHING AN ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER CLINIC: A
60,000
Education & Research, Inc.
PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR THE UROLOGY CLINIC
Association of Family Practice
JOINT ASPIRATION/INJECTION WORKSHOP
5,300
Physician Assistants
Cardiovascular Society of Buffalo and
UNDERSTANDIJG FABRY DISEASE FROM A CARDIAC PERSPECTIVE
7,000
Western NY SUNY AT BUFFALO CME
OFFICE
Cleveland Clinic Educational
CURRENT AND FUTURE THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS TARGETING
80,000
Foundation
RESIDUAL CVD RISK: EMERGING THERAPIES FOR THE
Collaboration \3\
TREATMENT OF DYSLIPIDEMIA
CME Outfitters, LLC
RISKY BUSINESS: UNDERSTANDING AND ATTENUATING RISK
207,090
ASSOCIATED WITH DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPY IN
RELAPSING-REMITTING MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
EXPERT DEBATES IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: OPPOSING VIEWS
125,000
Centers Nurse Practitioner
IN MANAGEMENT
Alternatives
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
PATIENTGPS?: CLINICAL PATHS TO EXPLORE TREATMENT
100,000
Centers Nurse Practitioner
OPTIONS AND INDIVIDUALIZE THERAPY IN MULTIPLE
Alternatives
SCLEROSIS
Dignity Health MandatoryCE LLC
2ND ANNUAL NEW MEXICO REGIONAL DIABETES SYMPOSIUM
45,000
FORE
2015 ORTHOPAEDICS FOR THE PRIMARY CARE PRACTITIONER &
4,000
REHABILITATION THERAPIST
Humboldt-Del Norte Consortium for
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
4,100
Continuing Medical Education
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS AND ITS MIMICS
1,920
Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
ADVANCES IN PEDIATRIC FOOD ALLERGY
15,000
Sinai
Institute for the Advancement of
LEARNER-DIRECTED CME: WHAT DO PRIMARY CARE PROVIDERS
49,500
Human Behavior Answers in CME, Inc.
NEED TO KNOW ABOUT THE LATEST ADVANCES IN THE
TREATMENT HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
Johns Hopkins University Advanced
THE 11TH ANNUAL JOHNS HOPKINS MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
210,000
Studies in Medicine
SYMPOSIUM SERIES
Johns Hopkins University Advanced
COMPREHENSIVE CARE FOR PATIENTS WITH GAUCHER DISEASE:
195,100
Studies in Medicine
EMERGING CONCEPTS FOR IMPROVED OUTCOMES
Johns Hopkins University Medical
MANAGEMENT OF PERSISTENT HYPERGLYCEMIA IN TYPE 2
81,750
Logix, LLC
DIABETES: BEYOND STARTING DOSES OF BASAL INSULIN
Medical Education Resources Tarsus
THE EVOLUTION OF INSULIN THERAPY: NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN
100,000
Cardio Inc. dba Health Science Media
TREATMENT, TECHNOLOGY, AND METHODS OF ADMINISTRATION
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW INREVIEW, RISING TO THE CHALLENGE: FOSTERING
100,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
EFFECTIVE PATIENTPROVIDER COMMUNICATION THROUGHOUT
Education, Inc.
THE COURSE OF POMPE DISEASE
Medical University of South Carolina
1ST ANNUAL NEPHROLOGY TRANSPLANT SYMPOSIUM FOR
2,500
NEPHROLOGISTS, PRIMARY CARE AND HOSPITALISTS
Med-IQ, LLC
TARGETING MODERATE-TO-SEVERE ATOPIC DERMATITIS:
99,896
EVOLVING TREATMENT STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS A KEY UNMET
Collaboration \3\
MEDICAL NEED
Med-IQ, LLC
CASE SIMULATIONS IN TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME: AGGRESSIVE
100,000
PROPHYLAXIS STRATEGIES TO PREVENT ADVERSE PATIENT
OUTCOMES
Med-IQ, LLC
UPDATE FOR CLINICIANS: THE POTENTIAL OF IL-6
104,578
INHIBITORS TO REVOLUTIONIZE RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Collaboration \3\
TREATMENT
Medscape, LLC
A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO THE PREVENTION OF SURGICAL
160,000
ADHESIONS
Medscape, LLC
IDENTIFYING AND ADDRESSING INADEQUATELY MANAGED
138,500
OSTEOARTHRITIS PAIN
Medscape, LLC
GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS IN T2D MANAGEMENT: THE MODERN
105,100
INJECTABLE
Missouri Academy of Physician
THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE IATROGENIC?
3,500
Assistants
Missouri Academy of Physician
JOINT INJECTIONS
5,000
Assistants
Montefiore Medical Center PlatformQ
A COMPREHENSIVE PERSPECTIVE ON INSULIN REPLACEMENT FOR
100,000
Health Education, LLC
TYPE 2 DIABETES
Montefiore Medical Center PlatformQ
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: EXPLORING TREATMENT OPTIONS AND
85,000
Health Education, LLC
INDIVIDUALIZING THERAPY
National Association of Managed Care
ADVANCES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: A
57,000
Physicians, Inc.
CLOSER LOOK AT NOVEL THERAPIES
National Association of Managed Care
INDIVIDUALIZING TREATMENT STRATEGIES FOR EFFECTIVE A1C
57,000
Physicians, Inc.
REDUCTION AND IMPROVED OUTCOMES IN TYPE 2 DIABETES
National Jewish Health California
CSAAI 23RD ANNUAL EDUCATIONAL MEETING
10,000
Society of Allergy, Asthma and
Collaboration \3\
Immunology
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
GREENSBORO PATIENT EMPOWERMENT WORKSHOP
3,500
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE & THE PRIMARY CARE
25,000
PRACTITIONER: EARLY SCREENING AND PREVENTION FOR THE
AT-RISK PATIENT
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
11TH ANNUAL JOINT MEETING OF THE UPSTATE AND WESTERN
5,000
NEW YORK COUNCILS ON RENAL NUTRITION
National Medical Association
NEW TYPE 2 DIABETES GUIDELINES AND THE TREND TOWARD
100,000
NEWER PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT
North American Center for Continuing
IMPLEMENTING BEST PRACTICES FOR TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME
100,000
Medical Education, LLC Horizon CME,
Inc.
Not-For-Profit Hospital Corporation
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE: STATE OF THE ART 2015
1,900
Pennsylvania Academy of Family
PA ACADEMY OF FAMILY PHYSICIANS FOUNDATION A1C
150,000
Physicians Foundation
CHALLENGE
Pennsylvania Society of Physician
THYROID MASSES
8,400
Assistants
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
CONVENIENT CARE OPPORTUNITIES TO OPTIMIZING INSULIN
48,689
Professional Education
THERAPY IN TREATMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
AJPB QUALITY FORUM: IMPLEMENTATION OF QUALITY MEASURES
50,000
Professional Education PQA, Inc.
TO IMPROVE OUTCOMES IN DYSLIPIDEMIA
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
AJPB QUALITY FORUM: AIMING FOR A FIVE-STAR RATING IN
50,000
Professional Education PQA, Inc.
DIABETES CARE: MANAGED CARE PLANS AND COMMUNITY
PHARMACIST COLLABORATION
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
ADDRESSING HYPOGLYCEMIA IN TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS:
30,000
LLC Medical Logix, LLC
THE PHARMACISTS ROLE IN OPTIMIZING PATIENT OUTCOMES
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine C- NOVEL MECHANISMS AND ADVANCING THERAPEUTIC PARADIGMS
379,000
MEducation Resources, LLC
FOR OPTIMIZING LDL-FOCUSED MANAGEMENT AND
Collaboration \3\
CARDIOPROTECTION IN THE DIABETIC PATIENT
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine C- THE IQ&A INTERACTIVE CARDIOVASCULAR INTELLIGENCE ZONE:
238,100
MEducation Resources, LLC
NEW FRONTIERS IN LDL-TARGETED CV RISK REDUCTION
Collaboration \3\
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
2015 FALL LEARNING SERIES
35,000
Association
PRIME Education Inc. (PRIME)
CASE-BASED DEBATES ABOUT UTILITY OF PCSK9 INHIBITORS
123,000
IN PATIENT POPULATIONS FOR LIPID REDUCTION
Collaboration \3\
PRIME Education Inc. (PRIME)
INTERNATIONAL INSIGHTS ON TREATMENT ADVANCES FOR
166,077
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Collaboration \3\
PRIME Education Inc. (PRIME)
NEW CHALLENGES IN THE PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF
78,810
TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME IN PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC
LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
DYSLIPIDEMIA IN PRIMARY CARE: NEW GUIDELINE
250,000
Horizon CME, Inc.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND TREATMENT OPTIONS
Collaboration \3\
ProCE, Inc. Institute for Safe
CONCENTRATED INSULIN: SAFE USE IN THE HOSPITAL AND
102,233
Medication Practices
TRANSITIONS OF CARE
Projects In Knowledge, Inc.
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS @ POINT OF CARE
200,000
Regents of the University of Colorado
RENAL DISEASE & ELECTROLYTE DISORDERS COURSE
3,000
Regents of the University of Colorado
PEDIATRIC AND ADULT DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CANCER, ARE
75,000
American Thyroid Association
THEY DIFFERENT?
Regents, University of California
THIRD ANNUAL UCLA REVIEW OF CLINICAL NEUROLOGY
15,000
Rush University Medical Center Plexus
DEVELOPING AN INTEGRATIVE APPROACH TO METASTATIC
65,000
Communications
PROSTATE CANCER: MAKING IT PERSONAL TO IMPROVE
CLINICAL OUTCOMES
Rutgers, The State University of New
8TH ANNUAL PERSPECTIVES IN RHEUMATIC DISEASES,
10,000
Jersey Global Academy for Medical
PRESENTED BY RHEUMATOLOGY NEWS, INTERNAL MEDICINE
Collaboration \3\
Education, LLC
NEWS, FAMILY PRACTICE NEWS
South Dakota Academy of Physician
DIABETIC MANAGEMENT
3,500
Assistants
Tennessee Academy of Physician
FALLFEST 2015-RENAL DISEASE
2,500
Assistants
Texas A&M University System Health
11TH ANNUAL DIABETES CONFERENCE
10,000
Science Center Coastal Be
The Boston Home
CARING FOR THE PATIENT WITH ADVANCED MULTIPLE
10,000
SCLEROSIS
The Endocrine Society
UPDATE IN BASAL INSULINS: YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED
129,040
The Endocrine Society
2015 CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGY UPDATE
25,000
The Endocrine Society
2015 CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGY UPDATE
25,000
The France Foundation
MS CLINICAL DIALOGS: A PEER DISCUSSION ON OPTIMAL
76,547
TREATMENT (PHASE 2)
The France Foundation National
A MULTI-DISCIPLINARY APPROACH TO LIMB-GIRDLE MUSCLE
240,794
Society of Genetic Counselors
WEAKNESS DYSTROPHY AND RELATED CONDITIONS MANAGEMENT
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
INTERACTIVE UPDATES IN USE OF STEM CELL MOBILIZATION
120,000
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing Co.,
FOR THE TREATMENT OF BLOOD RELATED CANCERS
Ltd.
Ultimate Medical Academy, LLC dba
IMPROVING OUTCOMES IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: TREATING
162,588
Global Education Group Integritas
TO TARGET, IL-6-DIRECTED THERAPIES, AND EVOLVING
Collaboration \3\
Communications, LLC
MANAGEMENT ALGORITHMS
UMA MLG, LLC
THE CHANGING LANDSCAPE OF DYSLIPIDEMIA TREATMENT
198,900
Collaboration \3\
UMA MLG, LLC
A 3-DIMENSIONAL VIEW INTO THE ROLE OF GLP1 IN TYPE-2
30,000
DIABETES: EXPLORING EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINES AS
PATIENT-CENTERED THERAPY
University of California, San Diego
PROMOTING BEHAVIOR CHANGE IN DIABETES: A SKILL
50,000
Behavioral Diabetes Institute
BUILDING PROGRAM FOR HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS A
University of Cincinnati Global
THE KNEE COURSE 2015
19,500
Academy for Medical Education, LLC
University of Virginia Renal
RENAL PHYSICIANS ASSOCIATION 2015 ADVANCED
12,500
Physicians Association
PRACTITIONER CONFERENCE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q3, 2015 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Oct 2015-31st Dec 2015
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of Physician
2015 ADULT HOSPITAL MEDICINE BOOT CAMP
2,500
Assistants
American Association of Clinical
NEW ENGLAND CHAPTER OF AACE 7TH ANNUAL MEETING
5,000
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
DIABETES DAY FOR PRIMARY CARE CLINICIANS EDUCATIONAL
50,000
Endocrinologists
SERIES
American Neurological Association
2015 AMERICAN NEUROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION 140TH ANNUAL
25,000
MEETING
ANNA Chapter 125, 126, and 133
ANNA NJ COLLABORATIVE 2015
3,000
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
INITIATING AND ADVANCING MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS THERAPIES:
125,000
at Eisenhower Postgraduate Institute
IMPROVING PATIENT CARE AND HEALTH OUTCOMES
for Medicine
Baylor University Medical Center dba
FOLLOWING THE EVIDENCE A PRACTICAL, CASE BASED
45,975
A. Webb Roberts Center MedNet, LLC
APPROACH TO PERSONALIZED TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
California Optometric Association
2015 MONTEREY SYMPOSIUM
7,416
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
5TH ANNUAL SYMPOSIUM ON LYSOSOMAL STORAGE DISORDERS
26,010
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
4TH CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL MS COGNITION
56,280
Centers Nurse Practitioner
SOCIETY IN COLLABORATION WITH THE CONSORTIUM OF
Alternatives
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS CENTERS
Harris County Optometric Society
EYES ON FABRY HARRIS COUNTY OPTOMETRIC SOCIETY
7,000
Fabry Support & Information Group
Horizon CME, Inc.
STRATEGIES FOR SELECTION AND OPTIMAL SEQUENCING OF
85,000
CURRENT TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR METASTATIC CASTRATION-
RESISTANT PROSTATE CANCER
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
3RD NY MASTERS COURSE IN ENDOCRINOLOGY AND ENDOCRINE
15,000
Sinai
SURGERY
Indiana Academy of Physician
THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE IATROGENIC (RENAL MEDICATION
3,250
Assistants
DOSING)
Letters & Sciences
ADVANCES IN MS RESEARCH & PRACTICE 2015 ANNUAL
70,000
CONFERENCE
Medical Education Resources Tarsus
2015 CMHC SYMPOSIUM: NOVEL THERAPIES FOR LDL-C
40,000
Cardio Inc. dba Health Science Media
LOWERING IN THE FIGHT AGAINST RESIDUAL ASCVD RISK
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW IN EXCHANGE, ESTABLISHING BEST PRACTICES FOR
140,325
PeerView Institute for Medical
THE PERSONALIZED CARE OF PATIENTS WITH MULTIPLE
Education, Inc.
SCLEROSIS: A TIMELY DISCUSSION AMONG ADVANCED
PRACTICE CLINICIANS?
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW VIDEO IN SESSION, CLINICAL HIGHLIGHTS FROM
134,450
PeerView Institute for Medical
BARCELONA: AN UP-TO-DATE REVIEW OF NEW DATA ON
Education, Inc.
APPROVED DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR MULTIPLE
SCLEROSIS MANAGEMENT?
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
2016 ACMG--PEERVIEW LIVE, ENSURING THE RAPID
239,950
PeerView Institute for Medical
IDENTIFICATION AND INDIVIDUALIZED MANAGEMENT OF
Education, Inc.
GAUCHER DISEASE TYPE 1: KEY PRINCIPLES AND STRATEGIES
Med-IQ,
LLC NEW THERAPIES FOR GAUCHER'S DISEASE: TALK TO YOUR
147,396
PHARMACIST
Med-IQ, LLC
EARLIER RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT OF GAUCHER'S DISEASE
135,728
IN HEMATOLOGY CLINICS
Med-IQ, LLC
RECOGNIZING THE UNLIKELY: IMPROVING IDENTIFICATION AND
246,977
CARE OF FABRY DISEASE
Michigan State Medical Society
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE IN PATIENTS WITH RENAL DISEASE
2,500
National Jewish Health
38TH ANNUAL PULMONARY AND ALLERGY UPDATE
10,000
Collaboration \3\
National Jewish Health Western
WSAAI 54TH ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC SESSION
10,000
Society of Allergy, Asthma and
Collaboration \3\
Immunology (WSAAI)
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
NATIONAL KIDNEY FOUNDATION'S 47TH ANNUAL MEDICAL
2,500
SYMPOSIUM
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
Research Symposium 2015: MS Research Discoveries:
3,000
New York Chapter
Wellness and Treatments for Living Your Best Life
Pennsylvania Society of Physician
RENAL MEDICATION DOSING: THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE
4,000
Assistants
IATROGENIC
PESI, Inc. Metabolic Endocrine
13TH ANNUAL WORLD CONGRESS ON INSULIN RESISTANCE,
15,000
Education Foundation
DIABETES AND CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE--WCIRDC
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
FAILURE IS NOT AN OPTION: SELECTING OPTIMAL STEM CELL
205,195
AXIS Medical Education, Inc.
MOBILIZATION STRATEGIES FOR MULTIPLE MYELOMA AND NON-
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
1,800 SECONDS? IN DIABETES MANAGEMENT WITH A GLP-1
75,000
Catamount Medical Education, LLC
RECEPTOR AGONIST AND BASAL INSULIN
Projects In Knowledge, Inc. MedPage
CLINICAL CONTEXT: MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
131,000
Today, LLC
Rutgers, The State University of New
THE FOURTH EVIDENCE-BASED PEDIATRIC UPDATE SYMPOSIUM
5,000
Jersey
Rutgers, The State University of New
SKIN DISEASE EDUCATION FOUNDATION'S 16TH ANNUAL LAS
5,000
Jersey Global Academy for Medical
VEGAS DERMATOLOGY SEMINAR, FEATURING THE 12TH ANNUAL
Collaboration \3\
Education, LLC
PSORIASIS FORUM
Society of Nuclear Medicine
SNMMI 2015-2016 THYROID IMAGING AND THERAPY
108,730
EDUCATIONAL OUTREACH FOR REFING PHYSICIANS AND
IMAGING PHYSICIANS
Swedish Medical Center Foundation
FIFTH ANNUAL INTENSIVE UPDATE IN NEUROLOGY
10,000
Swedish Medical Center Foundation
DIABETES MANAGEMENT UPDATE 2015
8,000
The Board of Trustees of the UA for
SPECIAL NEPHROLOGY RESEARCH AND TRAINING CENTER
15,000
the UA at Birmingham
SYMPOSIUM--11/9/15
The University of Texas Southwestern
NEUROTHERAPEUTICS UPDATE
5,000
Medical Center at Dallas
Tufts University School of Medicine
IMPROVING CARE FOR HEART FAILURE PATIENTS: AN UPDATE
5,000
FOR HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS - THE 8TH ANNUAL NEW ENGLAND
HEART FAILURE AND TRANSPLANT NETWORK CONFERENCE
University of Massachusetts Medical
NEW FRONTIERS AND EMERGING TREATMENT PARADIGMS FOR
347,000
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
OPTIMIZING LDLTARGETED CARDIOVASCULAR RISK REDUCTION
Collaboration \3\
University of Massachusetts Medical
THE IQ&A INTERACTIVE RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS INTELLIGENCE
189,000
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
ZONE: FOCUS ON THE EVIDENCE BASIS FOR RA MANAGEMENT
Collaboration \3\
THROUGH INHIBITION OF THE IL-6 CYTOKINE AND OTHER
FOUNDATION SIGNALING SYSTEMS
University of Massachusetts Medical
NEW FRONTIERS AND TREATMENT ADVANCES FOR ATOPIC
360,000
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
DERMATITIS: FOCUS ON THE ROLE OF ESTABLISHED AND
Collaboration \3\
EVOLVING BIOLOGIC THERAPIES FOR PEDIATRIC AND ADULT
PATIENTS WITH MODERATE-TO-SEVERE AND TREATMENT-
RESISTANT ATOPIC DERMATITIS
University of Texas Health Science
AMDA INTERNATIONAL PATIENT AND SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE--
60,000
Center at San Antonio Acid Maltase
PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE
Deficiency Association, Inc.
Vindico Medical Education, LLC
IN SEARCH OF THE GUIDING LIGHT: RE-VISITING THE USE OF
372,524
ORAL AND HIGHEFFICACY THERAPIES IN A MODERN ERA OF
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS TREATMENT
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q4, 2015 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Jan 2016-31th Mar 2016
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Admin of the Tulane Educa Fund on
8TH ANNUAL TULANE SYMPOSIUM ON THYROID AND PARATHYROID
7,500
behalf of TUHSC CCE
DISEASES
AKH Inc Advancing Knowledge and
2016 SOUTH BEACH SYMPOSIUM: CLINICAL DERMATOLOGY
5,000
Healthcare
SYMPOSIUM
Collaboration \3\
AKH Inc Advancing Knowledge and
NOVEL MECHANISMS AND ADVANCING THERAPEUTIC PARADIGMS
336,000
Healthcare C-MEducation Resources,
FOR OPTIMIZING LDLFOCUSED MANAGEMENT AND CV RISK
Collaboration \3\
LLC
REDUCTION IN THE DIABETIC PATIENT
American Academy of Continuing
INCREASING ACCESS TO KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION: NOVEL
104,000
Medical Education, Inc. Spire
STRATEGIES TO EXPAND LIVING DONATION
Learning
American Association of Clinical
THYROID SESSIONS AT ENDOCRINE UNIVERSITYr: DISEASE
30,000
Endocrinologists
MANAGEMENT & TECHNOLOGY SKILLS FOR ENDOCRINOLOGY
FELLOWS IN TRAINING
American Association of Clinical
NEVADA AACE THYROID CANCER SYMPOSIUM
5,000
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
LDL-C REDUCTION IN THE PATIENT WITH DIABETES: HOW LOW
267,758
Endocrinologists Medtelligence, LLC
SHOULD WE GO AND HOW SHOULD WE GET THERE?
Collaboration\3\
American College of Cardiology
DYSLIPIDEMIA COMBO-THERAPY: A FRAMEWORK FOR CLINICAL
75,000
Foundation
DECISION-MAKING
Collaboration\3\
American College of Rheumatology
2016 ACR RHEUMATOLOGY COURSES
150,000
Collaboration \3\
American Health Resources, Inc.
EXAMINING THE ROLE OF PCSK9 INHIBITORS IN DYSLIPIDEMIA
4,200
MANAGEMENT
Collaboration \3\
American Kidney Fund
AMERICAN KIDNEY FUND 2016 CLINICAL SCIENTIST IN
75,000
NEPHROLOGY PROGRAM
American Society of Transplant
ASTS 16TH ANNUAL STATE OF THE ART WINTER SYMPOSIUM:
50,000
Surgeons
LIMITED SUPPLY, INCREASING DEMAND: EXPANDING ORGAN
DONATION
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
EXPERTS IN RESIDENCE: BRIDGING THE GAP FROM KNOWLEDGE
110,000
at Eisenhower
TO PRACTICE IN CASTRATION-RESISTANT PROSTATE CANCER
Association of Black Cardiologists,
EVOLVING STRATEGIES FOR CARDIOVASCULAR RISK REDUCTION:
350,000
Inc. National Association for
BEYOND STATIN THERAPY
Collaboration \3\
Continuing Education
Cardiovascular Center of Sarasota
12TH ANNUAL CARDIOVASCULAR SYMPOSIUM CARDIOLOGY UPDATE
5,000
Foundation for Research and Florida
2016: FROM INTERVENTION TO PREVENTION TIME TO FOCUS
Collaboration \3\
Medical Association
ON EARLY CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH
Cardio Renal Society of America
4th ANNUAL CARDIO-RENAL METABOLIC CONFERENCE
6,000
CME Outfitters, LLC
IMPLEMENTING PERSONALIZED ACTION PLANS FOR PATIENTS
99,867.5
WITH ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Collaboration \3\
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
CLINICIAN-PATIENT SHARED DECISION MAKING IN MS: AN
100,860
Centers Nurse Practitioner
ESSENTIAL STEP TOWARD BETTER OUTCOMES
Alternatives
Emory University
EVALUATION OF THE LGMD DIAGNOSTIC TESTING PROGRAM:
5,850
PROGRAM UPDATES, OPPORTUNITIES AND FUTURE WORK
Forefront Collaborative National
CURRENT CONTROVERSIES IN DYSLIPIDEMIA MANAGEMENT: A
85,000
Lipid Association
POINT-COUNTERPOINT DISCUSSION
Collaboration \3\
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
UNDERSTANDING THE EVOLUTION OF MS CARE: OPTIMIZING
43,186
THERAPEUTIC DECISION MAKING
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW INCLINIC, ``MAXIMIZING CARE FOR INDIVIDUALS
145,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
WITH MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: THE ROLE OF
Education, Inc.
INTERPROFESSIONAL EDUCATION''
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW LIVE, "DISRUPTING DISEASE WORSENING IN
296,820
PeerView Institute for Medical
PATIENTS WITH MS: HOW CAN WE HARNESS THE FULL
Education, Inc
POTENTIAL OF AVAILABLE DISEASE-MODIFYING
Med-IQ, LLC
WHEN INSULIN ALONE ISN'T THE ANSWER: A FOCUSED LOOK AT
257,768
COMBINING BASAL INSULIN AND GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Med-IQ, LLC
HOW EARLY IS EARLY? WHEN TO START ERT AND OTHER
160,522
CONSIDERATIONS FOR OPTIMIZING TREATMENT OF FABRY
DISEASE
National Association of Managed Care
EFFECTIVE A1C REDUCTION IN TYPE 2 DIABETES: A CLOSER
75,000
Physicians, Inc.
LOOK AT COMBINATION INSULIN THERAPY
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
CKD-MBD: STATE-OF-THE-ART CONSIDERATIONS FOR OPTIMAL
253,850
University of Illinois at Chicago
OUTCOMES
National Lipid Association
NATIONAL LIPID ASSOCIATION 2016 MASTERS IN LIPIDOLOGY
20,000
COURSE SERIES
Collaboration \3\
National Lipid Association
NATIONAL LIPID ASSOCIATION 2016 LIPID ACADEMY COURSE
20,000
SERIES
Collaboration \3\
Nebraska Academy of Physician
JOINT INJECTION WORKSHOP
5,100
Assistants
Nevada System of Higher Education
2016 WINTER CLINICAL DERMATOLOGY CONFERENCE--HAWAII
50,000
Foundation for Research and
Collaboration \3\
Education in Dermatology
North American Center for Continuing
MEETING THE UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH
415,000
Medical Education, LLC Horizon CME,
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA: A FOCUS ON PCSK9 INHIBITORS
Collaboration \3\
Inc.
NYU School of Medicine
SEMINAR IN ADVANCED RHEUMATOLOGY
20,000
Collaboration \3\
NYU School of Medicine
41ST ANNUAL COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE
5,000
AND REHABILITATION
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES IN
89,160
Professional Education
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: A MANAGED CARE PERSPECTIVE
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
INNOVATION AND CLINICAL ADVANCES IN ACHIEVING GLYCEMIC
240,728
Professional Education
CONTROL: EVALUATING THE EFFICACY OF COMPLIMENTARY
AGENTS
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
THE ROLE OF THE PHARMACIST IN ACHIEVING TIGHT GLYCEMIC
53,346
Professional Education
CONTROL IN TYPE 2 DIABETES: PROMOTING PATIENT SELF-
MONITORING AND AGGRESSIVE TREATMENT
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
2016 NEW YORK GUTM: 9TH ANNUAL INTERDISCIPLINARY
75,000
PROSTATE CANCER CONGRES
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
OPTIMIZED APPROACHES TO INSULIN THERAPY AND GLUCOSE
301,000
LLC
CONTROL IN TYPE 2 DIABETES
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine C- NEW THERAPEUTIC ADVANCES AND PRACTICAL STRATEGIES FOR
309,500
MEducation Resources, LLC
COMPLEMENTARY BASAL INSULIN PLUS INCRETIN SYSTEM-
TARGETED THERAPY TO OPTIMIZE GLUCOSE CONTROL
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine C- NEW THERAPEUTIC ADVANCES AND PRACTICAL STRATEGIES FOR
331,000
MEducation Resources, LLC
COMPLEMENTARY BASAL INSULIN PLUS INCRETIN SYSTEM-
TARGETED THERAPY IN COMPLEX PATIENTS WITH
Primary Care Education Consortium
COMBINING A GLUCAGON-LIKE PEPTIDE-1 RECEPTOR AGONIST
309,985
WITH BASAL INSULIN: THE WHY AND HOW
PRIME Education Inc (PRIME)
NEW TREATMENT GUIDELINES, EVIDENCE, AND AGENTS IN
249,505
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Collaboration \3\
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
HOW TO SELECT AND INITIATE INSULIN THERAPY IN THE TYPE
998,500
Horizon CME, Inc.
2 DIABETES PATIENT
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS AND BASAL INSULIN COMBINATION:
977,000
Horizon CME, Inc.
AN COMPLEMENTARY STRATEGY FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES
TREATMENT INTENSIFICATION
Projects In Knowledge, Inc.
MEDIMAGE CASES: MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
125,000
Rhode Island Hospital, CME
ENDOCRINE GRAND ROUNDS
10,000
Rutgers, The State University of New
SKIN DISEASE EDUCATION FOUNDATION'S 40TH ANNUAL HAWAII
10,000
Jersey Global Academy for Medical
DERMATOLOGY SEMINAR
Collaboration \3\
Education, LLC
ScientiaCME, LLC Specialty Pharma
PROSTATE CANCER: ADVANCES IN PATIENT MANAGEMENT &
14,875
Education Center
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Scripps Health
SCRIPPS WHITTIER DIABETES INSTITUTE'S PROJECT DULCE
50,000
The Endocrine Society Advanced
THE EFFECTIVE USE OF INSULIN IN TYPE 2 DIABETES: A
329,613
Studies in Medicine
FOCUS ON TREATMENT ADVANCES
The Endocrine Society Institute for
DIABETES MASTERS SERIES 2016: INITIATING THE
237,055.5
Medical and Nursing Education
CONVERSATION: SHARING PERSPECTIVES ON ADVANCES IN
T2DM TREATMENT TO IMPROVE PATIENT-CENTERED CARE
The Endocrine Society Scripps Health
NEW COMPLEMENTARY INSULIN COMBINATIONS TO ACHIEVE
361,515
HBA1C TARGETS: 2016 ENDOCRINE SOCIETY ANNUAL
CONVENTION SATELLITE SYMPOSIUM
The Massachusetts General Hospital
CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGY 2016
5,000
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
NEW TITORY FOR THE UROLOGIST: OPTIMAL MONITORING AND
150,000
Inc. Paradigm Medical
TREATMENT SELECTION FOR MCRPC
Communications, LLC
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
OPTIMIZING STEM CELL MOBILIZATION STRATEGIES TO
299,980
Inc. PeerView Institute for Medical
ENHANCE SUCCESS OF AUTOLOGOUS HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL
Education, Inc.
TRANSPLANTATION
The Vitamin D Workshop Inc.
THE 19TH WORKSHOP ON VITAMIN D
5,000
Trustees of Boston University
PCE DIRECTED LEARNING ECOURSE: A MULTIMODAL APPROACH
152,105
Continuing Education Alliance, LLC
TO MANAGING KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS
Trustees of the University of
2016 THYROID MASTER CLASS: MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED
10,000
Pennsylvania/CME
(PROGRESSIVE MEDULLARY AND RAI-REFRACTORY
DIFFERENTIATED) THYROID CANCER AND UPDATE IN THYROID/
PARATHYROID ULTRASOUND IMAGING
University of Cincinnati PeerView
PEERVIEW INREVIEW, ``ACHIEVING RAPID CONTROL OF
68,700
Institute for Medical Education,
DISEASE ACTIVITY IN PATIENTS WITH MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS:
Inc.
THE INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ROLE OF DISEASEMODIFYING''
University of Massachusetts Medical
THE PHYSIOLOGIC BASIS FOR OPTIMIZING GLYCEMIC CONTROL
331,000
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
WITH BASAL INSULIN IN COMPLEX PATIENTS WITH DIABETES
University of Massachusetts Medical
THE FOUNDATIONAL ROLE AND PHYSIOLOGIC BASIS FOR
305,600
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
OPTIMIZING GLYCEMIC CONTROL WITH LONG-ACTING
INSULINS: FOCUS ON THE SAFETY-EFFICACY PROFILES OF
NEW
University of Massachusetts Medical
NEW FRONTIERS AND CLINICAL ADVANCES IN IMMUNOTHERAPY
389,000
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
FOR ASTHMA: FOCUS ON BIOLOGICS-BASED MANAGEMENT OF
Collaboration \3\
MODERATE-TO-SEVERE ASTHMA IN PATIENTS
University of Virginia
RENAL PHYSICIANS ASSOCIATION 2016 ANNUAL MEETING
25,000
University of Virginia
RENAL PHYSICIANS ASSOCIATION ADVANCED PRACTITIONER
7,500
CONFERENCE
Yale University Research To Practice
CURRENT STRATEGIES AND ONGOING RESEARCH IN THE
80,000
MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER--AN
INDEPENDENT SATELLITE SYMPOSIUM (ISS) HELD AS AN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q1, 2016 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Apr 2016-30th Jun 2016
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academic CME, LLC
STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVING OUTCOMES IN PATIENTS WITH
20,000
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
AKH Inc., Advancing Knowledge and
NOVEL MECHANISMS AND ADVANCING THERAPEUTIC PARADIGMS
350,000
Healthcare C-MEducation Resources,
FOR OPTIMIZING REAL WORLD MANAGEMENT OF
Collaboration \3\
LLC
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA: APPLYING LDLTARGETED THERAPIES
FOR CV RISK REDUCTION TO THE FRONT LINES OF
CARDIOVASCULAR, DIABETES, AND INTERNAL MEDICINE
PRACTICE
AKH Inc Advancing Knowledge and
NAVIGATING THE COMPLEX MAZE OF LDL-LOWERING THERAPIES:
378,700
Healthcare C-MEducation Resources,
A REAL WORLD ROADMAP FOR THE CARDIOVASCULAR
Collaboration \3\
LLC
SPECIALIST
American Academy of Physician
AAPA CONFERENCE 2016--ENDOCRINOLOGY TRACK
12,500
Assistants
American Academy of Physician
AAPA CONFERENCE 2016--NEPHROLOGY TRACK
6,000
Assistants
American Academy of Physician
AAPA CONFERENCE 2016--ORTHOPAEDICS TRACK
7,500
Assistants
American Association of Clinical
AACE 25TH ANNUAL MEETING AND CLINICAL CONGRESS--
5,0000
Endocrinologists
DIABETES SESSIONS
American Association of Clinical
CALIFORNIA CHAPTER OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
20,000
Endocrinologists
CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS PRESENTS: HOT TOPICS IN
DIABETES AND ENDOCRINOLOGY FOR PRIMARY CARE 2016
American Association of Diabetes
AADE 2016: DOES THE SHOE FIT? MATCHING THE RIGHT
321,194
Educators Institute for Medical and
INSULIN COMBINATION TO INDIVIDUAL PATIENTS WITH T2DM
Nursing Education
American Association of Nurse
SECONDARY PREVENTION OF ASCVD: NOVEL THERAPIES TO
75,000
Practitioners (AANP) Medical
IMPROVE OUTCOMES IN PATIENTS WITH
Collaboration \3\
Communications Media, Inc.
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
EAC 2016 - UPDATE IN ALLERGY, ASTHMA & IMMUNOLOGY
10,000
Immunology Eastern Allergy
Collaboration \3\
Conference
American Diabetes Association
DIABETES IS PRIMARY
133,595
American Diabetes Association
31ST ANNUAL CLINICAL CONFERENCE ON DIABETES
32,000
American Society of Gene Therapy
ASGCT 19TH ANNUAL MEETING
26,000
American Society of Health-System
THE CHANGING LANDSCAPE OF HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA: THE
117,215
Pharmacists
EMERGING ROLE OF NON-STATIN THERAPIES
Collaboration \3\
American Thoracic Society
ATS 2016 INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE--SELECTED SESSIONS
20,178
IN ASTHMA
Collaboration \3\
Baylor University Medical Center dba
UPDATE ON GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF
20,000
A. Webb Roberts Center MedNet, LLC
TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Carolinas Healthcare System/Charlotte
30TH ANNUAL MEETING OF THE GLOMERULAR DISEASE
3,000
AHEC
COLLABORATIVE NETWORK
Children's Hospital Corporation
BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL, DIVISION OF NEPHROLOGY
5,500
WEEKLY SEMINAR SERIES
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
2016 SCIENCE OF MS MANAGEMENT
69,225
Centers Nurse Practitioner
Alternatives
Foundation of the Consortium of MS
2016 MS MENTORSHIP FORUM
25,000
Centers
Horizon CME, Inc.
GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS: AN ALTERNATIVE TO PRANDIAL
265,190
INSULIN
Horizon CME, Inc.
ACHIEVING LDL GOALS IN PATIENTS WITH
187,395
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA: APPLYING PCSK9 INHIBITORS IN
Collaboration \3\
PRACTICE
Horizon CME, Inc.
CURRENT THERAPIES FOR PROSTATE CANCER
24,000
Johns Hopkins University Medical
PATIENT-CENTERED CARE IN ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER
60,000
Communications Media, Inc.
Johns Hopkins University Medical
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS IN THE AGE OF ENHANCED THERAPEUTIC
100,000
Logix, LLC
OPTIONS
Johns Hopkins University Medscape,
REAL-LIFE SCENARIOS: SIMULATION IN MCRPC
50,000
LLC
Medical Education Resources Tarsus
PATIENT-FOCUSED LDL-C MANAGEMENT AND RISK REDUCTION IN
200,000
Cardio Inc. dba Cardiometabolic
CLINICAL PRACTICE: THE UTILITY OF PCSK9 INHIBITORS
Collaboration \3\
Health Congress
Med-IQ, LLC
RECENT UPDATES IN CKD-MBD: MERGING SCIENCE AND PATIENT-
84,883
CENTERED CARE
Med-IQ, LLC Taking Control of Your
PRACTICAL STRATEGIES FOR ADVANCING INSULIN THERAPY:
995,246.5
Diabetes
FROM TIMELY INITIATION AND APPROPRIATE TITRATION OF
BASAL INSULIN TO ADDRESSING POST PRANDIAL GLUCOSE
CONTROL
Medscape, LLC
KEY CONCEPTS IN CKD-MBD: ESSENTIALS FOR IMPROVING
199,500
OUTCOMES
Medscape, LLC
ADVANCES IN BASAL INSULIN
829,075
Medscape, LLC
CME-TV: INDIVIDUALIZING T2D INSULIN THERAPY UTILZIING
816,000
COMPLIMENTARY MECHANISMS OF ACTION
Medscape, LLC
CASE CONSIDERATIONS: HOW TO REDUCE CV RISK IN
225,100
DYSLIPIDEMIA?
Collaboration \3\
Medscape, LLC
2016 UPDATE: CLINICAL ADVANCEMENTS IN MODERATE TO
640,000
SEVERE ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Collaboration \3\
Medscape, LLC
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT LDL-C?: A 2016 UPDATE
242,190
Collaboration\3\
Medscape, LLC
A PATIENT JOURNEY THROUGH STATIN INTOLERANCE: WHAT
249,215
HAVE WE LEARNED?
Collaboration \3\
Medscape, LLC
AN ENDOCRINOLOGY CLINIC IN DYSLIPIDEMIA: SOLVING
237,915
CHALLENGING CASES
Collaboration \3\
Medscape, LLC
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: FOUNDATIONS IN PATHOPHYSIOLOGY,
249,825
TARGETS, AND TREATMENT
Collaboration \3\
Medscape, LLC
WATERSHEDS IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: A CONCISE GUIDE TO
99,500
MAJOR CONFERENCES IN 2016
Collaboration \3\
Michigan State Medical Society
DIABETES AND LIPID UPDATES
5,000
MidEastern Chapter of the Society of
46TH ANNUAL SPRING MEETING AND EXHIBITION OF THE
7,500
Nuclear Medicine
MIDEASTERN CHAPTER OF THE SOCIETY OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
AND MOLECULAR IMAGING
Missouri Academy of Physician
DIABETES UPDATE FOR THE PRIMARY CARE PROVIDER
5,000
Assistants
Montefiore Medical Center PlatformQ
EVOLVING TREATMENT PARADIGMS IN METASTATIC CASTRATION-
75,000
Health Education, LLC
RESISTANT PROSTATE CANCER
National Association of Managed Care
BEST PRACTICES IN THE TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF
57,000
Physicians, Inc.
RELAPSING MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
National Association of Managed Care
ADVANCES IN LDL-C REDUCTION: A STRATEGIC LOOK AT THE
25,000
Physicians, Inc.
EFFECTIVENESS OF PCSK9 INHIBITORS
Collaboration \3\
National Comprehensive Cancer
NCCN 2016 ONCOLOGY CASE MANAGER AND MEDICAL DIRECTOR
25,000
Network, Inc.
PROGRAM
National Comprehensive Cancer
2016-2017 MONTHLY ONCOLOGY TUMOR BOARDS: A
25,000
Network, Inc.
MULTIDISCIPLINARY APPROACH TO INDIVIDUALIZED PATIENT
CARE
National Jewish Health
EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF SEVERE ASTHMA: THE ROLE OF
94,011.5
BIOLOGIC AND DIRECTED THERAPIES
Collaboration \3\
National Jewish Health Prova
ATOPIC DERMATITIS: DEFINING ITS PATHOGENESIS,
224,850
Education, Inc.
TARGETING ITS TREATMENT
Collaboration \3\
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
PATHOGENESIS AND MANAGEMENT OF FABRY DISEASE
166,485
National MS Society Greater New
NEW HAMPSHIRE LIVING WELL WITH MS CONFERENCE
1,500
England Chapter
National Lipid Association
TRANSLATION OF THE LDL RECEPTOR: A NATIONAL LIPID
125,000
ASSOCIATION CORE CURRICULUM INTENSIVE PROGRAM
Collaboration \3\
New Jersey Academy of Family
MANAGING T2DM IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS
6,000
Physicians
North American Center for Continuing
GRAND ROUNDS IN CARDIOLOGY: PCSK9 INHIBITORS WITHIN
499,838
Medical Education, LLC
THE TARGETED TREATMENT APPROACH TO
Collaboration \3\
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
Nurse Practitioner Alternatives
IMPROVING CARE IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: A NURSING
100,000
International Organization of
PERSPECTIVE
Multiple Sclerosis Nurses
Nurse Practitioner Alternatives
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 2016: WHAT NURSES NEED TO KNOW
57,900
International Organization of
Multiple Sclerosis Nurses
Nurse Practitioner Alternatives
2016 MS COUNSELING POINTS:HIGHLIGHTING THE ROLE OF
35,625
International Organization of
NURSES IN MULTIDISCIPLINARY MANAGEMENT OF MS
Multiple Sclerosis Nurses
Oakstone Publishing, LLC PeerVoice
ADVANCEMENTS IN CARE FOR PATIENTS WITH
29,725
America Limited
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA AND RESIDUAL CV RISK: EMERGING
Collaboration \3\
DATA, EVOLVING STRATEGIES
Oregon Health & Science University
ON THE HORIZON: UPDATES IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
9,930
Foundation
Penn State University i3 Health
GUIDELINE UPDATES AND EVOLVING CLINICAL PARADIGMS IN
23,500
DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CANCER
Penn State University PeerView
PEERVIEW SELECT-A-SCENARIO LIVE: TRANSFORMING PROSTATE
120,510
Institute for Medical Education,
CANCER CARE IN A RAPIDLY EVOLVING TREATMENT LANDSCAPE
Inc.
Penn State University PeerView
PEERVIEW SELECT-A-SCENARIO LIVE: ``CRITICAL
150,000
Institute for Medical Education,
DISCUSSIONS IN PROSTATE CANCER: HOW TO SELECT AND
Inc.
SEQUENCE THERAPIES THROUGHOUT THE DISEASE CONTINUUM''
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
ACHIEVING GLYCEMIC CONTROL: PROMOTING PATIENT SELF-
57,000
Professional Education
MONITORING AND EXPLORING INNOVATIVE TREATMENT
STRATEGIES IN THE CONVENIENT CARE SETTING
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
MANAGING HYPERLIPIDEMIA: A NEW CHARGE FOR SPECIALTY
32,000
Professional Education
PHARMACY WITH THE ADVENT OF PCSK9 INHIBITORS
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
OPTIMIZING TREATMENT REGIMENS FOR MS: THE PHARMACIST?S
35,000
Professional Education
ROLE IN ADVANCING PATIENT CARE
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
MANAGING ATOPIC DERMATITIS: A PHARMACIST'S OPPORTUNITY
86,450
Professional Education
TO INTERVENE
Collaboration \3\
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
CANCER SUMMARIES AND COMMENTARIE: UPDATE FROM CHICAGO:
40,000
ADVANCES IN THE TREATMENT OF GENITOURINARY CANCERS
Pna Centers For Neurological Research
RRNMF COURSE ON POMPE'S DISEASE RECOGNITION AND
25,000
THERAPY
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
THE CHANGING LANDSCAPE IN THE TREATMENT OF RHEUMATOID
52,500
LLC
ARTHRITIS: AN UPDATE FOR PHARMACISTS
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine C- IQ&A INTERACTIVE DIABETES INTELLIGENCE ZONE: GLYCEMIC
191,000
MEducation Resources, LLC
REGULATION THROUGH COMBINATION THERAPY--FOCUS ON
SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, METABOLIC EFFECTS, HA1C CONTROL,
AND EFFICACY OF COMBINATION BASAL INSULIN-GLP-1 RA
REGIMENS FOR FPG AND PPG CONTROL
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
WHY AREN'T THEY TAKING THEIR MEDS? PATIENT-CENTERED
33,000
Enquiring Minds LLC
APPROACHES TO NON-ADHERENCE IN MS
Primary Care Education Consortium
REMOVING THE COMPLEXITY AND CONCERNS OF INSULIN
78,595
MANAGEMENT IN TYPE 2 DIABETES, 4-HOUR WORKSHOPS TO BE
HELD DURING THE METABOLIC AND ENDOCRINE DISEASE
SUMMITS 2016
PRIME Education Inc (PRIME)
PRACTICAL SKILLS IN MEDICATION MANAGEMENT WITH NEWER
415,000
CHOLESTEROL THERAPIES: CAN WE ACHIEVE PATIENT AND
Collaboration \3\
MANAGED CARE HOMEOSTASIS?
PRIME Education Inc (PRIME)
GME-CME ADVANCED PRACTICE SEMINAR IN MULTIPLE
150,329
SCLEROSIS: FOCUSED TRAINING FOR EFFECTIVE
INDIVIDUALIZED TREATMENT DECISION-MAKING
PRIME Education Inc (PRIME)
RHEUMATOLOGY HOUSE CALLS--ENGAGING PATIENTS AND
172,845
PROVIDERS IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS COLLABORATIVE
Collaboration \3\
LEARNING
PRIME Education Inc (PRIME)
NEW TARGETS IN THE THERAPEUTIC LANDSCAPE FOR ADULTS
291,095
WITH ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Collaboration \3\
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
OSTEOARTHRITIS OF THE KNEE: A MULTI-MODAL APPROACH TO
160,000
PAIN MANAGEMENT
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
HOW LOW DO YOU GO? CLINICAL UPDATES IN LOW-DENSITY
490,479
LIPOPROTEINCHOLESTEROL MANAGEMENT
Collaboration \3\
Purdue University Focus Medical
2016 ARTHROS CITY ROUNDS SERIES
10,000
Communications, LLC
Collaboration \3\
Research Foundation of SUNY
MEASURING QUALITY OF LIFE (QOL) IN ESRD
5,000
Research To Practice
YEAR IN REVIEW--A FOUR-PART MULTI-TUMOR REGIONAL CME
60,000
SYMPOSIA SERIES FOCUSED ON THE APPLICATION OF
EMERGING RESEARCH INFORMATION TO THE CARE OF PATIENTS
WITH COMMON CANCERS: GENITOURINARY CANCERS MODULE
San Francisco Neurological Society
CALIFORNIA NEUROLOGY SOCIETY - UPDATES IN NEUROLOGY
3,000
Association of California
2016
Neurologists Foundation
Scripps Health
ANNUAL NEW APPROACHES TO OPTIMIZE REAL-WORLD DIABETES
50,000
CARE: SPRING CONFERENCE
Society for Urologic Nurses and
COMPETENCE IN ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER REGIONAL ONS
30,000
Associates (SUNA)
CHAPTER NURSING FORUMS. DEVELOPING STRATEGIES FOR
SEQUENCING AND COMBINING THERAPIES: NURSING
CONSIDERATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING A TAILORED TREATMENT
APPROACH
Society of Nuclear Medicine
61ST ANNUAL MEETING OF THE SOUTHWESTERN CHAPTER, SNMMI
2,000
Southwestern Chapter of the Society
of Nuclear Medicine
Swedish Medical Center Foundation
SIXTH ANNUAL INTENSIVE UPDATE IN NEUROLOGY
3,000
Texas A&M University System Health
12TH ANNUAL DIABETES CONFERENCE: 'DIABETES HEAD TO
10,000
Science Center Coastal Be
TOE'
The Endocrine Society
ENDO 2016 GENYZME THYROID SESSIONS
100,000
The Omnia-Prova Education
MANAGEMENT OF RA: GLOBAL OUTLOOK AND LATIN AMERICAN
311,067
Collaborative, Inc. Prova Education,
IMPLICATIONS
Collaboration \3\
Inc.
Trustees of Boston University
KEYS TO ACHIEVING OPTIMAL GLUCOSE CONTROL: EARLY
375,000
Continuing Education Alliance, LLC
INSULIN INITIATION AND CONTROL OF POSTPRANDIAL
GLUCOSE
Trustees of Boston University
IMPLEMENTING NEW THERAPIES FOR REFRACTORY
350,000
Continuing Education Alliance, LLC
DYSLIPIDEMIA: PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CLINICAL
Collaboration \3\
PRACTICE
Ultimate Medical Academy, LLC dba
IMPROVING OUTCOMES IN SEVERE ASTHMA: A NEW ERA IN
185,333
Global Education Group Integritas
PRECISION MEDICINE
Collaboration \3\
Communications, LLC
UMA MLG, LLC
COMPREHENSIVE DYSLIPIDEMIA MANAGEMENT: A VIRTUAL
249,825
REALITY TOUR BEYOND STATIN MONOTHERAPY
Collaboration\3\
University of Chicago Intelligent
INSIDE DYSLIPIDEMIA MANAGEMENT: IMPROVING RISK
285,734
Medical Decisions, Inc.
ASSESSMENT, REFERRALS AND LIPID GOAL ATTAINMENT FOR
Collaboration \3\
HIGH-RISK CV PATIENTS INSPIRING SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT
WITH DATA-DRIVEN EDUCATION
University of Cincinnati Advances in
MAUIDERM NP+PA SUMMER 2016
25,000
Cosmetic and Medical Dermatology
Collaboration \3\
University of Kansas Endowment
NEUROMUSCULAR REVIEW COURSE SERIES 2016
15,000
Association
University of Massachusetts Medical
PIVOTAL TREATMENT ADVANCES IN BIOLOGIC THERAPY FOR
376,000
School C-MEducation Resources, LLC
ATOPIC DERMATITIS (AD): FOCUS ON THE
Collaboration \3\
IMMUNOPATHOBIOLOGY OF AD AND ROLE OF EVOLVING
BIOLOGIC THERAPIES FOR OPTIMIZING OUTCOMES IN
PATIENTS WITH MODERATE-TO-SEVERE AND TREATMENT-
RESISTANT AD
University of Rochester Society of
2016 SOCIETY FOR INVESTIGATIVE DERMATOLOGY ANNUAL
50,000
Investigative Dermatology
MEETING
Collaboration \3\
University of Southern California
VAN DER MEULEN SYMPOSIUM: MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS UPDATE
20,000
University of Tennessee Advanced
ONCOLOGY PHARMACY CONSULTS: UPDATES ON THE MANAGEMENT
45,000
Studies in Medicine
OF PROSTATE CANCER
University of Texas Health Science
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY (ASCO) 2016
3,500
Center at San Antonio
REVIEW
University of Vermont and State
NEW ENGLAND THYROID CONFERENCE
10,000
Agricultural College
USF Health Professions Conferencing
13TH ANNUAL ROCKY MOUNTAIN METABOLIC SYNDROME
5,000
Corporation CEConsultants, LLC
SYMPOSIUM
Wellmont Health System
14TH ANNUAL DIABETES SYMPOSIUM
4,000
Yale University
INAUGURAL 1-95 INFILTRATIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY CONFERENCE
5,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q2, 2016 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st July 2016-30th Sep 2016
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association of Clinical
ORR-AACE 18TH ANNUAL MEETING
5,000
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
MID ATLANTIC-AACE 14TH ANNUAL MEETING
2,500
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
TEXAS-AACE ANNUAL MEETING & TEXAS ENDOCRINE SURGICAL
5,000
Endocrinologists
SYMPOSIUM
American Association of Clinical
NEVADA AACE ENDOCRINOLOGY FOR THE NON ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
5,000
Endocrinologists
AND ANNUAL MEETING
American Association of Clinical
NEVADA-AACE ENDOCRINOLOGY FOR THE NON ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
7,500
Endocrinologists
AND ANNUAL MEETING
American Association of Nurse
BEST PRACTICES IN ACHIEVING OPTIMAL A1C TARGETS AND
141,980
Practitioners (AANP)
POST PRANDIAL GLYCEMIC CONTROL
American Diabetes Association
14TH ANNUAL PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION SYMPOSIUM, AN
10,000
AFTERNOON WITH DIABETES EXPERTS: DIABETES DISTRESS,
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, MEDICATIONS, AND UPDATES TO THE
STANDARDS
American Health Resources, Inc.
EXAMINING NEW OPTIONS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF INSULIN
4,600
RESISTANT TYPE 2 DIABETES: A FOCUS ON BASAL INSULIN
THERAPY
American Society for Blood and Marrow
2017 ASBMT/SANOFI NEW INVESTIGATOR AWARD
65,000
Transplantation
Antidote Education Company
MANAGING DIABETES IN OLDER POPULATIONS
50,000
California Academy of Physician
MANAGEMENT OF OSTEOARTHRITIS IN THE PRIMARY SETTING
4,000
Assistants
California Academy of Physician
2016 ANNUAL MEETING OF THE CALIFORNIA ACADEMY OF
4,000
Assistants
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS (CAPA): UPDATES IN TYPE 2
DIABETES CARE
Cardiovascular Research Foundation
BEST MANAGEMENT FOR COMPLEX PATIENTS WITH COMPLEX
58,100
DISEASE: THE NEXT FRONTIER BEYOND REVASCULARIZATION
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
2016 CMSC ANNUAL MEETING SCIENTIFIC PROGRAM
25,000
Centers Nurse Practitioner
Alternatives
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
MS AT THE CUTTING EDGE: A 5-PART WEBINAR SERIES
56,700
Centers Nurse Practitioner
Alternatives
Dignity Health MandatoryCE LLC
5TH ANNUAL ARIZONA DIABETES SYMPOSIUM
50,000
Dignity Health MandatoryCE LLC
2016 ARKANSAS DIABETES SYMPOSIUM: FOCUS ON PREVENTION,
35,000
CURRENT TREATMENTS, AND COMORBIDITIES
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
ECTRIMS 2016: OPTIMALLY MANAGING PATIENTS WITH
85,000
Education Academic CME, LLC
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS THROUGH INDIVIDUALIZED TREATMENT
OPTIONS
Emory University
9TH WORLD CONGRESS ON PREVENTION OF DIABETES AND ITS
50,000
COMPLICATIONS
Florida Academy of Physician
EVALUATING KIDNEY DISEASE: KIDNEY KASES
5,000
Assistants
Florida Academy of Physician
JOINT INJECTIONS
5,500
Assistants
Foundation for Orthopaedic Research
ORTHOPAEDICS FOR THE PRIMARY CARE PRACTITIONER &
5,000
and Education, Inc.
REHABILITATION THERAPIST
Horizon CME, Inc.
GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONIST AND BASAL INSULIN: AN EMERGING
53,253
STANDARD FOR TYPE DIABETES TREATMENT
Horizon CME, Inc.
ULTRALONG-ACTING BASAL INSULINS: WHERE DO THEY FIT?
53,253
Integritas Communications, LLC
CLINICAL UPDATES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE ASTHMA:
5,000
Ultimate Medical Academy, LLC dba
NEW STRATEGIES TO INDIVIDUALIZE LONG-TERM CARE
Collaboration \3\
Global Education Group
LeBonheur Children's Hospital
BACK TO SCHOOL DIABETES CONFERENCE
3,828
Medical Education Resources Tarsus
COMBINING GLP-1RAS WITH INSULIN TO IMPROVE GLUCOSE
159,650
Cardio Inc. dba Cardiometabolic
CONTROL
Health Congress
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW VIDEO INSESSION AT AAN 2016, ``STAYING
131,530
PeerView Institute for Medical
CURRENT WITH THE LATEST UPDATES ON APPROVED DISEASE-
Education, Inc.
MODIFYING THERAPIES FOR MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
MANAGEMENT: CLINICAL HIGHLIGHTS FROM VANCOUVER''
Med-IQ, LLC
SEQUENCING TREATMENT FOR METASTATIC CASTRATION-
158,565
RESISTANT PROSTATE CANCER: HOW TO MATCH PATIENTS TO
THE RIGHT THERAPY
Med-IQ, LLC
THE EVOLVING THERAPEUTIC LANDSCAPE FOR MODERATE-TO-
88,759
SEVERE ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Collaboration \3\
National Association for Continuing
POSTPRANDIAL HYPERGLYCEMIA AND GLP-1 RECEPTOR
150,000
Education
AGONISTS: EFFECTIVE STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE GOALS
National Association of Managed Care
NEW PERSPECTIVES AND EMERGING TREATMENT PARADIGMS IN
57,000
Physicians, Inc.
THE MANAGEMENT OF RELAPSING MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
National Association of Managed Care
CLINICAL ADVANCES IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS: NOVEL
57,000
Physicians, Inc.
THERAPIES FOR IMPROVED PATIENT OUTCOMES
National Association of Managed Care
IMPROVING PATIENT OUTCOMES WITH INDIVIDUALIZED THERAPY
57,000
Physicians, Inc.
IN THE MANAGEMENT OF TYPE 2 DIABETES
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
25TH ANNUAL FELLOWS RESEARCH FORUM
3,500
National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE-MINERAL BONE DISORDER:
149,420
University of Illinois at Chicago
IMPLICATIONS FOR CARDIAC OUTCOMES
National Medical Association
STRATEGIES TO ACHIEVE BETTER CLINICAL OUTCOMES IN TYPE
200,000
2 DIABETES AND ITS THERAPEUTIC COMPLICATIONS
Penn State University Antidote
16TH ANNUAL DIABETES SYMPOSIUM
15,000
Education Company
Penn State University Medical
STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVING OUTCOMES IN PATIENTS WITH MS
15,000
Communications Media, Inc.
Pennsylvania Society of Physician
NEW TREATMENT OPTIONS IN DIABETES MELLITUS
8,000
Assistants
Potomac Center for Medical Education
EXPANDING DMD TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR PATIENTS WITH MS
205,000
Rockpointe Corporation
Primary Care Network, Inc. PlatformQ
THE EVOLUTION OF BASAL INSULINS: ONE SMALL STEP OR A
100,000
Health Education, LLC
GIANT LEAP?
Projects In Knowledge MedPage Today,
NEUROLOGY MASTERY IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
120,000
LLC
Regents of the University of
6TH ANNUAL UC IRVINE HEALTH NEUROMUSCULAR COLLOQUIUM
20,000
California
Regents of the University of Colorado
PRACTICAL WAYS TO ACHIEVE TARGETS IN DIABETES CARE
200,000
Regents, University of California
THE 4TH ANNUAL UCLA DIABETES SYMPOSIUM
10,000
Scripps Health
ANNUAL NEW APPROACHES TO OPTIMIZE REAL-WORLD DIABETES
70,000
CARE: FALL CONFERENCE AND ENDURING MATERIALS
The Board of Trustees of the UA for
SPECIAL NEPHROLOGY RESEARCH AND TRAINING CENTER
15,000
the UA at Birmingham
SYMPOSIUM--11/9/15
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
2016 ASBMT CLINICAL RESEARCH TRAINING COURSE
25,000
Inc. American Society for Blood and
Marrow Transplantation
University of California, San Diego--
PROMOTING BEHAVIOR CHANGE IN DIABETES: A SKILL
50,000
Behavioral Diabetes Institute
BUILDING PROGRAM FOR HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS
University of California, San Diego
ADDRESSING THE NATURAL HISTORY OF TYPE 2 DIABETES:
142,899
Taking Control of Your Diabetes
PRACTICAL APPROACHES TO CONTROLLING FASTING AND POST-
PRANDIAL GLUCOSE LEVELS
University of Cincinnati Global
HE METABOLIC & ENDOCRINE DISEASE SUMMIT (MEDS) 2016
25,000
Academy for Medical Education, LLC T
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q3, 2016 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Oct 2016-31th Dec 2016
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of Pas
2016 ADULT HOSPITAL MEDICINE BOOT CAMP
5,000
American Association of Clinical
CALIFORNIA CHAPTER OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
5,000
Endocrinologists
CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS (CA AACE) 16TH ANNUAL
MEETING & SYMPOSIUM
American Association of Clinical
DIABETES DAY FOR PRIMARY CARE CLINICIANS ADVANCES IN
75,000
Endocrinologists
DIABETES CARE
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
PLENARY SESSION: MODERN THERAPIES FOR ALLERGIC SKIN
35,000
Immunology
DISEASES
Collaboration \3\
American Health Resources, Inc.
NEW COMPLEMENTARY COMBINATION THERAPY FOR DIABETES:
21,800
FIXED DOSE BASAL INSULINS AND GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS
American Nephrology Nurses'
IMPROVING PATIENT OUTCOMES IN CKD-MBD: INDIVIDUALIZED
139,250
Association
MANAGEMENT AND ENHANCED PATIENT ENGAGEMENT
American Society of Nephrology
CKD-MBD GUIDELINES: A CRITICAL APPRAISAL OF RECENT
181,790
STUDIES
American Society of Transplantation
AST FELLOWS SYMPOSIUM ON TRANSPLANTATION (2016)
35,000
American Thyroid Association, Inc.
3RD ANNUAL E. CHESTER RIDGWAY TRAINEE CONFERENCE
25,000
University of Colorado School of
Medicine
American Thyroid Association, Inc.
86TH ANNUAL MEETING OF THE AMERICAN THYROID
50,000
University of Colorado School of
ASSOCIATION
Medicine
American Urological Association
ADVANCEMENTS IN UROLOGY 2017, AN AUA/JUA SYMPOSIUM
15,000
American Urological Association
ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER: MANAGING THE SPECTRUM OF THE
60,000
Education & Research, Inc.
DISEASE
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
EXPERTPERSPECTIVES: SHIFTING PARADIGMS, EMERGING
224,355
at Eisenhower
TREATMENTS IN MODERATE TO SEVERE ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Collaboration \3\
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
DEVELOPMENT OF SPANISH LANGUAGE VERSION OF: ANIMATED
75,000
at Eisenhower Postgraduate Institute
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS (MS) PATIENT AN ANIMATED PATIENTS
for Medicine Prime Medic
GUIDE TO MS/ANIMADAS DE ESCLEROSIS MULTIPLE (EM)
PACIENTE GUIA DEL PACIENTES ANIMADA A EM
Augusta University
NEUROLOGY FOR THE NON-NEUROLOGIST
5,000
AXIS Medical Education, Inc.
AUTOLOGOUS HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION AND
74,580
MOBILIZATION IN MULTIPLE MYELOMA: CURRENT DEBATE AND
DEVELOPMENTS
Baylor Scott & White Health Baylor
3RD ANNUAL SYMPOSIUM ON INDIVIDUALIZED NOVEL DISEASE-
40,000
University Medical Center dba A.
MODIFYING TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Webb Roberts Center MedNet, LLC
Baylor Scott & White Health MedNet
EMERGING BIOLOGICAL THERAPIES FOR ATOPIC DERMATITIS IN
35,000
CHILDREN AND ADULTS
Collaboration \3\
California Optometric Association
FABRY DISEASE--OPHTHALMIC MANIFESTATIONS AND RECENT
9,650
ADVANCES
Cleveland Clinic Educational
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS CASE-BASED ONLINE MONOGRAPH
25,000
Foundation
Clinical Care Options, LLC
NEW DIRECTIONS IN GU CANCERS: HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE 2017
25,000
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
GENITOURINARY CANCERS SYMPOSIUM
C-MEducation Resources, LLC AKH Inc
NEW FRONTIERS AND PIVOTAL CLINICAL ADVANCES IN
297,000
Advancing Knowledge and Healthcare
PATHOIMMUNOBIOLOGY OF ATOPIC DERMATITIS: THE
Collaboration \3\
TRANSLATIONAL PATH IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS AND
IMPLICATIONS FOR DERMATOLOGY PRACTICE
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
ADDRESSING COMORBIDITIES IN THE DIAGNOSIS AND
85,000
Centers Nurse Practitioner
MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: A
Alternatives
RESOURCE GUIDE FOR CLINICIANS
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
CLINICAL CONSULT: CASES AND COMPREHENSIVE CARE IN MS
115,200
Centers Nurse Practitioner
Alternatives
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
MONITORING AND FOLLOW-UP IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
60,725
Centers Nurse Practitioner
COMPREHENSIVE CARE
Alternatives
Continuing Education Alliance, LLC
TARGETED THERAPIES IN MODERATE TO SEVERE ATOPIC
92,550
Board of Regents for University of
DERMATITIS: EMERGING OPTIONS
Collaboration \3\
Nebraska
Creative Educational Concepts, Inc.
ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER: SEARCHING FOR OPTIMAL
15,000
THERAPY SEQUENCE AND ASSESSING EMERGING TREATMENT
OPTIONS
Delaware Academy of Physician
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
2,200
Assistants Inc.
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
CLINICAL ADVANCES IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: A FOCUS ON
350,000
Education Advanced Studies in
IMPROVING PATIENT OUTCOMES
Medicine
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
SPOTLIGHT ON FABRY DISEASE: DIAGNOSIS, GENOTYPE-
200,000
Education Excerpta Medica
PHENOTYPE CORRELATION, AND MULTIDISCIPLINARY PATIENT
CARE
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
ESMO2016: A THERAPEUTIC UPDATE ON THE MANAGEMENT OF
90,000
Education Excerpta Medica BV
PATIENTS WITH PROSTATE CANCER
Excel Continuing Education
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: MANAGING THE DISEASE, ITS SYMPTOMS
7,000
AND QUALITY OF LIFE (PART OF THE SOUTH FLORIDA
NEUROLOGY SYMPOSIUM: IMPROVING PATIENT OUTCOMES)
Excel Continuing Education
NEW DIRECTIONS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF POMPE DISEASE
64,120
Florida Academy of Physician
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
5,000
Assistants Inc.
Foundation of the Consortium of MS
2016-2017 ROBERT LISAK, MD MEDICAL STUDENT RESEARCH
8,000
Centers
SCHOLARSHIP
Global Academy for Medical Education
SKIN DISEASE EDUCATION FOUNDATION'S 17TH ANNUAL LAS
25,000
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
VEGAS DERMATOLOGY SEMINAR FEATURING THE 13TH ANNUAL
Collaboration \3\
Rutgers, the State University
PSORIASIS FORUM
Global Academy for Medical Education
16TH ANNUAL CARIBBEAN DERMATOLOGY SYMPOSIUM
20,000
Rutgers Biomedical and Health
Collaboration \3\
Sciences
Global Academy for Medical Education
SKIN DISEASE EDUCATION FOUNDATION'S 41ST ANNUAL HAWAII
50,000
University of Louisville Research
DERMATOLOGY SEMINAR
Collaboration \3\
Foundation
Haymarket Medical Education
BASAL INSULIN PLUS GLP-1 RAS: THERAPEUTIC SYNERGIES TO
146,788
OPTIMIZE PATIENT OUTCOMES: 4 VIDEO ``HOUSE CALLS''
DISCUSSIONS AMONG EXPERTS
Illinois Academy of Physician
JOINT INJECTABLES
4,000
Assistants
Illinois Academy of Physician
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
5,000
Assistants
Indiana Academy of Physician
``WHAT IS CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD) AND END STAGE
6,500
Assistants
RENAL DISEASE (ESRD)?''
Indiana Neurological Society Indiana
DEMYELINATING DISEASES: WHAT TO DO WHEN THE INSULATION
5,000
State Medical Association
BEGINS TO FRAY
Integritas Communications Global
LOOKING BENEATH THE SURFACE IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS:
361,807
Education Group
TARGETING IMMUNE DYSREGULATION AND DELIVERING
Collaboration \3\
COMPREHENSIVE CARE
Integritas Communications, LLC UMA
ATOPIC DERMATITIS: NEW PERSPECTIVES ON MANAGING A
267,480
Education, Inc. dba Global Education
CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY DISEASE
Collaboration \3\
Group
Integritas Communications, LLC UMA
CLINICAL ADVANCES IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS: EXPERT
202,218
Education, Inc. dba Global Education
INSIGHTS INTO NEW AND EMERGING THERAPIES
Collaboration \3\
Group
Integritas Communications, LLC UMA
CLINICAL UPDATES IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: NEW
249,900
Education, Inc. dba Global Education
STRATEGIES TO TARGET REMISSION AND INDIVIDUALIZE
Collaboration \3\
Group
COMPREHENSIVE CARE
International Eczema Council
PSORIASIS AND ATOPIC DERMATITIS: TWO DISEASES OR ONE
100,000
International Psoriasis Council
SPECTRUM?
Collaboration \3\
International Organization of MS
NP CONNECTIONS: THE ROLE OF THE NURSE PRACTITIONER IN
75,000
Nurses Nurse Practitioner
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS CARE
Alternatives
Kentucky Academy of Physician
JOINT INJECTION WORKSHOP
5,000
Assistants
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI
PEERVIEW LIVE AT CMSC 2017, GUIDING PATIENTS THROUGH
345,810
Peerview Institute for Medical
THE RISKS AND BENEFITS OF DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPY:
Education Inc.
PATIENT STORIES OF SHARED DECISION-MAKING THROUGHOUT
THE COURSE OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI
PEERVIEW LIVE AT ACMG 2017 STRENGTHENING THE GENETICS-
219,430
Peerview Institute for Medical
HEMATOLOGY PARTNERSHIP TO SHORTEN THE PATH TO
Education Inc.
DIAGNOSIS & TREATMENT OF GAUCHER DISEASE TYPE 1: A
PATIENT STORY
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI,
PEERVIEW VIDEO INPLAY NOVEL OPTIONS AND PATIENT
169,480
PeerView for Medical Education Inc.
PERSPECTIVES IN RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: INDIVIDUALIZING
Collaboration \3\
CARE FOR THERAPEUTIC SUCCESS
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI,
PEERVIEW VIDEO INREVIEW: ASSESSING THE COMPARATIVE
60,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
EFFECTIVENESS OF DISEASE-MODIFYING THERAPIES: WHAT
Education
CAN BE LEARNED FROM HEAD-TO-HEAD CLINICAL TRIALS AND
RECENT NUMBER-NEEDED-TO-TREAT ANALYSES?
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW IN REVIEW, ``DELAYING DISABILITY PROGRESSION
106,800
PeerView Institute for Medical
IN THE MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS PATIENT: WHAT CAN WE LEARN
Education, Inc.
FROM AVAILABLE DATA ON APPROVED DISEASE-MODIFYING
THERAPY?''
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
PEERVIEW TALKS: HIGHLY EFFECTIVE DISEASE-MODIFYING
65,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
THERAPIES FOR MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: WHEN AND IN WHOM
Education, Inc.
SHOULD THEY BE USED?
Medical Learning Institute, Inc.
NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN THE TREATMENT OF ATOPIC
156,480
PeerView Institute for Medical
DERMATITIS: CLINICAL HIGHLIGHTS FROM VIENNA
Collaboration \3\
Education, Inc.
Med-IQ, LLC
DIFFERENTIATING GAUCHER DISEASE FROM OTHER HEMATOLOGIC
290,043
CONDITIONS: EVERY DAY COUNTS
Med-IQ, LLC
LYSOSOMAL STORAGE DISEASES: NEWBORN SCREENING UPDATES
261,483
AND IMPLICATIONS FOR LONG-TERM CARE
Med-IQ, LLC
FABRY DISEASE : WHEN TO TREAT
100,000
Michigan State Medical Society
CARING FOR PATIENTS WITH A FOCUS ON THE KIDNEYS
5,000
MS Views And News Inc.
2016 NEUROLOGICAL ASPECTS OF MS AND BEYOND--SYMPOSIUM
17,500
MSWorld Inc.
2016 MSWORLD-HOSTED TALKS SERIES
35,000
National Association of Managed Care
NEW HORIZONS IN THE TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF
70,000
Physicians, Inc.
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: BEST PRACTICES FOR IMPROVED
PATIENT OUTCOMES
National Association of Managed Care
NEW HORIZONS IN THE TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF ATOPIC
90,000
Physicians, Inc.
DERMATITIS (AD): HOW NOVEL THERAPIES ARE CHANGING THE
Collaboration \3\
TREATMENT PARADIGM
National Jewish Health
THE 39TH ANNUAL NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH PULMONARY &
20,000
ALLERGY UPDATE
Collaboration \3\
National Kidney Foundation
12TH ANNUAL JOINT MEETING OF THE UPSTATE AND WESTERN
7,500
NEW YORK COUNCILS ON RENAL NUTRITION
National Kidney Foundation
STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE PATIENT OUTCOMES IN CKD-MBD
243,260
MANAGEMENT
Neurologic Disease Foundation
21ST FALL MS SEMINAR--OPTIMIZING MANAGEMENT OF MS
5,995
New England Section American
85TH ANNUAL MEETING NEW ENGLAND SECTION OF THE
10,000
Urological Assn American Urological
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
Association Education and Research,
Inc.
Not-For-Profit Hospital Corporation
THYROID CANCER MANAGEMENT? AN OVERVIEW AND UPDATE OF
2,750
NEW TREATMENT OPTIONS
Not-For-Profit Hospital Corporation
END STAGE RENAL DISEASE FOR THE NON-NEPHROLOGIST
1,910
PeerVoice America Limited Oakstone
EMERGING PARADIGMS IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS: TARGETING THE
492,850
Publishing, LLC.
UNDERLYING PATHOLOGY
Collaboration \3\
Penn State College of Medicine
CASES FROM THE COMMUNITY: CLINICAL INVESTIGATORS
80,000
Research To Practice
PROVIDE THEIR PERSPECTIVES ON EMERGING RESEARCH AND
ACTUAL PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER]AN
INDEPENDENT SATELLITE SYMPOSIUM (ISS) HELD AS A
PREMIUM ANCILLARY EVENT DURING THE 2017 GENITOURINARY
CANCERS SYMPOSIUM
Penn State University
PENN STATE HERSHEY CANCER INSTITUTE: CONTEMPORARY
3,500
TOPICS IN THYROID CANCER
Pennsylvania Society of Physician
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: A PRIMARY CARE PERSPECTIVE
4,500
Assistants
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
AN AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MANAGED CARE SYMPOSIUM:
92,358
APPLYING MANAGED CARE STRATEGIES TO THE ADVANCING
LANDSCAPE OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
Pharmacy Times Office of Continuing
MANAGING ATOPIC DERMATITIS: A PHARMACIST'S OPPORTUNITY
23,200
Professional Education
TO INTERVENE
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
BEST PRACTICES FOR MANAGING ADVERSE EVENTS ASSOCIATED
40,000
Clinical Care Options, LLC
WITH NOVEL THERAPIES FOR PATIENTS WITH HEMATOLOGIC
MALIGNANCIES
Potomac Center for Medical Education
NOVEL INSIGHTS IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS: PATHWAYS,
469,900
Rockpointe Corporation
BIOMARKERS, AND PHENOTYPES FOR A TARGETED APPROACH
President and Fellows of Harvard
DIABETES AND CARDIOMETABOLIC SYNDROME IN PRIMARY CARE
10,000
College Beth Israel Deaconess
Department of Medicine
President and Fellows of Harvard
18TH BIENNIAL HARVARD UROLOGIC CANCER COURSE
50,000
College Dana Farber Cancer Institute
President and Fellows of Harvard
SURGERY OF THE THYROID AND PARATHYROID GLANDS
10,000
College Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary Depart of Otolaryngology
PRIME Education Inc. (PRIME)
ADVANCING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE IMMUNOLOGY AND
289,785
TREATMENT CONSIDERATIONS IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS
ProCE, Inc. Wild Iris Medical
EVOLUTION OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS MANAGEMENT: PHARMACY'S
119,975
Education, Inc.
ROLE
Purdue University CiME LLC
APPLYING EVIDENCE BASED MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES FOR
62,792
PATIENTS WITH MS: AN EDUCATIONAL DATA CONTINUUM
Regents, University of California
FOURTH ANNUAL UCLA REVIEW OF CLINICAL NEUROLOGY
5,000
Rheumatology Nurses Society American
RHEUMATOLOGY NURSES SOCIETY 2016 ANNUAL CONFERENCE
25,000
Academy of Continuing Medical
Education, Inc.
RMEI Postgraduate Institute for
A LEARNING PATHWAY IN ATOPIC DERMATITIS: ACHIEVING
989,750
Medicine
SUCCESS IN ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT TO IMPROVE
Collaboration \3\
PATIENT OUTCOMES
RMEI The Omnia-Prova Education
TARGETING THE CYTOKINE PATHWAY IN RA MANAGEMENT:
199,610
Collaborative (TOPEC)
IMPLICATIONS FOR NOVEL AND EMERGING IL-6 AGENTS
Collaboration \3\
Robert Michael Educational Institute,
THE FUTURE OF ASTHMA MANAGEMENT: PRECISION THERAPY
212,340
LLC
WITH EMERGING CYTOKINE INHIBITORS
Collaboration \3\
Sanford Medical Center Fargo
2016 SANFORD HEALTH NEPHROLOGY, DIALYSIS, TRANSPLANT
3,000
SYMPOSIUM
Sidney Kimmel Medical College at
5TH ANNUAL DIABETES SYMPOSIUM: NEW ADVANCES & TRENDS
10,000
Thomas Jefferson University
Society of Urologic Nurses and
EMERGING PRACTICE PATTERNS FOR THE UROLOGY NURSE IN
50,000
Associates Plexus Communications
MANAGING PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED PROSTATE CANCER:
CHALLENGES AND BEST PRACTICES WITH SYSTEMIC THERAPY
Southern Alliance for Physician
40TH ANNUAL SOUTHEASTERN CONSORTIUM FOR DERMATOLOGY
10,000
Specialties CME
UPDATES IN PSORIASIS AND INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Collaboration \3\
Southern Salt, Water, and Kidney Club
57TH ANNUAL SCIENTIFIC MEETING
2,500
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
25TH ANNUAL PERSPECTIVES IN UROLOGY: POINT
15,000
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing Co.,
COUNTERPOINT (PCP 25)
Ltd.
Trustees of Boston University
2016 PCE ONCOLOGY SYMPOSIA SERIES FOR ADVANCED
150,000
Continuing Education Alliance
PRACTICE PROVIDERS SPECIALIZED IN ONCOLOGY: CHOOSING
INITIAL THERAPY FOR METASTATIC PROSTATE CANCER: A NEW
DIRECTION
Trustees of Boston University
PRACTICING CLINICIANS EXCHANGE (PCE) 2016 PRIMARY CARE
50,000
Continuing Education Alliance, LLC
SYMPOSIA SERIES 3 FOR NURSE PRACTITIONERS & PHYSICIAN
Collaboration \3\
ASSISTANTS: RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: TREATING TO TARGET
IN PRIMARY CARE
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
SCRATCHING BENEATH THE SURFACE OF ATOPIC DERMATITIS
25,000
Education Group
Collaboration \3\
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
METASTATIC PROSTATE CANCER: CURRENT TRENDS AND FUTURE
53,000
Education Group Applied Clinical
LANDSCAPE
Education
UMA MLG, LLC
MANAGING MODERATE-TO-SEVERE ATOPIC DERMATITIS IN
169,430
ADULTS: PATHOLOGY-BASED, TARGETED THERAPIES
Collaboration \3\
University of Cincinnati
INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES: THE KNEE COURSE 2016
5,000
University of Cincinnati CORE Medical
PRACTICE CHANGING ADVANCES: EXPANDING THE ATOPIC
112,825
Education, LLC
DERMATITIS ARMAMENTARIUM
Collaboration\3\
University of Cincinnati CORE Medical
TYPE 2 DIABETES: MASTERING COMBINATION THERAPIES TO
42,825
Education, LLC
INDIVIDUALIZE AND OPTIMIZE OUTCOMES
University of Cincinnati Robert
TAILORING APPROACHES TO MANAGEMENT IN PATIENTS WITH
247,170
Michael Educational Institute, LLC
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS: WHAT'S NEW?
Collaboration \3\
University of Nevada, Reno School of
2016 FALL CLINICAL DERMATOLOGY CONFERENCE
125,000
Medicine Foundation for Research and
Collaboration \3\
Education in Dermatology
University of Tennessee Advanced
LYSIS CRISIS: PHARMACIST'S ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY IN
70,000
Studies in Medicine
THE MANAGEMENT OF TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME
University of Vermont and State
NORTHERN NEW ENGLAND NEUROLOGICAL SOCIETY ANNUAL
5,000
Agricultural College
MEETING
WebMD Global LLC
2016 CLINICAL COURSE ON NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN ATOPIC
144,200
DERMATITIS
Collaboration \3\
World Allergy Organization
WAO INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE 2016
30,000
Collaboration \3\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q4, 2016 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Jan 2017-31th Mar 2017
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AcademicCME, LLC.
Applying Newer Biologic Therapies to Improve Outcomes
324,370.00
in Patients with Atopic Dermatitis
Collaboration \3\
Academy for Continued Healthcare
Current and Emerging Approaches to Customize Prostate
50,000.00
Learning
Cancer Treatment: an eNewsletter Series
Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy
Management of Rare and Orphan Diseases for Improved
34,500.00
(AMCP)
Patient and Payer Outcomes
Advanced Studies in Medicine Elsevier
Hawaii Dermatology Seminar: A Therapeutic Update on
131,590.00
Office of Continuing Medical
the Management of Patients with Atopic Dermatitis
Collaboration \3\
Education
Advancing Knowledge in Healthcare
Overcoming the Clinical Challenges of Basal Insulin
167,340.00
Medtelligence
Usage in Type 2 Diabetes
American Academy of PAs
AAPA 2017--Rheumatology Track
5,000.00
Collaboration \3\
American Association of Clinical
Using Insulin When, Where, and How It's Needed: Type 2
204,570.00
Endocrinologists
Diabetes Treatment in the Modern Age
American Association of Clinical
AACE 2017--Treatment Advances for Challenging Patients
329,620.00
Endocrinologists ASiM
with Type 2 Diabetes: The Role of Emerging Insulin
Combinations
American Association of Clinical
Endocrine University--Thyroid Sessions
10,000.00
Endocrinologists
American Association of Diabetes
Improving Adherence with New Fixed-Dose Insulin
864,525.00
Educators Medscape
Combination Therapy
American College of Cardiology
Recent Trends in Combination Therapy: Managing
50,000.00
Foundation
Cholesterol Even in the Most Resistant
Collaboration \3\
American College of Medical Genetics
Genzyme/ACMG Foundation Clinical Genetics Fellowships
75,000.00
Foundation
in Medical Biochemical Genetics
American College of Rheumatology
2017 ACR Rheumatology Courses
150,000.00
Collaboration \3\
American Society of Transplantation
2017 AST Cutting Edge of Transplantation: One
38,000.00
Transplant for Life, Many Pathways to Success
American Urological Association
2017 CRPC Live Forum for Urology Residents and Fellows
60,000.00
American Urological Association
2017 AUA Annual Meeting: Highlights in Advanced
75,000.00
Prostate Cancer
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder-
67,905.00
at Eisenhower
Translating Evidence Into Practice
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
Expert Discussions: Recent Advances in Metastatic
100,000.00
at Eisenhower Clinical Care Options,
Prostate Cancer Treatment
LLC
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
Dana Farber Master Class for Oncologists--
25,000.00
at Eisenhower
Genitourinary Cancers Track
AXIS Medical Education
Integrating Shared Decision Making and Guideline
40,000.00
Recommendations for Prostate Cancer Treatment
AXIS Medical Education ReachMD
Advancing Interdisciplinary Care in Prostate Cancer:
143,090.00
Clinical Updates for Urology and Oncology Healthcare
Professionals
Boston University School of Medicine-- PCE Series 2: Decision Points--Considerations for
399,897.00
Office of CME Continung Education
Using New Complementary GLP-1 Receptor Agonist-
Alliance, LLC Institute for Medical
Insulin Combinations in Patients with T2DM
and Nursing Education, Inc.
Boston University School of Medicine
PCE 2017 Primary Care Symposia Series 3: Joint
100,000.00
Practicing Clinicians Exchange
Management: The Role of Primary Care in Rheumatoid
Collaboration \3\
Arthritis
Catamount Medical Education, LLC
MS4: Sequencing, Switching, Escalation, and Symptom
150,000.00
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Management
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
6th Annual Symposium on Lysosomal Storage Disorders
15,000.00
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Genetic Counselor Fellowship in Lysosomal Storage
75,000.00
Foundation
Disorders
Conquer Cancer Foundation of the
2017 Genitourinary (GU) Cancers Symposium: Translating
28,000.00
American Society of Clinical
Research to Value-Based and Patient-Centric Care
Oncology American Society of
Clinical Oncology, Inc.
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
The Science of MS Management: 2017
70,775.00
Centers Nurse Practitioner
Alternatives
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Advances In Multiple Sclerosis (AIMS) 2016: A 360
125,000.00
Centers Nurse Practitioner
Approach to Translating Data into Optimal Practice
Alternatives The France Foundation
Duke University
Fellowship in Medical Biochemical Genetics
75,000.00
Elesevier Office of Continuing
Clinical Issues in Severe Asthma: Consensus and
271,605.00
Education Integritas Communications
Controversies on the Road to Precision Medicine
Collaboration \3\
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Perspectives from the American Academy of Dermatology
131,590.00
Education ASiM
2017 Meeting: Clinical Strategies and Scientific
Collaboration3
Advances in Atopic Dermatitis
Emory Genetics Laboratory
Paul M. Fernhoff Genetic Counselor Fellowship in
75,000.00
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
Endocrine Society
ENDO 2017 Thyroid Sessions
75,000.00
Enquiring Minds, LLC Postgraduate
Multiple Sclerosis in Pediatric Patients: Expert
60,000.00
Institute for Medicine
Guidance on Overcoming Challenges in Diagnosis and
Treatment
Evolve Medical Education, LLC
From Symptom Control to Target Treatment: The Shifting
201,325.00
Paradigm of Atopic Dermatitis
Collaboration \3\
Excerpta Medica BV Elsevier Office of
2017 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium: A Therapeutic
65,795.00
Continuing Medical Education
Update on the Management of Patients with Prostate
Cancer
Foundation of the Consortium of MS
2017 FCMSC Medical Resident Annual Meeting (CMSC)
24,700.00
Centers
Scientific Scholarships
Foundation of the Consortium of MS
2017-2018 Medical Student Research Scholarships
34,000.00
Centers
Haymarket Medical Education
Physiologic Approaches to Optimizing Glycemic Control:
309,519.00
A Pecha Kucha-Inspired CME Symposium on Long-Acting
Insulins
Horizon CME
Fixed-Ratio GLP-1RA and Basal Insulin Formulations:
182,100.00
How and When to Use Them?
Horizon CME
GLP-1 RA and Basal Insulin Combinations: New Options
212,645.00
for Treatment Intensification
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
Overcoming Barriers to the Early Recognition and
149,000.00
Diagnosis of Rheumatoid Arthritis in Real-World
Collaboration \3\
Practice: Strategies to Expedite Treatment to
Remission
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
2017 AAFP State Society CME Meetings and Publication
198,500.00
in Action Enduring Material Initiative--Evaluating
Collaboration \3\
Newer Targeted Therapies for Patients with Rheumatoid
Arthritis: Addressing Unmet Needs in the Primary Care
Practice
International Psoriasis Council
Evolving Perspectives on Psoriasis and Atopic
100,000.00
Dermatitis: Are They Two Diseases or One Spectrum?
Collaboration \3\
Lysosomal and Rare Disorders Research
Genetic, Rare and Immune Disorders Symposium (GRIDS)
30,000.00
and Treatment Center Professional
2016
Education Services Group
Med Learning Group
Actionable Pathologic Targets in Rheumatoid Arthritis:
169,700.00
Modifying the Dysregulation of the Immune Response to
Collaboration \3\
Self to Optimize Patient Outcomes
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI
``Insights Into the Pathophysiology of Atopic
290,600.00
Peerview Institute for Medical
Dermatitis: Setting the Stage for Novel Treatment
Collaboration \3\
Education Inc.
Options''
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI
``Addressing Unmet Needs in Rheumatoid Arthritis
156,730.00
Peerview Institute for Medical
Through Novel Treatment Options and Enhanced
Collaboration \3\
Education Inc.
Physician-Patient Collaboration''
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI,
PeerView Video in Exchange, ``Establishing a
98,750.00
PeerView Institute for Medical
Therapeutic Alliance in the Management of Multiple
Education
Sclerosis: How Can We Better Align Treatment
Preferences and Goals among Patients and
Practitioners?''
Med-IQ, LLC
Newborn Screening for Lysosomal Storage Disorders:
197,866.00
Recent Progress and Unanswered Questions
Med-IQ, LLC
Medical Insiders: Targeting IL-6 Signaling in the
125,000.00
Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis
Collaboration3
Med-IQ, LLC
Tumor Lysis Syndrome in a Rapidly Evolving Treatment
142,099.00
Landscape
Med-IQ, LLC
Insulin Intensification with GLP-1 Receptor Agonists:
251,110.00
Clinical Evidence and Real World Perspectives
Med-IQ, LLC
Viewpoints on Atopic Dermatitis: How Emerging
169,995.00
Treatments May Change the Management of Moderate to
Collaboration \3\
Severe Disease
Medscape
Osteoarthritis of the Knee: A Patient-Simulation
250,000.00
Approach to Assessment and Management
Medscape LLC
Managing Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis in the
250,000.00
Virtual Clinic Setting
Collaboration \3\
Medscape LLC
A Lipid Clinic in Action: How Would You Treat?
225,000.00
Collaboration \3\
Medscape LLC Close Concerns
Improving Outcomes in Diabetes: Glucose Monitoring,
75,000.00
Adherence, and Individualized Treatment
Medscape, LLC
Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation in Multiple
182,500.00
Myeloma: Who, When, and How?
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
International Center for Fabry Disease
150,000.00
MS Cure Fund, Inc.
1st Quarter 2017 Multiple Sclerosis Lifestyle
19,750.00
Management Patient Education Programs
National Association of Managed Care
Managing Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer:
45,000.00
Physicians
Understanding the Therapeutic Landscape
National Association of Managed Care
What's New in the Evolving Treatment Landscape for
57,000.00
Physicians, Inc.
Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis (AD)
Collaboration \3\
National Jewish Health
Personalized Medicine in Severe Asthma: Applying
120,044.00
Emerging Data and Treatments to Everyday Clinical
Collaboration \3\
Practice
National Jewish Health Western
WSAAI 55th Annual Scientific Session
15,000.00
Society of Allergy, Asthma and
Collaboration \3\
Immunology (WSAAI)
National Lipid Association Robert
Navigating the Challenges of Prescribing PCSK9
249,835.00
Michael Educational Institute (RMEI)
Inhibitors in Persistent Elevated LDL-C
Collaboration \3\
National Society of Genetic
New Lysosomal Storage Disease Healthcare Advocate
28,000.00
Counselors (NSGC) Emory University
Workshop
New York University--Langone School
Department of Neurology, Division of Neurogenetics
75,000.00
of Medicine
North American Center for Continuing
Fixed-Ratio GLP-1 RA and Basal Insulin Combinations: A
173,365.00
Medical Education Horizon CME
Complementary Approach to Treatment Intensification
Norton Healthcare Foundation
Celebrating MS Innovations 2017
10,000.00
NYU Post-Graduate Medical School
NYU Seminar In Advanced Rheumatology
10,000.00
Collaboration \3\
Organ Donation and Transplantation
2017 National Donor Management Summit
5,000.00
Alliance
Penn State College of Medicine MCM
Evolving Standards of Care in Metastatic Prostate
138,400.00
Education
Cancer
Penn State College of Medicine PVI
``PeerView Master Class and Practicum Live--Urologists
150,000.00
Peerview Institute for Medical
at the Intersection of Evidence-Based and Patient-
Education Inc.
Centric Prostate Cancer Care: Practical Guidance for
Everyday Practice''
Penn State College of Medicine, MCM
Rheumatoid Arthritis: Improving Quality of Care
100,000.00
Education
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Managing Diabetes with Insulin/ GLP-1 Receptor Agonist
251,500.00
Combinations: A Clinical Discussion of Safety and
Efficacy Data
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Information for Pharmacists: Counseling on
36,000.00
Dermatologic Conditions
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Advances in the Treatment of Moderate to Severe Atopic
59,867.00
Dermatitis: Practice and Management Essentials for
Collaboration \3\
Specialty Pharmacists
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Medical Crossfirer: Value-Based Diabetes: Managing
187,400.00
Costs Yet Improving Outcomes
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Treatment Advances in Diabetes: Evaluating the Safety
68,000.00
and Efficacy of Insulin/GLP-1 Receptor Agonist
Combinations
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Atopic Dermatitis: Focusing on the Patient Care
74,000.00
Strategy in the Managed Care Setting
Collaboration \3\
Ponce Medical School Foundation, Inc.
The Role of the Primary Care Providers with Chronic
10,000.00
Kidney Disease Patients.
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
Working Together Against Clinical Inertia: Using
126,075.00
LLC
Combination Injectable Therapies in Type 2 Diabetes
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Best Practice Roadmaps and Clinical Rationale for Use
968,000.00
CMEducation Resources
of Complementary Insulin plus GLP-1 Receptor Agonist
Combination Therapy To Optimize PAN-Glycemic HA1c
Target Goal Attainment in T2D: The Physiologic and
Mechanistic Basis for New Basal Insulin plus Short-
Acting GLP-1 RA Fixed-Ratio, Combination Formulations
for Controlling FPG and Postprandial Hyperglycemia
(PPG): Optimizing Glucose Control and Reducing Risks
of Hypoglycemia and Weight Gain
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Best Practice Roadmaps and Clinical Rationale for Use
319,000.00
CMEducation Resources
of Complementary Insulin plus GLP-1 Receptor Agonist
Combination Therapy To Optimize PAN-Glycemic HA1c
Target Goal Attainment in T2D: The Physiologic and
Mechanistic Basis for New Basal Insulin plus Short-
Acting GLP-1 RA Fixed-Ratio, Combination Formulations
for Controlling FPG and Postprandial Hyperglycemia
(PPG): Optimizing Glucose Control and Reducing Risks
of Hypoglycemia and Weight Gain
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
New Fixed-Ratio Combination Insulin Regimens for
341,000.00
CMEducation Resources
Optimizing Comprehensive Glycemic Management In
Challenging Patients with T2D: The Rationale,
Evidence, and Mechanistic Basis for Fixed Ratio,
Complementary Insulin plus GLP-1 RA Combinations for
Achieving FPG and PPG Target Goals-Focus on Pan-
Glycemic Control While Mitigating Risks of
Hypoglycemia and Weight Gain
Practicing Clinicians Exchange
Practicing Clinicians Exchange (PCE) Directed Learning
138,800.00
Continuing Education Alliance
eCourse: Updates on the Management of Knee
Osteoarthritis in Primary Care: The Role of
Viscosupplementation
President and Fellows of Harvard
New England Thyroid Club
1,500.00
College acting through Harvard
Medical School Depart. of Contin Edu
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
President and Fellows of Harvard
Clinical Endocrinology 2017
5,000.00
College acting through the Harvard
Medical School Department of Con The
Massachusetts General Hospital
PRIME Education, LLC
GME-CME Today Advanced Practice in Multiple Sclerosis:
92,938.00
Focused Training for Effective Individualized
Treatment Decision-Making
PRIME Education, LLC
Implications of Cardiovascular Outcomes Trials on
228,145.00
Lipid-Lowering Therapies
Collaboration \3\
PRIME Education, LLC
Applying Evidence and Lessons Learned in the
295,270.00
Management of Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis
Collaboration \3\
Pri-Med Institute, LLC Horizon CME
Practical Strategies to Using Novel GLP-1 RA and Basal
972,120.00
Insulin Combinations in Clinical Practice
Pri-Med Institute, LLC Horizon CME
Integrating Newer Basal Insulins in Primary Care: A
956,499.91
Case-based Review
Projects In Knowledge @Point of Care
Rheumatologic Diseases @Point of Care
150,000.00
Collaboration \3\
Projects In Knowledge @Point of Care
Multiple Sclerosis @Point of Care
133,225.00
Prostate Cancer Foundation
MARS2 Retreat (Mission: Androgen Receptor Splice
10,000.00
Variant)
PVI Peerview Institute for Medical
PeerView Video inSession, ``Examining the Clinical
66,240.00
Education Inc. Medical Learning
Implications of Late-Breaking Data on Approved and
Institute Inc.
Emerging Disease Modifying Therapies for Multiple
Sclerosis Management: What Are the Key Learnings From
Boston?''
Regents of the University of
5th Annual UC San Diego Essentials and Advances in
5,000.00
California
Apheresis
Regents of the University of
Transplant Immunosuppression 2017: Achieving Long-Term
35,000.00
Minnesota
Success
Research To Practice
What Urologists Want to Know: Addressing Current
85,000.00
Questions and Controversies in the Management of
Early and Advanced Prostate Cancer--An Independent
Satellite Symposium (ISS) Held in Conjunction with
the 2017 American Urological Association (AUA) Annual
Meeting
Rocky Mountain MS Center
MS 101 2017 Programs
10,000.00
Rush University Medical Center Plexus
Realizing Improved Outcomes in Advanced Prostate
80,000.00
Communications
Cancer through Evolving Research and Emerging
Treatment Paradigms: Challenges and Opportunities
Rush University Medical Center Plexus
VHA Oncology Clinical Forums: ``Current Treatment
100,000.00
Communications
Strategies for Advanced Prostate Cancer: Sequencing
Therapies and Incorporating Novel Approaches''
Society for Inherited Metabolic
2016 North American Metabolic Academy
20,000.00
Disorders
St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center
Introduction to Clinical Transplantation; Renal
1,500.00
Transplantation--An Overview
The France Foundation
State Chapter Meetings: A Physiological Approach to
357,120.00
Combination Therapies: Improving Glycemic Control in
T2DM
The France Foundation
A Bright Outlook on New and Emerging RA Management
145,330.00
Options: What Would You Do?
Collaboration \3\
The France Foundation Calibre
Famous People with Diabetes: A Case Study Exploring
552,210.00
Institute for Quality Medical
the Use of New and Emerging Basal Insulins
Education
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
27th International Prostate Cancer Update
20,000.00
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing Co.,
Ltd.
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
Optimizing Stem Cell Mobilization for Autologous
223,000.00
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing Co.,
Transplantation in Myeloma
Ltd.
The National Multiple Sclerosis
The Living Well with MS Conference (North Florida)
3,500.00
Society, North Florida Chapter
The Trustees of the University of
Lysosomal Storage Disease Fellowship
75,000.00
Pennsylvania
The University of Chicago
22nd Annual University of Chicago Developmental
5,000.00
Therapeutics Symposium
The University of Texas MD Anderson
7th Current Concepts in the Management of Thyroid &
25,000.00
Cancer Center
Parathyroid Neoplasms
Tufts Medical Center
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy--A Contemporary and
20,000.00
Treatable Disease: Diagnosis, Heart Failure
Management, and Prevention of Sudden Death
UC Irvine
University of California, Irvine Lysosomal Storage
56,857.68
Diseases Patient and Family Educational Grant
UCI Office of Continuing Medical
Nephrology Grand Rounds
2,000.00
Education University of California
Irvine
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Optimizing Outcomes in Atopic Dermatitis
106,250.00
Education Group, Physicians'
Collaboration \3\
Education Resource
University of Alabama at Birmingham
2017 Fabry Fellowship
75,000.00
UMA Education, Inc.: dba Global
Going Deeper on Atopic Dermatitis: Pathophysiology to
239,640.92
Education Integritas Communications
the Management of Moderate-to-Severe Disease
Collaboration \3\
University of Arkansas for Medical
Tackling Type 2 Diabetes at the Community Level: A
90,000.00
Sciences MedIQ
Focused QI Initiative to Overcome Local Challenges to
Patient Health
University of Cincinnati Advances in
MauiDerm 2017
45,000.00
Cosmetic and Medical Dermatology
Collaboration \3\
University of Kansas Medical Center/
Neuromuscular Review Course 2017
20,000.00
Kansas Endowment Association
University of Kansas School of
Neuromuscular Medicine Fellowship
75,000.00
Medicine
University of Massachusetts Medical
The Physiologic and Mechanistic Rationale for
341,000.00
School CMEducation Resources
Achieving HA1c Target Goals with Basal Insulin In
Vulnerable Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: Focus on
the Safety-Efficacy Equation, Patient Selection,
Switching, Dosing and Physiologic, PK/PD Profiles of
Long-Acting Basal Insulin Formulations
University of Massachusetts Medical
The iQ&A Case-By-Case interactive Diabetes
178,000.00
School CMEducation Resources
Intelligence Zone: Practical, Real World Strategies
for Deploying Fixed-Ratio Insulin Combinations in T2D-
National Experts in Diabetes Focus on Patient
Identification, Dose Titration, Pan-Glycemic (FPG and
PPG) Control, Mechanistic Complementarity, and
Optimizing the Safety-Weight-Efficacy Equation in
Patients with Diabetes
University of Massachusetts Medical
The iQ&A Case-By-Case Interactive Diabetes
178,000.00
School CMEducation Resources
Intelligence Zone: Focus on Practical Aspects of
Using Physiologic, Long-Acting Basal Insulin to
Optimize Glycemic Management in T2D
University of Rochester School of
2017 Society for Investigative Dermatology Annual
50,000.00
Medicine and Dentistry Society for
Meeting
Collaboration \3\
Investigative Dermatology
University of Massachusetts Medical
The iQ&A Case-By-Case Interactive Diabetes
178,000.00
School CMEducation Resources
Intelligence Zone: Focus on Practical Aspects of
Using Physiologic, Long-Acting Basal Insulin to
Optimize Glycemic Management in T2D
University of Rochester School of
2017 Society for Investigative Dermatology Annual
50,000.00
Medicine and Dentistry Society for
Meeting
Collaboration3
Investigative Dermatology
University of Vermont and State
The 28th Annual Eastern Winter Dermatology Conference
Collaboration \3\
Agricultural Colle
10,000.00
UT Southwestern Medical Center
39th Annual Carrell-Krusen Neuromuscular Symposium
5,000.00
Collaboration \3\
World Allergy Organization
Collaboration on Severe Asthma (COSA)
35,000.00
Collaboration \3\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q1, 2017 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st April 2017-30th June 2017
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AKH Inc., Advancing Knowledge in
A Multidisciplinary Approach to the Treatment of
149,125.00
Healthcare Center of Excellence
Prostate Cancer: Providing Therapies that Improve
Media, LLC--An affiliate of The Lynx
Overall Survival and Quality of Life
Group
AKH Inc., Advancing Knowledge in
Endocrine Nurses Society Symposium 2017 Thyroid
5,000.00
Healthcare Endocrine Nurses Society
Sessions
American Academy of Dermatology The
The Future is Finally Here--Targets of the New Atopic
75,000.00
France Foundation
Dermatitis Drugs
Collaboration \3\
American Academy of PAs
AAPA 2017--Orthopaedics Track
10,000.00
American Association of Clinical
Current Landscape in Medullary Thyroid Cancer: Updates
198,425.00
Endocrinologists
for Clinicians
American Association of Clinical
Georgia-AACE April Dinner Program: New Developments in
3,276.00
Endocrinologists
Thyroid Cancer
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
EAC 2017 Update in Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
10,000.00
Immunology Eastern Allergy
Collaboration \3\
Conference
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
Society of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology CSAAI 2017 A
10,000.00
Immunology; California
Midsummer Night's Wheeze
American College of Medical Genetics
Genzyme/ACMG Foundation Clinical Genetics Fellowships
75,000.00
Foundation
in Biochemical Genetics
American Society of Clinical
Oncology 2017 ASCO Annual Meeting Genitourinary Cancer
28,000.00
Oncology, Inc. Conquer Cancer
Tracks Bundle--Prostate and Nonprostate
Foundation of the American Society
of Clinical
American Thoracic Society
ATS 2017 International Conference--Selected Sessions
20,000.00
in Asthma
Collaboration \3\
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's
Lysosomal Storage Disease Training Program for Genetic
75,000.00
Hospital of Chicago
Counselors
Med Learning Group
Novel Formulations of Basal Insulins for Patients with
249,050.00
Diabetes: A New Opportunity to Optimize Outcomes
Med Learning Group
A Virtual Reality View of Biologic Agents: Targeted
375,000.00
Therapies for the Management of Moderate-to-Severe
Collaboration \3\
Atopic Dermatitis in Adults
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI
Enhancing Autologous Hematopoietic Stem Cell
108,050.00
Peerview Institute for Medical
Transplantation Through Individualized Stem Cell
Education Inc.
Mobilization Strategies
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI
PeerView Video in Session ``New Developments in
154,980.00
Peerview Institute for Medical
Inflammatory Dermatologic and Respiratory Diseases:
Collaboration \3\
Education Inc.
Clinical Highlights From Helsinki''
Medscape LLC
Basal Insulin in Today's Clinical Practice
500,000.00
Environment: Improving Use for Better Patient
Outcomes
Medscape LLC
Clinical Advances in Atopic Dermatitis
950,000.00
Collaboration \3\
Medscape LLC
A Medscape Studio Series on Modern Approaches for
125,000.00
Optimizing Care in MS
Michigan State Medical Society
Rheumatology Update
5,000.00
Collaboration \3\
MSWorld Inc.
Comprehensive Proposal for 2017 MS World Conference
50,000.00
Coverage
MSWorld Inc.
2017 ``MSWorld Talks'' Series
55,000.00
Muscular Dystrophy Association
MDA Care Center Open House at Nemours Children's
500.00
Hospital
National Association of Managed Care
Individualizing Treatment in the Management of Type 2
57,000.00
Physicians, Inc.
Diabetes: Novel Therapies for Improved Patient
Outcomes
National Comprehensive Cancer Network
Prostate Cancer Patient Management Simulator
35,000.00
National Lipid Association Vindico
Back to the Future: Clinical Experience with and
50,000.00
Medical Education
Access to Lipid-Lowering Agents of the Past, Present,
Collaboration \3\
and Future--A National Lipid Association Expert
Discussion and Town Hall
National Medical Association
Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism Symposium
250,000.00
Current and Emerging Interventions: Saving Lives and
Limbs by Improving Diabetes Care
National Medical Association
MODERN ERA DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF
15,000.00
PATIENTS WITH PROSTATE CANCER
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
National MS Society Monthly Email Newsletter
75,000.00
National Society for Cutaneous
2017 Real World Dermatology for Residents
40,000.00
Medicine
Collaboration \3\
OhioHealth
OhioHealth Multiple Sclerosis Symposium
5,000.00
Oncology Nursing Society
42nd ONS Annual Congress and two Oncology Updates
25,000.00
Regional Programs
Oregon Health & Science University
7th International Symposium on Gait & Balance in
13,108.00
Multiple Sclerosis: Neuroplasticity and
Rehabilitation in MS
Palm Beach County Medical Society
Managing Thyroid Disease for the Primary Care Provider
5,000.00
Services Palm Beach Diabetes &
Endocrine Specialists, P.A.
Penn State College of Medicine i3
Selecting Optimal Therapeutic Strategies for Patients
50,000.00
Health
With Differentiated and Medullary Thyroid Cancer
Penn State College of Medicine PVI
``Science and Stories: Making the Most of the Complex
146,030.00
PPerview Institute for Medical
Treatment Landscape in Prostate Cancer''
Education Inc.
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Reaching Out: A Pharmacist's Curriculum to Optimize
251,240.00
Insulin Therapy Through Patient Engagement and
Management
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
How Specialty Pharmacists Can Enhance Patient-Driven
58,000.00
LLC Postgraduate Institute for
Care in Multiple Sclerosis
Medicine
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
Providing Relief to Patients with Atopic Dermatitis:
137,250.00
LLC Postgraduate Institute for
How Pharmacists Can Help
Collaboration \3\
Medicine
Potomac Center for Medical Education
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS CARE IN THE HOSPITAL SETTING: Novel
75,000.00
Rockpointe Corporation
Neuroimaging Techniques, Individualized Treatment
Strategies, and Management of Comorbidities
Practicing Clinicians Exchange Boston
New and Emerging Strategies in T2DM Using Basal
375,000.00
University School of Medicine
Insulin
PRIME Education, LLC
Advances in Psoriatic Diseases and Atopic Dermatitis
150,000.00
for Clinicians in Federal and Public Healthcare
Collaboration \3\
Settings
PRIME Education, LLC
When Statin Therapy Isn't Enough
192,435.00
Collaboration \3\
ProCE Inc.
Atopic Dermatitis: A Specialty Pharmacy 360-Degree
42,250.00
View of the Patient
Collaboration \3\
Projects In Knowledge
MedImages Cases: Multiple Sclerosis
125,000.00
Purdue University MCM Education
Managing Type 2 Diabetes: The Role of Insulin
175,000.00
Regents of the University of Colorado
Practical Ways to Achieve Targets in Diabetes Care
150,000.00
Regents of the University of
Pharmacotherapy of Inherited Metabolic Diseases Post-
75,000.00
Minnesota
Doctoral PharmD Fellowship
Society for Translational Oncology
Conference Perspectives: Lessons Learned
40,000.00
St. Vincent Neuroscience Institute,
MS: A Personal Approach
3,000.00
St. Vincent Hospital, Indianapolis
The University of Chicago MCM
Evolving Paradigms for Insulin Therapy of Type 2
150,000.00
Education
Diabetes
Tisch Multiple Sclerosis Research
Tisch MS Research Center 20th Annual MS Patient
50,000.00
Center of New York
Symposium
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Coalition United for Better Eczema Care (CUBE-C)
320,000.00
Education Group FactoRx Health
Collaboration \3\
Advocacy Partners National Eczema
Association Med Ed Consulting
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
R.A.P.I.D.--Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Primary Care
150,000.00
Education Group FactoRx MedEd
Initiative for Improved Diagnosis and Outcomes
Collaboration \3\
Consulting Improve CME, LLC Indegene
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
The Role of Concentrated Insulins and Insulin
127,500.00
Education Group Physicians'
Combinations in Overcoming Insulin Resistance and
Education Resource
Improving Adherence A Patient Centered
Multidisciplinary Approach
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Medical Crossfirer: Advances in Atopic Dermatitis: A
157,000.00
Education Group Physicians'
Multidisciplinary, Patient-Centered Approach to
Education Resources
Addressing Unmet Therapeutic Needs
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Effective Management of Atopic Dermatitis: New
99,585.00
Education Group Physicians'
Approaches to Guiding Everyday Practice
Collaboration \3\
Education Resources
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Getting Beneath the Surface in Atopic Dermatitis: A
164,330.00
Education Group Physicians'
Patient-Centered Approach to Optimize Outcomes
Collaboration \3\
Education Resources
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
Best Practices: Efficient and Cost Effective
155,884.00
Education Group Tarsus Cardio Inc.
Management of the Authorization Process
Collaboration \3\
dba Cardiometabolic Health Congress
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q2, 2017 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st July 2017--30th Sep 2017
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of PAs
2017 Adult Hospital Medicine Boot Camp
5,490.00
American Association of Clinical
Current Landscape in Medullary Thyroid Cancer: Updates
147,769.00
Endocrinologists
for Clinicians
American Association of Clinical
Illinois-AACE 7th Annual Meeting
5,000.00
Endocrinologists
American Association of Clinical
New Jersey Chapter of the American Association of
5,000.00
Endocrinologists
Clinical Endocrinologists
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
Thursday Morning Session: Atopic Dermatitis Yardstick
40,000.00
Immunology
Collaboration \3\
American College of Medical Genetics
Genzyme ACMG Foundation Clinical Genetics Fellowships
75,000.00
Foundation
in Biochemical Genetics
American Society of Transplant
11th Annual Surgical Fellows Symposium
44,500.00
Surgeons
American Society of Transplantation
2017 Fellows Symposium on Transplantation
40,000.00
American Urological Association
Practical Management of Metastatic Prostate Cancer:
75,000.00
Guidelines and Beyond
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's
Lysosomal Storage Disease Training Program for Genetic
75,000.00
Hospital of Chicago
Counselors
Ascendant Limited Albert Einstein
The Team-based Approach to Diagnosing and Managing
134,868.75
College of Medicine and Montefiore
African American Patients with MS: A Quality
Medical Center, Center for CME
Improvement Curriculum
Carden Jennings Publishing Co., Ltd.
27th International Prostate Cancer Update
20,000.00
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
Inc.
Cleveland Clinic Educational
Pitfalls in Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis
25,000.00
Foundation
Clinical and Patient Educators
Oncology Emergency Essentials: Addressing Tumor Lysis
117,394.90
Association
Syndrome in Your Practice
Carden Jennings Publishing Co., Ltd.
27th International Prostate Cancer Update
20,000.00
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
Inc.
Cleveland Clinic Educational
Pitfalls in Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis
25,000.00
Foundation
CMEducation Resources Postgraduate
Optimizing Insulin-Based Glycemic Control in Type 2
500,000.00
Institute for Medicine
Diabetes: The Foundational Role and Physiologic
Rationale for Long-Acting Insulin: An Evidence-Based
Roadmap for Clinical Success-Focus on the Safety-
Efficacy and PK/PD Profiles of New Long-Acting
Physiologic Insulin Formulations
Connecticut Pharmacists Association
Current and Emerging Therapies in Multiple Sclerosis
10,000.00
Continuing Education Alliance
PCE Interactive eCourse Series: New Pathways in Atopic
149,534.00
Practicing Clinicians Exchange
Dermatitis: Novel Therapies for Optimizing Outcomes
Collaboration \3\
Dignity Health MandatoryCE
2017 Arkansas Diabetes Symposium: Focus on Treatment
25,000.00
Advances, Nutrition Therapy, Obesity and Metabolic
Syndrome
DKBmed The Johns Hopkins University
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
120,000.00
School of Medicine
eDiabetes Review Volume 3
Duke University
Duke Solid Organ Transplant Summit
30,000.00
E&S MedEd Group, Inc. American
Zeroing In on A1C Targets: Pinpointing the Optimal
284,660.00
Association of Diabetes Educators
Basal Insulin Strategy in Every Patient with Type 2
Diabetes
Elsevier Office of Continuing
Evolving Treatment Paradigms for Rheumatoid Arthritis:
75,000.00
Education Integritas Communications
Translating Comprehensive Patient Evaluations Into
Collaboration \3\
Personalized Therapy
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
MS Paris 2017: Clinical Updates on Disease Modifying
161,920.00
Education AcademicCME
Therapies to Improve Outcomes for Patients with
Multiple Sclerosis
Enquiring Minds, LLC Postgraduate
Are My Patients Taking Their Meds as Prescribed?
106,205.00
Institute for Medicine
Addressing Suboptimal Therapeutic Response Among
Patients with MS
Euforea IVZW
European Summit on the Prevention and Self-Management
10,676.50
of Airway Diseases
Excel Continuing Education
Expanding Horizons in ASMD/Niemann-Pick Disease
68,175.00
Focus Medical Communications, LLC
2017 International Coalition of Rheumatology Education
100,000.00
Siyemi Learning
Providers Initiative
Foundation for Orthopaedic Research &
2017 Orthopaedics for the Primary Care Practitioner &
5,000.00
Education (FORE)
Rehabilitation
Global Academy Medical Education
Innovative Techniquesr: The Knee, Hip and Shoulder
25,000.00
University of Cincinnati
Course
Haymarket Medical Education Haymarket
Race to Remission: Timely Diagnosis and Early,
273,823.00
Media/MIMS
Intensive Treatment in Rheumatoid Arthritis Care: A
Collaboration \3\
Patient-Centered Global Curriculum Aligning With the
Spirit of World Arthritis Day
Indiana Academy of Physician
``Multiple sclerosis 2017--Update on diagnostic
5,000.00
Assistants
criteria, clinical descriptors, and treatments''
International Niemann-Pick Disease
Support for the development and management of the
117,706.45
Registry
International Niemann Pick Disease Registry
Kentucky Academy of Physician
Joint Injection Workshop
5,000.00
Assistants
Letters & Sciences
Advances in Multiple Sclerosis Research & Practice,
69,000.00
Annual CNE Conference Hosted by Columbia University,
MS Clinical Care and Research Center
Mattel Children's Hospital UCLA
Post Doc Fellowship
63,000.00
Med Learning Group
Pathologic Targets in Rheumatoid Arthritis: Modifying
288,350.00
the Immune Response to Optimize Patient Outcomes
Collaboration3
Med Learning Group
A 3-Dimensional View of Recent Advances in
353,460.00
Personalized Treatment for the Management of
Collaboration \3\
Uncontrolled Asthma
Med-IQ, LLC
Clinical and Translational Insights in Pompe Disease:
189,407.00
Disease Pathology, Patient Identification, and
Treatment
Medscape LLC
CME LIVE: A Late-Breaking Update on PCSK9 Inhibitors
500,000.00
and Cardiovascular Outcomes
Collaboration \3\
Medscape LLC
Advances in Rheumatoid Arthritis 2017: What's the
99,500.00
Conference Buzz?
Collaboration \3\
MedStar Georgetown University
4th Annual Current Issues in the Care of Dialysis and
10,000.00
Hospital
Transplant Patients
Montefiore Medical Center MRCME, LLC
PCSK9 Inhibitor Therapy for Dyslipidemia: Implications
399,845.00
of Outcome Trial Results and a Look to the Future
Collaboration\3\
MS Views and News
The 2017 Multiple Sclerosis Symposium of South Florida-
20,000.00
The Neurological Aspects of MS and Beyond
Collaboration \3\
National Association for Continuing
Utilizing Concentrated Insulins: A New Strategy for
260,000.00
Education
the Insulin Resistant Patient
National Association of Managed Care
New Targets in the Therapeutic Landscape for Moderate-
57,000.00
Physicians, Inc.
to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis (AD): What Does Managed
Collaboration \3\
Care Need to Know?
National Gaucher Foundation, Inc.
Medical Diagnostic/Testing Program
150,000.00
Collaboration \3\
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
Life-Changing Breakthroughs: African American
10,000.00
Education Conference
National Organization for Rare
NORD Continuing Medical Education
80,000.00
Disorders University of
Massachusetts Medical School
Oregon Health & Science University
17th Annual Pacific Northwest Prostate Cancer
20,000.00
Conference
Penn State College of Medicine MCM
Contemporary Management of Type 2 Diabetes
166,694.00
Education
Penn State College of Medicine PVI
PeerView In Session, ``Analyzing the Latest Evidence
151,480.00
Peerview Institute for Medical
in Atopic Dermatitis: Clinical Updates From Geneva''
Collaboration \3\
Education Inc.
Pennsylvania Society of Physician
``Joint Injections''
5,500.00
Assistants
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Advances in Insulin and Insulin Combination Therapies:
68,300.00
Opportunities for Convenient Care Providers to
Improve Patient Outcomes
PlatformQ Health Education, LLC
From Novice to Expert: A Series in Multiple Sclerosis
100,000.00
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Management
Centers Nurse Practitioner
Alternatives
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
Understanding the Mechanisms of DMARD Therapy in
53,500.00
LLC Postgraduate Institute for
Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis
Collaboration \3\
Medicine
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Importance of Early Diagnosis and Timely Access to
349,850.00
Global Academy for Medical Education
Treatment of RA
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Defining Personalized Care Plans in Metastatic
60,000.00
i3 Health
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Managing Multiple Sclerosis: Current Treatment and
150,000.00
Impact Education, LLC
Care Management Strategies for Managed Care
PRIME Education, LLC
Scaling-Up Shared Decision-Making in Multiple
162,382.50
Sclerosis Treatment
Projects in Knowledge
The Art & Science of Multiple Sclerosis Management
175,000.00
Projects in Knowledge @Point of Care
Atopic Dermatitis @Point of Care
200,000.00
Collaboration \3\
Regents of the University of Michigan
Pompe Disease Patient Educational Booklet
2,777.00
Collaboration \3\
Regents University of California Los
Educational Seminars for Patients, Families, and
20,000.00
Angeles
Friends 2017-2018
Research To Practice
Year in Review--A Four-Part Multi-tumor Regional CME
40,000.00
Symposia Series Focused on the Application of
Emerging Research Information to the Care of Patients
with Common Cancers: Genitourinary Cancers Module
Rheumatology Nurses Society
RNS 2017 Annual Conference
25,000.00
Collaboration \3\
RMEI Postgraduate Institute for
Achieving Success in RA Assessment and Management: A
349,547.00
Medicine
Learner Pathway to Improve Patient Outcomes
Collaboration \3\
Suffolk Academy of Medicine Long
The Long Island Allergy & Asthma Society 24th Annual
10,000.00
Island Allergy & Asthma Society
Scientific Meeting
Collaboration \3\
Suffolk Academy of Medicine Long
The Long Island Allergy & Asthma Society 24th Annual
10,000.00
Island Allergy & Asthma Society
Scientific Meeting
Collaboration3
The Regents of UC/Office of Cont Med
UCLA Review of Clinical Neurology
2,500.00
Educ
Tufts University School of Medicine
Severe Asthma: Inspiring Change
216,712.50
DKBmed
Collaboration \3\
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
Closing the Gap Created by Clinical Inertia: New
207,845.00
Education Group Tarsus Cardio Inc.
Strategies for T2DM Treatment
dba Cardiometabolic Health Congress
Universitatsmedizin Rostock, Albrecht- Recent advances in rare diseases: Gaucher disease as a
25,000.00
Kossel-Institute for
model (RARD 2017)
Neuroregeneration (AKos)
University of Louisville Research
10th Annual Perspectives in Rheumatic Diseases
12,500.00
Foundation Global Academy for
presented by Rheumatology News, Internal Medicine
Collaboration \3\
Medical Education, LLC Postgraduate
News & Family Practice News
Institute for Medicine
University of Nevada, Reno School of
2017 Fall Clinical Dermatology Conference
125,000.00
Medicine Foundation for Research and
Education in Dermatology
Vindico Medical Education, LLC
When Severe Asthma is Out of Control: Examining
137,340.00
Phenotypic Approaches to Treatment
Collaboration \3\
Yale New Haven Hospital
New and Emerging Multiple Sclerosis Therapies
15,000.00
Yale School of Medicine
The Yale-Cambridge Transplantation Symposium: Donor
20,000.00
Decision-Making in an Era of Advanced Medical
Complexity
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q3, 2017 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Oct 2017-31th Dec 2017
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AcademicCME, LLC.
Applying Individualized Therapeutic Strategies of
98,000.00
Switching and Sequencing to Improve Outcomes for
Patients with Multiple Sclerosis: The Right Treatment
at the Right Time for the Right Patient
Albert Einstein College of Medicine/
Atopic Dermatitis (Eczema) Challenges: Recognition and
108,682.50
Montefiore Medical Center M2
Assessment in Primary Care
Collaboration \3\
Communications
American Association of Clinical
New Jersey-AACE January Dinner Program: Treatment of
2,591.00
Endocrinologists
Advanced Thyroid Cancer
American Association of Clinical
Minnesota/Midwest Chapter of the American Association
5,000.00
Endocrinologists
of Clinical Endocrinologists 8th Annual Meeting
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
Biologics in Atopic Dermatitis Workshop
25,320.00
Immunology
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
WSAAI 2018: 56th Annual Scientific Session
20,000.00
Immunology Western Society of
Collaboration \3\
Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
10th Annual Linda Morgante MS Nurse Leadership Program
35,000.00
at Eisenhower Academy for Continued
Healthcare Learning (ACHL)
Association pulmonaire du Quebec
Biennale de l'Espace francophone de la pneumologie
12,150.00
Boston University School of Medicine
Management of Knee Osteoarthritis in Primary Care: The
200,000.00
Practicing Clinicians Exchange
Case for Viscosupplementation
Continuing Education Alliance LLC
California Optometric Association
2017 Monterey Symposium
10,400.00
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
7th Annual Symposium on Lysosomal Storage Disorders
15,000.00
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Lysosomal Storage Disease (LSD) Fellowship
75,000.00
Foundation
Cleveland Clinic--Lou Ruvo Center for
Advancing Therapeutics for Multiple Sclerosis
5,000.00
Brain Health
Cleveland Clinic Center for
Clinical Updates on Fabry Disease: Diagnosis Through
159,750.00
Continuing Medical Education
Treatment
Medscape LLC
Cleveland Clinic Educational
Medical Dermatology Therapy Update: Autoimmune
10,000.00
Foundation
Diseases, Chronic Inflammatory and Advanced
Malignancies
Cleveland Clinic Educational
6th Annual Basic & Clinical Immunology for the Busy
25,000.00
Foundation
Clinician
CME Outfitters, LLC
Peeking Beneath the Surface of Atopic Dermatitis:
200,000.00
Testing Your Skills from Pathogenesis to Treatment
Division of Medical Genetics and
Better Outcomes of Lysosomal Diseases (BOLD)
75,000.00
Genomic Medicine
Fellowship
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
THE LSD DEBATE: OPTIMIZING DIAGNOSIS AND FUTURE
248,465.00
Education Excerpta Medica BV
MANAGEMENT
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Clinical Issues in Severe Asthma: Debates and
628,867.00
Education Integritas Communications
Discussions About Personalizing Patient Management
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Clinical Issues in Atopic Dermatitis: Discussions and
784,641.50
Education Integritas Communications
Debates on Managing Moderate-to-Severe Disease
Collaboration \3\
Emory University
The Paul M. Fernhoff Genetic Counseling Fellowship in
75,000.00
the Lysosomal Storage and Other Genetic Disorders
EUFOREA IVZW
European Rhinology Research Forum
18,000.00
European Respiratory Society
ERS Satellites
72,000.00
European Society for Dermatological
47th ESDR Meeting 2017
44,400.00
Research
Excel Continuing Education
Responding to the Challenge of Pompe Disease
100,165.00
(satellite symposium at 2018 World Congress)
George Washington University (GW)
American Contact Dermatitis Society-Frontiers in
10,000.00
Office of Continuing Education in
Dermatitis 2017
Collaboration \3\
the Health Profession (CEHP)
American Contact Dermatitis Society
Global Education Group Integritas
Clinical Issues in Atopic Dermatitis: Discussions and
177,074.00
Communications
Debates on Managing Moderate-to-Severe Disease
Collaboration \3\
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
4th NY Masters Course in Endocrinology and Endocrine
10,000.00
Sinai
Surgery
Collaboration \3\
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
20th Annual Mount Sinai Winter Symposium ``Advances in
20,000.00
Sinai
Medical & Surgical Dermatology''
Indiana Academy of Physician
``Anterior Knee Pain and Osteoarthritis''
5,000.00
Assistants
Institute for Medical and Nursing
MEDS 2018: Going Flat-Out for Glycemic Control: The
381,055.00
Education, Inc.
Role of New Basal Insulins in Patient-Centered T2DM
Management
Institute for Medical and Nursing
MEDS 2018: Rationale, Recognition, and
354,830.00
Education, Inc.
Recommendations: Expert Perspectives on Combining
Basal Insulin and GLP-1 RAs to Intensify Treatment of
T2DM
Kidney Disease Improving Global
KDIGO Controversies Conference on Glomerular Diseases
25,000.00
Outcomes (KDIGO)
Med Learning Group
Recognizing the Connection: A View into the Parallels
225,000.00
between Asthma and Nasal Polyps
Medical Education Resources, Inc.
Basic concepts in eczema diagnosis and management
20,000.00
Dermveda Inc.
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI,
PeerView ``Ascertaining the Potential Clinical
80,000.00
Peerview Institute for Medical
Implications of The Latest Data on Approved and
Education Inc.
Emerging Disease Modifying Therapies for Multiple
Sclerosis Management: A Recap from Paris''
Medical Learning Institute Inc. PVI,
PeerView in Session, ``Exploring the Latest Data in
74,490.00
PeerView Institute for Medical
the Treatment of Uncontrolled Persistent Asthma:
Collaboration \3\
Education, Inc.
Clinical Highlights from San Diego''
Medical Learning Institute PVI,
PeerView Talks, ``A Patient-Centered Approach to the
153,580.00
PeerView Institute for Medical
Diagnosis and Treatment of Atopic Dermatitis in
Collaboration \3\
Education
Adults: An Expert's Story''
Med-IQ, LLC
Pragmatic Approaches to Improving Insulin Introduction
254,623.00
and Integration in T2DM:Patient Simulations For
Frontline Providers
Med-IQ, LLC
Addressing Bone Manifestations of GD: The Latest
382,736.00
Evidence in Evaluation and Treatment
Medscape LLC
Updates and Perspectives in Diabetic Dyslipidemia:
246,500.00
2017 in Review
Collaboration \3\
Medscape LLC
Addressing Disease Burden in Asthma and Comorbidities:
400,000.00
From Pathophysiology to Targeted Treatments
Medstar Georgetown University
Multiple Sclerosis Patient Education Day
7,500.00
Hospital
Mount Sinai School of Medicine
The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai NP
75,000.00
Fellowship Program in Lysosomal Storage Disease
National Association For Continuing
Atopic Dermatitis: New Insights, New Therapies
150,000.00
Education
National Committee for Quality
A Patient-Centered Approach to Severe Asthma
232,325.00
Assurance NACCME, LLC
Management: Embracing Diversity and Improving
Collaboration \3\
Outcomes with Emerging Therapies
NCCN Foundation
NCCN Guidelines for Patients: Prostate Cancer
25,000.00
Nurse Practitioner Alternatives
Advances In Multiple Sclerosis (AIMS) Primer: Third
59,150.00
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Edition
Centers
Nurse Practitioner Alternatives
1,800 SecondsTM in MS Management: An Online
92,000.00
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Educational Series for MS Clinicians
Centers
Oakstone Publishing, LLC PeerVoice
A New Treatment Paradigm in Atopic Dermatitis: Expert
268,700.00
America Limited
Insights on Incorporating Biologic Therapy Among
Available Options
Oakstone Publishing, LLC PeerVoice
Optimizing Systemic Therapy for Atopic Dermatitis:
268,700.00
America Limited
Practical Strategies to Ensure Patient Safety
Oregon Health and Science University
Annual OHSU Colloquium on Neuromuscular Disorders
5,000.00
PEERVOICE AMERICA LIMITED Oakstone
``Practical Strategies for Managing Inadequate
193,250.00
Publishing, LLC
Responders to Atopic Dermatitis Treatment''
Collaboration \3\
Penn State College of Medicine
Beyond the Guidelines: Investigator Perspectives on
100,000.00
Research To Practice
Current Clinical Issues and Ongoing Research in the
Management of Advanced Prostate Cancer
PESG Lysosomal And Rare Disorders
GRIDS2017: A workshop on immune aspects of Lysosomal
55,000.00
Research And Treatment Center Inc.
Storage Disorders: From pathology to therapy
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
A Specialty Pharmacy Update on PCSK9 Inhibitor Therapy
10,000.00
for Hypercholesterolemia
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
An American Journal of Managed Care Webinar:
75,255.00
Evaluating Novel Therapies for Atopic Dermatitis
Physician's Education Resource, LLC
Provider and Caregiver Connection--Getting Beneath the
167,850.00
Surface: Addressing Patient Concerns In Moderate to
Severe Atopic Dermatitis
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Early Detection and New Approaches to the Management
150,000.00
Catamount Medical Education, LLC
of Atopic Dermatitis in the Family Medicine Setting
Collaboration3
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Role of Specialty Pharmacy and the Challenge of
150,000.00
Impact Education, LLC
Managing Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Management of Atopic Dermatitis: Entering a New
200,000.00
Impact Education, LLC
Paradigm
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Rheumatoid Arthritis Management Strategies: New
150,000.00
Impact Education, LLC
Insights for Managed Care
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Learning Pathway in Atopic Dermatitis: Optimizing
382,947.00
Robert Michael Educational Institute
Management Approaches in Patients with Moderate-to-
Collaboration \3\
LLC
Severe Disease
Potomac Center for Medical Education
Targeting Improved Outcomes In Atopic Dermatitis:
449,955.00
Rockpointe Corporation
Strategies for Achieving Personalized Treatment Goals
Collaboration \3\
Potomac Center for Medical Education
Achieving New Treatment Goals In Multiple Sclerosis:
176,000.00
Rockpointe Corporation Nurse
Strategies for Initial Treatment Selection and
Practitioner Alternatives
Patient Engagement
PRIME Education, LLC
Aligning Managed Care Decision-Making with the Latest
272,543.00
Evidence for Targeted Asthma Treatment
PRIME Education, LLC
Navigating the Intersection of Uncontrolled Asthma and
354,188.00
Related Comorbidities: Implications of Novel
Mechanisms of Action for Managed Care
PRIME Education, LLC
Advancing Specialty Pharmacy Decision-Making to
242,011.00
Optimize Therapy Selection and Access in Uncontrolled
and Severe Asthma
PRIME Education, LLC
Solving the Problem of Choice in Treatment Decisions
182,535.00
for Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis: Evidence-
Based, Guideline-Directed, and Patient-Centered
Strategies
Pri-Med Institute, LLC
Viscosupplementation for Osteoarthritis of the Knee:
149,499.92
Who, When, and How?
Projects In Knowledge
Asthma--Practical Applications from ATS 2018: A Video
50,000.00
Roundtable
Rutgers, The State University of New
Cognitive Dysfunction and Fatigue in Multiple
3,011.00
Jersey
Sclerosis
Sidney Kimmel Medical College at
Thyroid Cancer 2017: New Advances in Diagnosis &
10,000.00
Thomas Jefferson
Treatment
Society for Inherited Metabolic
2017 North American Metabolic Academy
20,000.00
Disorders
St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center
Multiple Sclerosis: A Changing Landscape
1,300.00
The France Foundation
Achieving Better Control of Severe Asthma: New
262,700.00
Understandings in Asthma Pathophysiology and Targeted
Therapies
The France Foundation
Are You Ready? Recent Effective Atopic Dermatitis
240,720.00
Therapy Considerations
The Regents of the University of
Post Doc Fellowship
63,000.00
California--UCLA Division of
Nephrology
UC Regents
Genetic Neuromuscular Diseases Fellowship
75,000.00
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
Beyond the Flare: A Practical Overview of the Newest
25,000.00
Education Group Tarsus Cardio dba
Concepts in Atopic Dermatitis Pathogenesis and
Collaboration \3\
South Beach Symposium
Treatment
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
2018 Masters of Pediatric Dermatology Symposium
20,000.00
Education Group Tarsus Cardio Inc.,
Collaboration \3\
dba South Beach Symposium
University Neurology, Inc.
The 2017 New York State Multiple Sclerosis Consortium
5,000.00
(NYSMSC) Annual Professional Research and Education
Meeting
University of Alabama at Birmingham
2017 Fabry Fellowship
73,714.12
University of California, San Diego
Challenges in Pompe
4,800.00
San Diego Neurology Society
University of Colorado School of
87th Annual Meeting of the American Thyroid
50,000.00
Medicine American Thyroid
Association
Association
University of Louisville School of
Visiting Professor and Endocrine Grand Rounds
3,320.00
Medicine
University of Louisville Global
Skin Disease Education Foundation's 18th Annual Las
25,000.00
Academy for Medical Education
Vegas Dermatology Seminar featuring the 14th Annual
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Psoriasis Forum
University of Louisville Postgraduate
17th Annual Caribbean Dermatology Symposium
50,000.00
Institute of Medicine Global Academy
Collaboration \3\
for Medical Education
University of Louisville Postgraduate
Skin Disease Education Foundation's 42nd Annual Hawaii
50,000.00
Institute of Medicine Global Academy
Dermatology Seminar
Collaboration \3\
for Medical Education
University of Massachusetts Medical
New Frontiers and Pivotal Investigation-Based Advances
369,000.00
School CMEducation Resources
in the Pathoimmunobiology and Management of Atopic
Collaboration \3\
Dermatitis
Vindico Medical Education, LLC
Shutting Down MS: New Insights on Induction,
196,378.58
Escalation, Oral Agents, and Monitoring
WEBMD Global
Advancing the Care of Patients With Atopic Dermatitis-
301,000.00
International Perspectives for OUS MDS: An Initiative
developed in partnership with the University of
Sheffield Medical School, Dermatology Research
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q4, 2017 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Organization Name
Amount
Acid Maltase Deficiency Association INC.
$5,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC
$50,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC.
$117,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC.
$25,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC.
$25,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC.
$25,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC.
$25,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC.
$60,000.00
Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics, INC.
$75,000.00
Alliance for the Adoption of Innovations in Medicine
$50,000.00
American Association Of Kidney Patients Inc.
$362,293.31
American Association Of Kidney Patients Inc.
$10,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$6,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$30,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$70,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$100,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$60,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$55,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$95,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$165,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$35,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$30,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$150,000.00
American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
$175,000.00
American Kidney Fund Inc.
$40,000.00
American Kidney Fund Inc.
$10,000.00
APFED (American Partnership for Eosinophilic
$15,000.00
Disorders)
Arthritis Foundation
$100,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$3,500.00
Arthritis Foundation
$1,250.00
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$3,500.00
Arthritis Foundation
$250,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$250,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$30,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$100,000.00
Arthritis Foundation
$100,000.00
Arthritis Foundation Inc.
$2,500.00
Arthritis Foundation of NENY
$5,000.00
Association For Glycogen Storage Disease
$3,000.00
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
$150,000.00
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
$24,200.00
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
$50,000.00
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
$75,000.00
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
$100,000.00
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America, New England
$20,000.00
Chapter
Aubrey Rose Foundation
$25,000.00
Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute
$10,000.00
Be The Match Foundation
$40,000.00
Berkshire Resource Project
$1,500.00
Berkshire Resource Project
$1,500.00
Beyond the Diagnosis
$10,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$8,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$40,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$26,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$20,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$20,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$30,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$40,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$70,000.00
Can Do Multiple Sclerosis
$30,000.00
Community Oncology Alliance
$75,000.00
CrowdCare Foundation
$45,000.00
Cure GM1 Incorporated
$5,000.00
Cure GM1 Incorporated
$5,000.00
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$10,000.00
EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases
$10,000.00
EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases
$30,000.00
EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases
$5,000.00
EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases
$30,000.00
EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases
$15,000.00
EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases
$25,000.00
EveryLife Foundation for Rare Diseases
$20,000.00
Fabry Support & Information Group
$22,000.00
Fabry Support & Information Group
$1,500.00
Fabry Support & Information Group
$50,000.00
Fabry Support & Information Group
$30,000.00
Fabry Support & Information Group
$100,000.00
Florida Hemophilia Association
$3,000.00
Foundation Fighting Blindness Inc.
$5,000.00
Fundacion de Esclerosis Multiple de Puerto Rico
$15,000.00
Global Alliance for Patient Access
$115,000.00
Global Alliance for Patient Access
$30,000.00
Global Healthy Living Foundation, Inc.
$100,000.00
Global Healthy Living Foundation, Inc.
$50,000.00
Global Parents for Eczema Research, a project of
$47,438.00
Heluna Health
Great Lakes Hemophilia Foundation Inc.
$2,500.00
Hemophilia Foundation of Northern California
$5,000.00
Hemophilia of Iowa
$1,500.00
Hemophilia of Iowa
$1,000.00
Hemophilia of North Carolina
$5,000.00
Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome Network
$24,935.00
Holy Name Health Care MS Center
$2,500.00
Holy Name Health Care MS Center
$2,500.00
Hope for Hemophilia
$15,000.00
Hope for Hemophilia
$15,000.00
International Myeloma Foundation
$75,000.00
International Myeloma Foundation
$50,000.00
International Myeloma Foundation
$75,000.00
International Society For Mannosidosis & Related
$30,000.00
Disease Inc.
Kessler Foundation
$5,000.00
Leukemia & Lymphoma Society--MA Chapter
$20,000.00
Light of Life Foundation
$5,000.00
Little Miss Hannah Foundation
$1,000.00
Lone Star Chapter of the National Hemophilia
$15,000.00
Foundation
Lymphoma Research Foundation
$20,000.00
March of Dimes Foundation
$10,000.00
March of Dimes Foundation
$15,000.00
Mercy Foundation
$20,000.00
Mid America MS Achievement Center
$5,000.00
Mid America MS Achievement Center
$5,000.00
MLD Foundation
$12,000.00
MLD Foundation
$12,000.00
MS Bright Spots of Hope
$2,500.00
MS Cure Fund
$3,000.00
MS Cure Fund
$5,250.00
MS Cure Fund
$2,500.00
MS Dream Center--RI, Inc.
$3,000.00
MS HOPE FOR A CURE INC.
$10,000.00
MS Views and News
$25,000.00
MS Views and News
$50,000.00
MS Views and News
$30,000.00
MS Views and News
$30,000.00
MS Views and News
$10,000.00
MS Views and News
$40,000.00
MS Views and News
$25,000.00
MSWorld, Inc.
$4,000.00
Multiple Myeloma Cure Seeker Society
$5,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Association of America
$200,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Association of America
$30,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Association of America
$25,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Association of America
$50,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Association of America
$50,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Association of America
$46,031.00
Multiple Sclerosis Center of Georgia
$10,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Center of Georgia
$7,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Foundation
$30,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Foundation
$20,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Foundation
$50,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis Resources of Central New York, Inc.
$7,500.00
Muscular Dystrophy Association
$20,000.00
Muscular Dystrophy Association
$430,000.00
National Bone Marrow Transplant Link
$3,000.00
National Eczema Association
$100,000.00
National Eczema Association
$85,000.00
National Eczema Association
$100,000.00
National Eczema Association
$75,000.00
National Eczema Association
$100,000.00
National Fabry Disease Foundation
$100,000.00
National Fabry Disease Foundation
$100,000.00
National Fabry Disease Foundation
$40,000.00
National Gaucher Foundation
$1,500,000.00
National Gaucher Foundation
$650,000.00
National Gaucher Foundation
$200,000.00
National Gaucher Foundation
$1,900,000.00
National Hemophilia Foundation
$37,500.00
National Hemophilia Foundation
$100,000.00
National Hemophilia Foundation
$9,479.00
National Kidney Foundation
$3,700.00
National Kidney Foundation
$10,000.00
National Kidney Foundation
$10,000.00
National MPS Society
$500.00
National MPS Society
$20,000.00
National MPS Society
$100,000.00
National MS Society
$5,000.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
$780,000.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
$65,000.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
$15,000.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
$2,500.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
$15,000.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
$750,000.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
$150,000.00
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$2,500.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$1,100.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$15,000.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$122,100.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$5,000.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$1,250.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$300.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$1,000.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$5,000.00
Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis Society New York City
$5,000.00
Chapter
National Niemann-Pick Disease Foundation
$40,000.00
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc.
$50,000.00
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc.
$5,000.00
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc.
$25,000.00
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc.
$100,000.00
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc.
$75,000.00
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc.
$50,000.00
National Tay-Sachs & Allied Diseases Association, Inc.
$20,000.00
National Tay-Sachs & Allied Diseases Association, Inc.
$10,000.00
National Tay-Sachs & Allied Diseases Association, Inc.
$10,000.00
New England Hemophilia Association
$5,000.00
New England Hemophilia Association
$10,000.00
New England Hemophilia Association
$2,500.00
New England Hemophilia Association
$7,500.00
Next Step Fund Inc.
$10,000.00
OhioHealth Corporation
$25,000.00
Osteogenesis Imperfecta Foundation
$5,000.00
Patient Access Network Foundation
$300,000.00
Patient Empowerment Network
$20,000.00
Patient Empowerment Network
$20,000.00
Patient Services, Inc.
$662,500.00
Patient Services, Inc.
$2,381,250.00
Patient Services, Inc.
$4,797,500.00
Patient Services, Inc.
$1,418,750.00
Patient Services, Inc.
$1,365,000.00
PKD Foundation
$50,000.00
PKD Foundation
$20,000.00
PKD Foundation
$25,000.00
Prostate Cancer Foundation
$300,000.00
Prostate Health Education Network Inc.
$20,000.00
Quinn Madeleine Inc.
$5,000.00
Rare Disease United Foundation
$15,000.00
Rare New England, INC.
$4,000.00
Rare New England, INC.
$4,000.00
Rare New England, INC.
$4,000.00
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Center
$2,500.00
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Center
$5,000.00
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Center
$5,000.00
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Center
$2,500.00
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Center
$3,000.00
Sofia Sees Hope
$22,000.00
Swiss Hemophilia Society (Schweizerische Hemophilie
$2,600.00
Gesellschaft)
The Assistance Fund, Inc.
$10,000,000.00
The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society Eastern PA Chapter
$10,000.00
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer Survivors' Association, Inc.
$5,000.00
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer Survivors' Association, Inc.
$3,000.00
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer Survivors' Association, Inc.
$5,000.00
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer Survivors' Association, Inc.
$10,000.00
Tisch Multiple Sclerosis Research Center of New York,
$15,000.00
Inc.
Tisch Multiple Sclerosis Research Center of New York,
$2,500.00
Inc.
Transplant Life Foundation
$12,000.00
Tri-State Multiple Sclerosis Association
$2,500.00
United Pompe Foundation
$50,000.00
United Pompe Foundation
$42,500.00
United Pompe Foundation
$30,000.00
United States Bone and Joint Initiative, NFP
$80,000.00
United States Bone and Joint Initiative, NFP
$30,000.00
United States Bone and Joint Initiative, NFP
$25,000.00
University of Minnesota Foundation
$5,000.00
Us TOO International
$2,500.00
Us TOO International
$30,000.00
Wylder Nation Foundation
$5,000.00
Wylder Nation Foundation
$15,000.00
Program/Event
PCMA of Texas's Pull
Telehealth 2018
Patient Awareness
for Pompe
Program
Understanding Severe
2018 USAsthma Summit
Corporate Council 2018
Asthma Program
2018 Allergy & Asthma
2018 Asthma Bloggers
Understanding Severe
Awareness Day
Conference
Asthma Guide
Webinars on
Medical Education
Education Project
Dermatological
Conditions in the
Workplace
Eczema Online Program
Patient Awareness
Patient Awareness
Program
Program
Fellow-in-Training
Severe Atopic
2018 Corporate Council
Travel Scholarships
Dermatitis Toolkit
Membership
Program
Biologics Education
Severe Asthma Allergist
Webinar Education
Program
and Patient Education
Program
Severe Asthma Patient
Practice Management
Educational Tools for
Education
Center: Expansion and
Allergists and
Enhancement
Patient Education
Campaign
Patient Education
Proposal Request in
Annual Patient
Program
Support of 360 Degrees
Education Conference
of Care
Patient Voice Access
Arthritis Foundation
2018 Arthritis
Project
Patient Engagement at
Foundation Conference
ACR
of Champions
2018 Bone Bash
Silver Ball Fundraiser
Evening of Honors
Fundraiser
Fundraiser
Freedom of Movement
San Francisco Bone Bash
2018 Jingle Bell Run
Fundraiser
Fundraiser
Walk to Cure Arthritis
Arthritis Industry
Patient Awareness
Forum (AIF)
Program
Patient Education and
2018 Bone Bash
Albany Commitment to a
Awareness Program
Fundraiser
Cure Fundraiser
Annual GSD Conference
Patient Education
Patient Access Program
Program
My Life With AD
AAFA's Patient Support
My Kids' Life With
Center
Asthma
Be Smart and Breathe
Medical Resources for
8th Annual Prostate
Easy Patient Education
Children: An
Cancer Symposium
Invaluable Database
Be The Match 2018
Patient Education and
Patient Education
National Walk+Run
Awareness Program
Program
Series
Operating Support
Patient Awareness
2019 SKI for MS
Program
2019 JUMPSTART Program
2018 MS Global Patient
9th Annual Can Do
Exhibits
Programs
Month
2018 Young
2018 JUMPSTART Program
2018 Online Programs
Professionals Program
Exhibition
Sponsorship
2018 CAN DO Program
2018 JUMPSTART Program
2018 Can Do On Demand
2018 COA Corporate
Patient Awareness
2nd GM1 Research
Sponsorship
Program
Symposium
TORCH award donation
Fundraiser event
Patient Awareness
Program
RareVoice Awards
Rare Disease Scientific
RARE on the Road
Workshop
Leadership Series
Patient Awareness
Rare Disease Week
Community Congress
Program
Sponsorship
FSIG Patient Meetings
2018 Fun Run/Walk
2018 FSIG Expert Fabry
Conference
Patient Assistance
Operating Support
35th Annual Florida
Program
Bleeding Disorders
Conference
Boston VisionWalk
Managing MS: A
European RA patient
multidisciplinary
online program
approach
European Alliance for
Patient Education and
50-State Network
Patient Access RA
Awareness Program
Patient Advocacy
Stakeholders Workshop
Assessing and
2018 Wisconsin Bleeding
BLeaders
Communicating the
Disorders Conference
Impact of AD on
Patients and Families
Annual Meeting
Teen Program
Family Education
Sponsorship
Program
Research Program
2018 MS Awards
21st Annual Spring
Reception
Fling for MS
Superhero Run/Walk--
2018 Superhero Hope Run/ Long Term Care
Covington
Walk--Wichita
Survivors Initiative
2018 IMF Patient IMF
9th Annual
6th Glycoproteinoses
Patient and Family
International Myeloma
International
Seminars and Regional
Working Group Summit
Conference--Atlanta--
Community Workshops
USA
Kessler Foundation's
Light The Night Boston
Light of Life
2018 Stroll 'N Roll
Foundation 2018
Walk
Patient Activities
3rd Annual Vegas Cares
Texas Bleeding
Research Program
About Rare Kids 5K
Disorders Conference
2018
Fundraising Event
Boston March for Babies
Multiple Sclerosis
Achievement Center
Wellness Education
programs
Eat Bid Laugh 7 Program
Race to Nowhere 2018
RUSP Roundtable
Program
RUSP Roundtable Program
MS Bright Spots Evening
6th ANNUAL MS ADAPTIVE
of Hope
SKI DAY--THRIVING
BEYOND MS!
Relapse Management and
MS ALPINE ADVENTURES
Exhibit Sponsorship
Rehabilitation Program
2018 ADAPTIVE SKI DAY
2018 MS Hope Day
Patient Education and
Patient Education and
Awareness Program
Awareness Program
Patient Education and
Patient Education and
2018 Champions
Awareness Program
Awareness Program
Tackling MS Awards
Dinner
Patient Education and
Patient Education and
2018 ``MSWorld Talks''
Awareness Program
Awareness Program
Cleveland Clinic:
Display Table
2018 Defeat Multiple
Patient Assistance
A Better Understanding
Myeloma Run/Walk
Program
of MS within the
Hispanic Community
Patient Education and
2018 Multiple Sclerosis
MS Awareness Month
Awareness Program
Summit: A Community
2018
Conference and
Exposition
2018 Needs Assessment
MS Fest for Patients
Health, Hope & Hops
MS Focus' Homecare
MS Focus' Assistive
National MS Education
Assistance Grant
Technology Program
and Awareness Month
Program
2018
2018 Mission Steps Walk
Congress Sponsorship
Community Education
and MS Awareness Days
and Engagement
Support
Resource Guide of
Eczema Awareness Month-
The Face of Atopic
Helpful Organizations
Unhide Eczema Campaign
Dermatitis in America
Eczema Expo '18
Atopic Dermatitis Teen
Educational Webcasts
Commitment Campaign
for Patients &
Caregivers
Operating Support
2018 Fabry Community
Community support
Support and Education
programs
programs
Patient Assistance
Patient Education and
Patient Education and
Program
Awareness Program
Awareness Program
Patient Assistance
NHF 2018 Bleeding
UNITE for Bleeding
Program
Disorders Conference
Disorders National
Walk 2018
NHF Bleeding Disorders
Congress Sponsorship
New York City Kidney
Conference 2018
Walk
The Big Ask The Big
In-Kind Donation
National MPS Society
Give
National Run Program
2018--15th
Bike MS: City to Shore
National sponsorship
International
Ride
of Walk MS and local
Symposium on MPS and
sponsorship of select
Related Diseases
Bike MS events
MS Breakthroughs
2018 National MS
Women on the Move--
Program
Society Leadership
Pittsburgh
Conference
Everyday Matters:
National MS Society
Fellowship Program
Living Your Best Life
National Event
with MS
Sponsorship
Knoxville Fall Crush
40th Annual Ambassadors
Mood Changes In MS
Fundraiser
Alliance Industry Forum
On the Move Luncheon--
Women on the Move
2018
New Orleans
Luncheon and Fashion
Show--Cincinnati
Women On the Move--
2018 On the Move
On The Move Luncheon-
Washington, D.C.
Luncheon--St Louis
Houston
2017 On The Move
Patient Education and
Patient Assistance
Luncheon--Dallas TXH
Awareness Program
Program
Running for Rare
2018 Corporate Council
Patient Education and
Membership--Corporate
Awareness Program
Product Member
2018 Rare Diseases and
2018 Rare Impact Awards
Imagine & Believe
Orphan Product
Program
Breakthrough Summit
Voices of
40th Annual Family
Congress Sponsorship
Determination, An
Conference
Evening to Benefit
NTSAD
Family Camp
Massachusetts Advocacy
New England Hemophilia
Days
Association 9th
Annual Walk
Face Forward
OhioHealth Multiple
Conference Sponsorship
Campference and Year-
Sclerosis Wellness
Round Programming for
Program
Youth With Rare
Genetic Disorders
Patient Assistance
Multiple Myeloma
2018 Myeloma Patient
Program
Community Meetings
Cafe
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Program
Program
Program
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Walk for PKD
Program
Program
2018 Boston Walk for
2018 PKD Connect
25th Annual Scientific
PKD
National Conference
Retreat
PHEN Rally Against
TORCH award donation
Beyond the Diagnosis
Prostate Cancer
Rare New England Inc.
RNE Honors Rare Disease
Patient Education and
Day Speakers Series
Awareness Program
2019
2018 RMMSC Annual
2018 MS4MS (Multiple
Rocky Mountain MS
Fundraiser
Summits for MS)
Center's Spring
Education Summit
2018 Conversations on
2018 Webinar Series
LCA and IRD Community
MS
Outreach and
Education
70th NHF Bleeding
Patient Assistance
LLS Light The Night
Disorders Conference
Program
Events
Website Update Project
Congress Sponsorship
21st International
Thyroid Cancer
Survivors' Conference
Patient Education and
Patient Education and
2018 Future Without MS
Awareness Program
Awareness Program
Fundraiser
Donate Life Transplant
Autumn Walks
Fiscal Year 2018
Games
Patient Meeting
Patient Meeting
Experts in Arthritis
Program
Access Program
Corporate Sponsorship
Marrow on the Move
14th Annual SEA Blue
Us TOO Prostate Cancer
TORCH award donation
Prostate Cancer Walk &
Regional Educational
Run
Symposiums
5th Annual Living Like
a Warrior Gala
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Jan 2018-31th Mar 2018
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Kansas Continuing
2017 Muscle Study Group Scientific annual Meeting--
25,000
Education & Professional Development
Neuromuscular Therapeutics: Bench to Bedside and
Beyond
National Jewish Health PVI Peerview
PeerView inPlay and inClinic: ``Optimizing Asthma
209,000
institute for Medical Education Inc.
Control Through Accurate Identification, Evidence-
Based Management and Targeted Therapeutic Options''
Aventura Hospital
Miami Thyroid Oncology Symposium
10,000
AcademicCME, LLC.
ASCO GU 2018: A Clinical Analysis of Optimal
82,300
Therapeutics to Improve Outcomes in Patients with
Prostate Cancer
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
PeerView Live at BMT 2018, ``Integrated Myeloma
88,555
Inc. PVI, PeerView Institute for
Management & Enhanced Patient Outcomes: The
Medical Education, Inc.
Conjunction of Novel Therapeutic Platforms,
Innovative Agents, and Stem Cell Transplant''
American Society of Transplant
18th Annual State of the Art Winter Symposium The
75,000
Surgeons
Future Is Now: Saving More Lives Through
Transplantation
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
Optimal Use of Stem Cell Mobilization in Patients with
305,000
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing
Multiple Myeloma and Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Medical Learning Institute PVI,
PeerView inReview, ``Assessing the Potential Impact of
104,250
PeerView Institute for Medical
New Consensus Recommendations and Ongoing Clinical
Learning
Trials of Emerging Therapies on the Diagnosis and
Treatment of Acid Sphingolmyelinase Deficiency''
National Society of Genetic
New Lysosomal Storage Disease Healthcare Advocate
42,637
Counselors (NSGC)
Workshop 2018
American Society of Clinical
2018 Genitourinary (GU) Cancers Symposium: Translating
30,000
Oncology, Inc. Conquer Cancer
Evidence to Multidisciplinary Care
Foundation of the American Society
of Clinical Oncology
American Association of Clinical
Advances in Medical & Surgical Management of Thyroid
15,000
Endocrinologists
Cancer
ScientiaCME LLC
Atopic Dermatitis (AD): Best Practices, Barriers to
19,100
Care, and Emerging Therapies in Medication Management
Potomac Center for Medical Education
Risk-Benefit Analysis and Personalized Treatment in
100,000
Rockpointe Corporation
Multiple Sclerosis: Basing Treatment Goals on the
Latest Evidence
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Moving from Treating Atopic Dermatitis Symptoms to
165,000
Education ASiM CE, LLC
Treating Underlying Pathology
University of Cincinnati Advances in
MauiDerm 2018
50,000
Cosmetics and Medical Dermatology
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Rheumatoid Arthritis Vital Education Initiative:
264,800
New Horizons in Therapeutic Options (RAVE: New
Horizons)
American Society for Blood and Marrow
American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation
65,000
Transplantation
New Investigator Award
UT Southwestern Medical Center
40th Annual Carrell-Krusen Neuromuscular Symposium
5,000
Regents of the University of
6th Annual UC San Diego Essentials and Advances in
5,000
California
Apheresis
Physicians' Education Resource
Multiple Sclerosis: A Treatment Paradigm Shift when
85,100
Time is Brain
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
2018 New York GUTTM: 11th Annual Interdisciplinary
50,000
(PER)
Prostate Cancer Congress
National Comprehensive Cancer Network
NCCN 23rd Annual Conference: Improving the Quality,
25,000
Effectiveness, and Efficiency of Cancer CareTM
UNTHSC
Overcoming Persistent Barriers to Effective Management
72,500
of Atopic Dermatitis
Cleveland Clinic Educational
2018 Nephrology Update
10,000
Foundation
Medical Learning Institute, Inc. PVI,
PeerView in Session, ``New Developments in Allergic
168,730
PeerView Institute for Medical
and Inflammatory Diseases: Clinical Updates From San
Education, Inc.
Diego and Orlando''
Penn State College of Medicine PVI,
Science and Stories: Navigating the Prostate Cancer
90,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
Landscape: Urologists at the Intersection of Emerging
Education Inc.
Evidence and Patient Centric Care
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Cutting Edge of Transplantation 2018: Breaking through
40,000
Education Group American Society of
Regulatory Barriers to Unleash Transplant Innovation
Transplantation
to Success
American College of Rheumatology
2018 ACR Rheumatology Courses
75,000
PRIME Education, LLC
Global Perspectives on Current and Emerging Biologic
151,341
Therapies for Rheumatoid Arthritis
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
The 28th Annual International Prostate Cancer Update
10,000
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing Co.,
(IPCU 28)
Ltd.
NYU Post-Graduate Medical School
NYU Langone Seminar in Advanced Rheumatology
20,000
AcademicCME, LLC.
Individualizing Treatment Plans to Reduce Disease
75,000
Activity in Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
Medical Crossfire: Personalizing Care for Multiple
75,000
(PER)
Myeloma Patients: Current and Future Sequencing
Strategies
American College of Surgeons
The changing face of thyroid cancer management for
40,900
surgeons: real-life applications of the new ATA
guidelines
Penn State College of Medicine PVI,
PeerView Live at ASCO 2018: ``How I Think, How I
75,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
Treat: A Personal Look at Innovative Therapy and
Education, Inc.
Meeting Patient Needs in Multiple Myeloma''
UMA Education Inc., LLC dba: Global
Evolving Management Strategies for Moderate-to-Severe
346,647
Education Group (GLOBAL)
Atopic Dermatitis: Looking Beyond Barriers to
Optimized Therapy
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
Advances InT Supportive Care: An Onco-Nurses Guide to
50,000
(PER)
Managing Cancer Treatment-Related Toxicities
National Association of Managed Care
Exploring the Challenges of Severe Asthma:
45,000
Physicians
Implementing Personalized Treatment Plans for
Improved Patient Outcomes
National Association for Continuing
Conversations in Dermatology The Evolving Paradigm in
59,000
Education
Atopic Dermatitis: Integrating Evolving Treatments to
Improve Outcomes
Eastern Virginia Medical School
Multiple Sclerosis Symposium 2018
5,000
University of Kansas Medical Center
Neuromuscular Review Course
25,000
American Academy of Pas Medical
Moving Toward Improved Outcomes in MS: How PAs Can
50,000
Logix, LLC
Make a Difference
Med-IQ, LLC
Preventing Tumor Lysis Syndrome: Risk Assessment and
75,000
Appropriate Prophylaxis
Cleveland Clinic Educational
Cleveland Clinic Neurological Institute Summit 2018:
50,000
Foundation
MS Treatment Strategies
Johns Hopkins University School of
14th Annual Advances in the Diagnosis and Treatment of
30,000
Medicine
the Rheumatic Diseases
National Association of Managed Care
Implementing Newer Biologic Therapies to Improve
57,000
Physicians
Economic and Clinical Outcomes in Patients with
Moderate to Severe Atopic Dermatitis
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
Master Class for Oncologists
30,000
at Eisenhower Dana Farber Cancer
Institute
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Rising to the Challenge: Diagnosis and Optimal
124,000
Education ASiM CE LLC Dannemiller
Management of Atopic Dermatitis in the Primary Care
Setting
National Association of Managed Care
Novel Treatment Advances and Approaches in Rheumatoid
45,000
Physicians
Arthritis: Personalizing Therapy for Improved
Clinical and Economic Outcomes
National Kidney Foundation
Managing the Life-Long Impact of Fabry Disease
265,995
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
Optimal Treatment sequencing in Metastatic Castration-
65,000
at Eisenhower PlatformQ Health
Resistant Prostat Cancer: Expert Analysis through
Education, LLC
Case Studies
Michael J Fox Foundation
MDS-PAS Movement Disorders School for Neurology
20,000
Residents
Penn State College of Medicine PVI,
Science and Stories at ASCO 2018: Making an Impact in
100,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
Prostate Cancer--Using Expert Experience and Evidence
Education, Inc.
to Personalize the Complex Treatment Landscape
Purdue University Clinical Care
Advancing Care in Prostate Cancer: Aligning Your
80,000
Options, LLC
Practice With Rapidly Evolving Standards of Care
Throughout the Disease Continuum
Continuing Education Alliance
2018 PCE Oncology Symposia Series Segment: Sequencing
125,000
Therapy in Patients with Castration-Resistant
Prostate Cancer
University of Chicago
At the Forefront of Hepatology
5,000
National Association of Managed Care
The Value of Personalized Treatment Sequencing for
45,000
Physicians
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer
Vindico Medical Education, LLC
Immunology Bootcamp
100,000
American Urological Association
2018 Evidence-based Clinical Management of Advanced
100,000
and Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer
International Transplant Nurses
European Transplant Nursing Symposium
10,000
Society
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
R.A.P.I.D.--Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Primary Care
200,000
Education Group FACTORx MedEd
Initiative for Improved Diagnosis and Outcomes
Consulting Improve CME, LLC NACE Pri-
Med Indegene, Inc.
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Learning Pathway in Atopic Dermatitis: Maximizing
362,310
Positive Outcomes for Your Patients
American Urological Association
AUA 2018 Highlights in Advanced and Castration-
80,000
Resistant Prostate Cancer
PESI Inc.
15th Annual World Congress on Insulin Resistance,
50,000
Diabetes & Cardiovascular Disease
Horizon CME
Improving the Quality of Care in Patients with
237,900
Diabetes through a Simulated QI Experience
Joslin Diabetes Center
Long-acting Insulins in Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes:
324,500
Aligning Provider and Patient Perspectives to Address
Therapeutic Barriers
Boston University School of Medicine
Balancing Glycemic Control and Hypoglycemia in T2DM:
435,000
Practicing Clinicians Exchange (PCE)
the Role of long-acting Basal Insulin Analogues
Physicians' Education Resource
Physiologic Insulin Replacement: Practical Strategies
105,650
for Insulin Initiation and Titration of Long-Acting
Insulins
University of Massachusetts Medical
The Foundational role of Physiologic, long-acting
341,000
School CMEducation Resources
Basal Insulin: Optimizing the safety-efficacy
equation in vulnerable patients with T2D
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Targeting diabetic patients for Physiologic, long-
496,200
CMEducation Resources
acting Basal Insulin therapy--A best practice roadmap
to clinical success
The Endocrine Society Institute for
Diabetes Masters Series 2018: Getting to the heart of
249,885
Medical and Nursing Education, Inc.
the matter: Multidisciplinary perspectives on patient-
centered care in T2DM
American Association of Diabetes
Leveraging CDEs to Improve Individualized Management
1,024,440
Educators
of T2D: Focus on Injectable Therapies
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
An American Journal of Managed Care Medical Crossfire:
202,150
Evaluating New Generation Basal Insulin Therapy
American Association of Nurse
The I's Have It: Improving Insulin Initiation Inertia
358,557
Practitioners
A Nurse Practitioner-Led Quality Initiative
Pri-Med Institute, LLC
Newer Long-acting Insulins: A Physiologic Approach to
721,504
Glucose Control
National Association for Continuing
Clinical Updates for NPs and PAs: 2018--Advances in
244,585
Education
Insulin Therapy: Another Step Closer to a More
Physiological Strategy
Institute for Medical and Nursing
AAFP 2018: Building Basal Knowledge: Establishing a
374,867
Education, Inc.
Solid Foundation for Using New Options in Basal
Insulin for T2DM
NACCME, LLC
Incorporating Long-Acting Insulin Therapy into the
180,565
Physiologic Approach to Diabetes Management
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Multi-Mechanistic, Insulin-Based Approaches for
347,000
CMEducation Resources
Achieving HA1c/PPG Targets and Optimizing Safety in
Challenging Patients with T2D
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Emerging Strategies for the Safe and Effective
81,303
Treatment of Uncontrolled Diabetes: The Application
of Fixed Ratio Combination Insulin/GLP-1 RA Options
Boston University School of Medicine
Type 2 Diabetes: New Treatment Combinations for Early
870,000
Practicing Clinicians Exchange
and Aggressive Glucose Control
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Complementary insulin-based approaches for achieving
935,000
CMEducation Resources
HA1c/PPG targets and optimizing safety in patients
with T2D: A best practice roadmap
American Academy of PAs
Achieving Quality Measures in T2DM: Addressing
199,600
Clinical Inertia and Patient Needs with Complementary
Insulin-Based Therapies
National Association for Continuing
Clinical Updates for NPs and PAs: 2018--Combination
244,585
Education
Basal Insulin and GLP-1 RA Therapy: A Physiologic
Approach to Diabetes Care
North Carolina Academy of Family
Ready, set, action: An intervention to combat clinical
372,477
Physicians Med-IQ, LLC
inertia and reduce prolonged hyperglycemia in T2DM
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
The Advent of Insulin/GLP-1 RA Fixed-Ratio Agents for
129,020
Uncontrolled Diabetes: Moving Past the Barriers of
Clinical Inertia
Pri-Med Institute, LLC
Treatment Intensification in T2DM: A Pathophysiologic
721,504
Approach to Combining GLP-1 Receptor Agonists with
Basal Insulin
American Association of Clinical
Endocrine University: Lipids Module
4,000
Endocrinologists
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Raising the Bar by Lowering the Target: Integrating
419,083
Education Integritas Communications
PCSK9 Inhibitors into Hypercholesterolemia Management
University of Tennessee College of
Breaking Barriers to Diabetes Control with GLP-1RA/
165,000
Pharmacy
Insulin Combination Agents: Opportunities for the
Community Pharmacist
American Association of Nurse
Advances in Diabetes Management: Titratable Fixed-
235,873
Practitioners
Ratio Combination Therapy and its Role in T2DM
Treatment
University of California, San Diego
Comparing and Contrasting Basal Insulin Strategies in
481,775
Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes
University of Massachusetts Medical
The Mechanistic and Therapeutic Rationale for Dual
342,750
School CMEducation Resources
SGLT1/2 Inhibition in Adults with Type 1 Diabetes
Collaboration \4\
American Association of Clinical
AACE 2018--Reflecting on the Data Pool: Emerging Roles
357,151
Endocrinologists Institute for
for SGLT1 and SGLT2 Inhibition in T1DM
Collaboration \4\
Medical and Nursing Education, Inc.
American Association of Diabetes
Reducing Glycemic Variability in Type 1 Diabetes: An
333,715
Educators E&S MedEd Group, Inc.
Exploration of Non-Insulin Treatment Options
Collaboration \4\
Medscape LLC
Maximizing Medical Management of Knee Osteoarthritis:
174,500
Use of Injectable Therapy
Oakstone Publishing, LLC. PeerVoice
Reducing Cardiovascular Risk in Patients With
374,288
America Limited
Dyslipidemia: What Do We Know Now? (And What Should
Collaboration \3\
We Do About It?)
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
Managing Hypercholesterolemia: Clinical Updates for
85,201
Specialty Pharmacists on PCSK9 Inhibitor Therapy
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Landmark Evidence and Clinical Rationale for PCSK9
486,800
CMEducation Resources
Inhibition in the diabetic patient
Collaboration \3\
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
2018 PCNA Dyslipidemia Campaign
60,000
Association
Collaboration \3\
Oakstone Publishing, LLC. PeerVoice
Modern Management of Lipid-Related Cardiovascular Risk
375,000
America Limited
in Patients With Dyslipidemia
Collaboration \3\
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
Mastering the Prior Authorization Process to Meet
275,000
Education Group
Patient Needs
Collaboration \3\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q1, 2018 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. "Funding Amount" does not include funds that may have been provided
by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
\4\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Lexicon, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st April 2018-30th June 2018
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Med-IQ, Inc.
Getting Social About Multiple Sclerosis: Tools for
75,000
Newly Diagnosed Patients and Their Care Teams
National Association of Managed Care
Building a Better Understanding in Asthma Management:
57,000
Physicians
Best Practices for Treatment and Control
Excel Continuing Education
Exploring the Genetics and Management of Fabry Disease
69,720
The Trustees of Columbia University
The Columbia Renal Biopsy Course
5,000
in the City of New York
Rheumatology Nurses Society Medscape
Updates in RA, PsA, and Biosimilars: A Pipeline View
50,000
Education
for the Clinical Nurse
University of Illinois at Chicago
Illinois Transplant Pharmacists Association Symposium
8,000
College of Pharmacy
Rush University Medical Center Plexus
Northern California Genitourinary Malignancy
10,000
Communications
Symposium: Translating Clinical Advancements to
Practical Patient Care
Medscape, LLC
Managing Multiple Myeloma: What's Next?
116,000
University of Louisville Research
11th Annual Perspectives in Rheumatic Diseases,
30,000
Foundation Inc. Global Academy for
presented by Rheumatology News, Internal Medicine
Medical Education Postgraduate
News, Family Practice News
Institute for Medicine
AKH Inc, Advancing Knowledge in
Focusing on the Patient Voice: Utilizing Components of
100,000
Healthcare 47-Consultants in Medical
a Patient Coach Module Contextually within Patient-
Education
Centric CME Activities
University of Colorado Denver
Forty-fifth annual Renal Disease and Electrolyte
5,000
Disorders Course
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
Advancing Knowledge to Practice: Optimizing Severe
200,000
at Eisenhower
Asthma Care in the Age of Biologics
USF Health i3 Health
Challenges and Opportunities in Metastatic Castration-
90,000
Resistant Prostate Cancer: A CME/CE/CPE-Certified VA/
DoD Meeting Series
Projects In Knowledge @Point of Care
Multiple Sclerosis @Point of Care
75,000
New Jersey Academy of Family
Ascertaining the Role of the Primary Care Clinician in
5,000
Physicians
the Recognition and Management of Patients With
Multiple Sclerosis in the Modern Era
Med Learning Group
Pathology-Based, Targeted Therapies--Managing Moderate-
124,745
to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis in Adults
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
2018 SUNA Advanced Prostate Cancer Grant
30,000
at Eisenhower Prostate Cancer
Education Council
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Immune Dysfunction in Multiple Sclerosis: Modern
75,000
Centers Catamount Medical Education
Considerations in Treatment and Management
Dallas County Optometric Society
Eyes on Fabry Dallas County Optometric Society
9,266
Fabry Support & Information Group
Association of Reproductive Health
Snap, Crackle and Pop: Provider Education and Targeted
52,000
Professionals
Training to Improve the Diagnosis and Therapeutic
Management of Rheumatoid Arthritis in Female Patients
AcademicCME
Improving Individualized Outcomes in Asthma with
45,000
Evidence-based Treatment Strategies
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
2018 Asthma State Society CME Meetings and BioDigital
319,350
Human On-demand Simulation Activity--Improving Severe
Asthma Control through Comprehensive Patient
Assessment and Tailored Treatment Selection
UMA MLG, LLC
Targeted Therapies for the Management of Moderate-to-
249,975
Severe Atopic Dermatitis in Adults--Animated
Whiteboard View
Society for Investigative Dermatology
Neuro-Immunology of Skin Symposia
75,000
Penn State College of Medicine PVI,
PeerView Live: ``Unraveling the Complex Treatment
60,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
Landscape for Prostate Cancer: Guidance for
Education, Inc.
Delivering Evidence-Based, Patient-Centered Care''
Medscape, LLC
Minimizing the Effects of TLS and CRS in Patients with
74,000
Hematologic Malignances
Excel Continuing Education
Unraveling the Genetics and Management of MPS 1
55,565
Hereditary Disease Foundation
Hereditary Disease Foundation's ``Milton Wexler
10,000
Celebration of Life'' Symposium of international
Huntington's disease researchers
Medscape LLC
Targeted Therapies for the Management of Severe
261,500
Asthma: Surveying an Evolving Landscape
Seattle Children's Hospital
PLUGS Summit 2018: Clinical Laboratory Stewardship:
8,000
Where Patient Safety and Financial Responsibility
Meet
University of Cincinnati Global
Skin Disease Education Foundation's 14th Women's &
10,000
Academy for Medical Education
Pediatric Dermatology Seminar
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
2018 ASH Symposium: ``D'' is for Diagnosis: Solving
250,000
(PER)
the Mystery of Rare Hematologic Disorders
Boston University School of Medicine,
Practical Approach to Electromyography and
7,500
CME
Neuromuscular Disorders Conference
Specialty Pharma Education Center
Renal Transplantation: Overview of Advances in
49,750
Clinical Understandings, Guidelines, and Treatment &
Management Strategies
University of California Irvine
8th Annual UC Irvine Neuromuscular Colloquium
20,000
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
Oncology BriefingsTM: Current Perspectives on
50,000
(PER)
Preventing and Managing Tumor Lysis Syndrome
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Nursing Management of Treatment-Related Side Effects
120,000
Education Group MCM Education
in Metastatic Prostate Cancer
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
A Quality Improvement (QI) Educational Pilot on
107,155
Education Group Q Synthesis, LLC
Enhancing Prostate Cancer Management in Urology
Practice
Med Learning Group
Evolving Therapeutic Options for Moderate-to-Severe
274,785
Asthma: A Comprehensive 3-Dimensional Study
University of Cincinnati
2018 International Rare Lung Diseases Research
10,000
Conference
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Therapeutic Decision-Making for Disease Modification
49,288
Centers Inc. Delaware Media Group
in MS: 2018 Update
Excel Continuing Education
Unraveling a Therapeutic Conundrum: ASMD Niemann Pick
106,790
Disease
University of Cincinnati Advances in
MauiDerm NP+PA Summer 2018
25,000
Cosmetic and Medical Dermatology
American Thoracic Society
ATS 2018 International Conference - Selected Sessions
20,000
in Asthma
Creighton University Physicians
Skin of Color Seminar Series 2018 (SOCSS 2018)
15,000
Continuing Education, Corporation
UMA MLG, LLC
Treating a Chronic Autoimmune Inflammatory Disease:
214,500
Targeting Pathophysiologic Cytokines in the
Management of Rheumatoid Arthritis--Animated
Whiteboard View
Tarrant County Organization Society
Eyes on Fabry Tarrant County Optometric Society
7,998
Fabry Support & Information Group
University of Nevada, Reno School of
2018 Real World Dermatology for PAs and NPs
25,000
Medicine Dermatology University LLC
American Society of Clinical
2018 ASCO Annual Meeting Genitourinary Cancer Tracks
40,000
Oncology, Inc. Conquer Cancer
Bundle (Prostate and Nonprostate)
Foundation of the American Society
of Clinical Oncology
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Clinical Care Team Exchange: The Role of New Biologics
425,170
for Optimal RA Management
PRIME Education, LLC
Driving Practice Change in Systems-Based Care of
344,805
Patients with Atopic Dermatitis
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
The 23rd Annual Southwest Prostate Cancer Symposium
5,000
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing Co.,
(SPCS 23)
Ltd
St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center
Acute Rejection of the Allograft--New Concepts and Old
1,810
MS Cure Fund, Inc.
2018 Q1 Lifestyle Management Patient Education
20,000
Programs for individuals diagnosed with multiple
sclerosis, and their support team.
Alaska Regional Hospital
Wheezin', Sneezin' & Itchin' in Alaska
5,000
American Academy of PAs
AAPA 2018--Rheumatology Track
5,000
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Specialty Pharmacy Review BoardTM--Examining
235,000
Impact Education, LLC
Emerging Biologics for Difficult-to-treat or Severe
Asthma
National Association of Managed Care
Individualizing Therapy in the Management of Relapsing
45,000
Physicians
Multiple Sclerosis: Expert Switching and Sequencing
Strategies
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Nursing Care in Multiple Sclerosis: Evidence-Based
75,000
Centers Inc. International
Practice
Organization of MS Nurses
The Annenberg Center for Health
How I Treat Advanced Prostate Cancer: Making Sense of
100,000
Sciences at Eisenhower prIME
the Ever-Increasing Options
Oncology, LLC
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Clinical Issues in Atopic Dermatitis: Discussions and
784,642
Education Integritas Communications
Debates on Managing Moderate-to-Severe Disease
Horizon CME, Inc.
How to Select and Start Insulin in Patients with Type
59,925
2 Diabetes: A Hands-on Workshop
National Assocation For Continuing
Getting Comfortable with Insulin: New Approaches to
355,396
Education
Getting Patients Safely to Target
Medscape LLC
Improving Use of Basal Insulin for Better Diabetes
800,000
Outcomes
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
The Southern Diabetes Initiative: Individualizing Care
400,000
in the 21st Century
Elsevier Office of Continuing Medical
Emerging Strategies for Achieving Glycemic Control in
179,950
Education
Adults with Type 1 Diabetes
Collaboration \4\
The France Foundation
When Insulin Isn't Enough: Exploring Dual SGLT1 and
153,900
SGLT2 Inhibition in T1DM
Collaboration \4\
NACCME, LLC.
Integrating Emerging Evidence in Adjunctive Therapies
432,535
Into Team-Based Management Strategies in Type 1
Collaboration \4\
Diabetes
Med-IQ, LLC
Evolving Evidence in Type 1 Diabetes Management:
238,281
Evaluating the Role of SGLT Inhibition
Collaboration \4\
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Type 1 Diabetes: New and Emerging Therapeutic
511,628
Education Group
Strategies to Address Unmet Needs
Collaboration \4\
Haymarket Medical Education
GLP-1 Receptor Agonists: Injecting More Confidence in
49,950
Achieving Glycemic Control for Patients With T2DM The
my CME Town Wall: A Live Clinical Forum for Multiple
Viewpoints on a Virtual Stage
Medscape LLC
Novel Treatments for T1D
499,000
Collaboration \4\
Med-IQ, Inc.
Initiating Insulin in Patients Who Fear Needles: Using
297,385
Evolving Basal Insulins to Improve Adoption
National Association of Managed Care
The Role of PCSK9 Inhibitors in Lowering LDL-C in
95,000
Physicians
Patients with Dyslipidemia: What Managed Care Needs
Collaboration \3\
to Know
Allina Health Minneapolis Heart
PCSK9 Inhibitors--Science, Selection and Access
5,000
Institute Foundation
Collaboration \3\
Medscape LLC
PCSK9 Inhibitors and Cardiovascular Outcomes: ACC 2018
237,125
Data You Cannot Afford to Miss
Collaboration \3\
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The Landmark trial-based evidence and rationale for
398,000
CMEducation Resources, LLC
PCSK9 inhibition to prevent and treat Atherosclerotic
Collaboration \3\
Cardiovascular Disease (ASCVD)
National Lipid Association Horizon
PCSK9 Inhibitors in Practice: Real-World Challenges
261,335
CME, Inc.
and Solutions
Collaboration \3\
National Lipid Association
The New Era of Preventive Cardiology: Applying PCSK9
153,000
Inhibitor Therapeutics to Prevent Heart Attack and
Collaboration \3\
Stroke
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
New Evidence-Based, Therapeutic Strategies for
397,000
CMEducation Resources, LLC
applying CV outcome and trialbased evidence for PCSK9
Collaboration \3\
inhibition to the front lines of CAD Prevention and
Treatment
Med Learning Group
A Virtual Reality Tour of Nonstatin LDL-C-lowering
573,725
Agents that Decrease Cardiovascular Risk for Patients
Collaboration \3\
with Persistent Hypercholesterolemia
Potomac Center for Medical Education
Role of Interventional Cardiologists in Secondary
198,450
Prevention of Myocardial Infarction: Redefining
Collaboration \3\
Clinical Practice
North American Center for Continuing
Cardiology Grand Rounds: Overcoming Access Barriers
476,838
Medical Education, LLC
and Practice Challenges to PCSK9 Inhibitor
Collaboration \3\
Implementation
PRIME Education, LLC
Applying the Latest Cardiovascular Outcomes Trial
146,740
Evidence to PCSK9 Inhibitor Decision-Making in Lipid
Collaboration \3\
Management
Pri-Med Institute, LLC (d/b/a pmiCME)
Translating Evidence to Practice: Improving Outcomes
575,150
Horizon CME, Inc.
in Patients with ASCVD with PCSK9 Inhibitors
Collaboration \3\
Med Learning Group
A Virtual Reality In Practice View: Maximizing
174,400
Clinical Benefit Through Optimal LDL-C Reductions in
Collaboration \3\
Patients With Atherosclerotic Disease
Physicians' Education Resource
2018 New York Multidisciplinary Cardio-Endo-Renal
35,000
Collaborative: Access to PCSK9i: Updates on
Collaboration \3\
Guidelines, Emerging Cardiovascular Benefits and
Overcoming Barriers to Access
PRIME Education, LLC
Integrating Evidence from the Latest Cardiovascular
459,799
Outcomes Data into Managed Care Decision-Making in
Collaboration \3\
Lipid Management
The Academy for Continued Healthcare
Improving Outcomes and Expanding Opportunities for the
180,420
Learning
Treatment of Hyperlipidemia
Collaboration \3\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appea r on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q2, 2018 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
\4\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Lexicon, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st July 2018-30th Sept 2018
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
Advancing Diagnosis and Management of Atopic
318,450
Dermatitis in Children and Adolescents--
Practitioner's Edge State Society Meeting Series,
CaseScribe On-demand Activity, and Mobile Coach
Platform
Penn State College of Medicine PVI,
PeerView inSession, ``An Expert Analysis of New Data
76,740
PeerView Institute for Medical
for Uncontrolled Persistent Asthma Treatments:
Education, Inc.
Clinical Updates From Paris''
Medscape LLC
Advances in Severe Asthma Management: Conference
219,500
Highlights and Perspectives
PRIME Education, LLC
4th Annual Regional Meetings for Providers in Federal
188,000
and Public Healthcare Sectors: Interprofessional
Education on Psoriatic Diseases, Atopic Dermatitis,
and Rheumatoid Arthritis
Medscape LLC
Guide to Atopic Dermatitis: Clinical Pearls for
198,400
Dermatologists and Allergists
MediCom Worldwide, Inc.
2018 ASH Meeting on Hematologic Malignancies: The Art
25,000
and Science of Relapsed/Refractory Multiple Myeloma:
A Practical Guide to Complex Therapeutic Choices
Medscape LLC
The Pediatrician's Role in Atopic Dermatitis
458,225
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
Strategies to Provide Individualized Treatment in
360,900
Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis--Practitioner's
Edge State Society Meeting Series and Publication in
Action On-demand Activity
Regents of the University of
Frontiers in Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney
10,000
California
Disease (ADPKD)
National Association of Managed Care
Optimizing Clinical and Economic Outcomes in the
57,000
Physicians
Management of Moderate to Severe Atopic Dermatitis:
Taking a Closer Look at the Role of Biologic
Therapies
National Jewish Health Catamount
What is Multiple Myeloma? A Game-Based Learning
75,000
Medical Education, LLC
Experience on Novel Treatment Strategies for
MultipleMyeloma
Medical Learning Institute, Inc. PVI,
PeerView inVision, Expert Insights on Available and
122,250
PeerView Institute for Medical
Emerging Therapies for the Management Pompe Disease
Education, Inc.
ScientiaCME LLC
Treatment strategies in Fabry disease
17,800
UMA MLG, LLC
Utilizing the Molecular/Physiologic Phenotype to
289,400
Direct Asthma Therapy: A Comprehensive Infographic
View
CME Outfitters, LLC
Atopic Dermatitis: You Can't Improve What You Don't
279,850
Measure
The University of Kansas Medical
The Changing Landscape of Neuromuscular Disease: The
40,000
Center--Continuing Medical Education
Future is Here
Oakstone Publishing, LLC.
Getting Under the Skin with Targeted Therapy to
170,000
Improve Atopic Dermatitis Management
University of Cincinnati Global
14th Annual Coastal Dermatology Symposium
10,000
Academy for Medical Education
Postgraduate Institute For Medicine
MediCom Worldwide, Inc.
2018 Meeting Highlights of the 4th International
12,500
Conference on Multiple Myeloma
National Comprehensive Cancer Network
NCCN 13th Annual Congress: Hematologic MalignanciesTM
25,000
Boston Children's Hospital/Division
Metabolism Conference Series
10,000
of Genetics and Genomics
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Incorporating New Agents into the Management of Atopic
375,400
PlatformQ Health Education, LLC
Dermatitis
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of
America
Purdue University MCM Education
Improving the Management of Severe Asthma in Patients
125,000
with Type 2 Inflammation
Cedars-Sinai
8th Annual Symposium on Lysosomal Storage Disorders
20,000
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
Use of Novel Hormonal Agents and Systemic Therapy in
50,000
Advanced Prostate Cancer
Med Learning Group
In Pursuit of Clinical Remission: Optimizing the
249,850
Pharmacologic Management of Rheumatoid Arthritis
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
Cancer Summaries and CommentariesT: Report from San
50,000
(PER)
Diego on Advancements in Multiple Myeloma
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
2019 ASCO GU Symposium: Prostate Cancer Tumor Board:
100,000
(PER)
Integration of Recent Data Sets Across Lines of Care
University of Pittsburgh
2018 Pittsburgh International Lung Conference--
10,000
Pulmonary Medicine: Basic Biology and Novel Therapies
American College of Chest Phys
Update on Moderate-to-Severe Asthma for Specialists:
500,000
Conference Coverage from CHEST 2018
American Academy of Physician
10th Annual Allergy, Asthma & ENT CME Conference
5,000
Assistants in Allergy, Asthma &
Immunology
Oakstone Publishing, LLC Answers in
Strategies for Success in Rheumatoid Arthritis
170,000
CME Inc.
Treatment: Integrating the Patient Voice
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
An interactive Case Discussion of a Young Adult with
40,000
Immunology
Severe Atopic Dermatitis: Insights from the Expert
UT Southwestern Medical Center
Treatment Approaches and Therapies for Highly Active
83,350
Medical Logix, LLC
Multiple Sclerosis: Implementing Updated MS
Guidelines
National Association of Managed Care
Implementing Personalized Therapeutic Strategies of
45,000
Physicians
Switching and Sequencing to Improve Patient Outcomes
in the Management of Multiple Sclerosis
Projects In Knowledge
MedImage Cases: Multiple Sclerosis
75,000
American Society of Transplant
12 Annual Surgical Fellows Symposium
110,000
Surgeons
Medscape LLC
Management Challenges in Rheumatoid Arthritis: A
250,000
Virtual Simulation Approach
Michael J. Fox Foundation For
MDS-PAS Movement Disorders School for Neurology
20,000
Parkinson's Research
Residents
Society for Inherited Metabolic
2018 North American Metabolic Academy
25,000
Disorders
Duke University
2018 Duke Solid Organ Transplant Summit
15,000
American Society of Nephrology
Fabry Disease for the Nephrologist: Present and Future
125,000
University of Minnesota
American College of Allergy, Asthma &
Thursday Morning Session: Biologic Therapies in Your
77,875
Immunology
Practice
Physicians' Education Resourcer
Advances inTM Therapies for Patients with Multiple
60,000
(PER)
Myeloma: More Options. More Decisions. Better
Outcomes
Oakstone Publishing, LLC Answers in
Making the Case for Stepping Up Therapy for Atopic
185,000
CME Inc.
Dermatitis
Oakstone Publishing, LLC Answers in
Assessing the Impact of AD: Physical and Beyond
170,000
CME Inc.
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Recognizing and Managing Suboptimal Therapeutic
35,000
Enquiring Minds, LLC
Response in MS: Expert Guidance on Challenging Cases
JPatible
JPatible Jewish Genetic Screening and Couple
77,500
Compatibility Matching Program
Illinois Academy of Physician
Multiple Sclerosis
6,500
Assistants
American Society for Reconstructive
Vascularized Composite Tissue Allografts: What it
30,152
Transplantation
Takes to Succeed
Massachusetts Association of
``Multiple Sclerosis''
4,800
Physician Assistants
i3 Health
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer: Implementing New
86,975
Data and Evolving Standards
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and
International Myeloma Society Educational Workshop
50,000
Science SPARGO Inc. on behalf of the
International Myeloma Society
UCSF Office of CME
UCSF TRANSPLANT 2018: Pioneering Advances in
5,000
Transplantation
The University of Texas MD Anderson
Emerging Therapeutic Strategies for Relapsed and
50,000
Cancer Center ASiM CE, LLC
Refractory Multiple Myeloma: Highlights from ASH 2018
Regents of the University of Colorado
88th Annual Meeting of the American Thyroid
75,000
American Thyroid Association
Association and the 2018 Annual Ridgway Trainee
Conference
National Assocation For Continuing
Matching Pathogenesis and Treatment in Atopic
92,800
Education
Dermatitis: The Evolving Science
The Medical College of Wisconsin PVI,
PeerView Live at the 2019 TCT Meetings--``Innovative
119,477
PeerView Institute for Medical
Therapies and Concepts in Transplant-Eligible
Education
Patients With Myeloma: Advancing Toward More
Effective Care Across Treatment Settings''
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
Medical Crossfire: How Can We Best Leverage the Use
50,000
(PER)
of MRD to Optimize Outcomes in the Management of
Hematologic Malignances?
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
Identification and Management of Atopic Dermatitis:
154,500
LLC Postgraduate Institute for
Applying Advances to Improve Outcomes A PHE/Power-Pak
Medicine (PIM)
Initiative Program 2: Treatment and Emerging
Therapies in Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
Optimizing Outcomes Through Stem Cell Mobilization:
300,000
(PER) The Medical College of
Applying Evidence to Patients with Multiple Myeloma
Wisconsin, Inc.
and Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma
Continuing Education Alliance
PCE Directed Learning eCourse plus eMinders and
148,275
Reinforcements: Changing Pathways in Moderate to
Severe Atopic Dermatitis
American Academy of CME, Inc.
Reversing the Trend in Living Kidney Donation:
122,875
Improving Risk Assessment and Increasing Access
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Applying Precision Medicine in Severe and Difficult-to-
322,100
Treat Asthma.
Penn State College of Medicine
Consensus or Controversy? Clinical Investigators
95,000
Research To Practice
Provide Perspectives on the Current and Future
Management of Patients with Prostate Cancer--An
Independent Satellite Symposium (ISS) Held as a
Premium Ancillary Educational Event During the 2019
Genitourinary Cancers Symposium
Excel Continuing Education
Newborn Screening for Rare Disorders: Focusing on
77,575
Pompe Disease and Gaucher Disease
Excel Continuing Education
``Multiple Sclerosis: Treating and Managing Symptoms''
5,000
Medical Learning Institute, Inc. PVI,
PeerView inSession, Taking Stock of Late-Breaking Data
50,000
PeerView Institute for Medical
on Disease-Modifying Therapies for the Treatment of
Education, Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis: What Are the Key Learnings from
Berlin?
UMA MLG, LLC
A 3D View: Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis in the
425,000
Pediatric Population: Long-term Treatment and Managed
Care Issues
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
A Learning Pathway for Clinicians in Multiple
50,000
RMEI
Sclerosis: Practical Strategies for Early Diagnosis
and Informed Management
Postgraduate Institute for Medical
Atopic Dermatitis: A Specialist Perspective on
300,000
Education Global Academy for Medical
Diagnosis and Management Across the Age Spectrum
Education
American Academy of CME, Inc
Crucial Conversations in Rare & Orphan Disease:
36,000
Challenges of Diagnosing Rare Diseases: A Focus on
Gaucher Disease
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Improving Multiple Sclerosis Care: Integrating Patient-
60,000
Centers PlatformQ Health Education,
Provider Perspectives
LLC
Postgraduate Healthcare Education
The Pharmacist's Role in Managing Disease-Modifying
30,000
Spire Learning
Therapies in Adults With Multiple Sclerosis
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
Improving Diagnosis and Treatment of Atopic Dermatitis
299,800
through Collaborative Primary & Specialist Care--
Practitioner's Edge State Society Meeting Series and
CME Audit and Feedback Practice Assessment
Regents of the University of Colorado
Practical Ways to Achieve Targets in Diabetes Care
25,000
(ATDC)
Collaboration \4\
Regents of the University of Colorado
Practical Ways to Achieve Targets in Diabetes Care
50,000
(ATDC)
Regents of the University of Colorado
Practical Ways to Achieve Targets in Diabetes Care
75,000
(ATDC)
Horizon CME, Inc.
Can We Do It Better: Improving Outcomes in the
165,100
Management of Patients with Atrial Fibrillation
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
2019 AAFP State Society CME Meetings, Hands-on
160,000
Workshop And BioDigital Human On-demand Simulation
Activity: Overcoming Barriers to Initiating or
Intensifying Insulin Therapy: Best Practices for the
Family Physician
NACCME, LLC.
Cardiology Grand Rounds: Diagnostic and
221,710
Pharmacotherapeutic Strategies for the Individualized
Management of Atrial Fibrillation
University of Cincinnati
New Developments in Type 2 Diabetes Treatment to
275,000
Decrease the Risk of Hypoglycemia
Medscape LLC
Lipid Clinic Considerations: What Would You Do? A Live
447,220
Patient Simulation
Collaboration \3\
PRIME Education, LLC
Patients, Payers, Providers Opine: When to Treat with
445,879
PCSK9s
Collaboration \3\
Boston University School of Medicine
2018 PCE Series 3 Live and Enduring Home Study with
225,000
Practicing Clinicians Exchange (PCE)
Eminders and Reinforcement Activities--Evolution of
Collaboration \3\
Dyslipidemia Management: The Expanding Role of PCSK9
Inhibitors
Association of Black Cardiologists,
Managing Lipids and Cardiovascular Risk: Using the
250,000
Inc.
Data to Optimize Care
Collaboration \3\
Pharmacy Times Continuing Education
An American Journal of Managed Care (AJMC) Payor and
51,850
Specialty Pharmacy Forum: Discussing Clinical Updates
Collaboration \3\
and Outcomes Data for PCSK9 Inhibitors
Med-IQ, Inc.
Exploring Treatment Intensification in Type 2
250,050
Diabetes: Focus on the Provider-Patient Collaborative
UMA MLG, LLC
An In Practice View: Moving Beyond Statins To Decrease
178,150
Cardiovascular Events in Patients With
Collaboration \3\
Atherosclerotic Disease
Oakstone Publishing, LLC Answers in
Putting Cardiovascular Outcomes Data Into Context: How
170,000
CME Inc.
Will the Latest Information on PCSK9 Inhibitors
Collaboration \3\
Change Practice?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q3, 2018 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
\4\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Lexicon, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Independent Medical Education Grants
1st Oct 2018--31st Dec 2018
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to supporting independent medical education
activities in therapeutic areas in which the Company is involved, for healthcare professionals, patients, and
consumers to improve patient care and health outcomes in therapeutic areas in which the Company is engaged.
Sanofi US and Genzyme Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical company.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding Amount
Recipient Name(s) \1\
Activity Title
($) \2\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NACCME, LLC Horizon CME
Clinical and Cost Considerations for Value-Based
74,875
Multiple Sclerosis Care
AKH, Inc. Catalyst Medical Education,
Improving Care for Patients with Pompe Disease: A Look
239,740
LLC
at Emerging Therapies and Multidisciplinary
Management Strategies
Medical Education Resources Impact
Managing Clinical and Cost Outcomes in Multiple
75,000
Education, LLC
Sclerosis: Expert Insights
i3 Health
Current Trends in the Management of Castration-
47,530
Resistant Prostate Cancer
Oakstone Publishing, LLC Answers in
A Breath of Fresh Air: Exploring Pathophysiology and
340,000
CME Inc.
Novel Therapeutic Options to Improve Outcomes in
Moderate-to-Severe Asthma
ANA NY, ISONG
2018 ISONG Congress--Building Connections to Genomic
2,500
Health
Affinity CE/PESG LDRTC
Genetic Rare and Immune Disorders Symposium-GRIDS 2018
50,000
GRIDS 2018 title: Late and Attenuated Presentations
of Lysosomal Storage Disorders
UMA MLG, LLC
A Virtual Reality Experience--Pediatric Atopic
230,950
Dermatitis: Treatment and Management
UMA MLG, LLC
A Virtual Reality View--Long-term Management of Atopic
449,550
Dermatitis: New and Emerging Targeted Systemic
Therapies
UMA Education, Inc. dba Global
Clinical Issues in Atopic Dermatitis: Discussions and
168,203
Education Group Integritas
Debates on Improving Outcomes for Moderate-to Severe
Communications
Disease
National Kidney Foundation
Evidence-Based New Insights on the Management of Fabry
145,000
Disease
UMA Education Inc., dba Global
Looking Ahead: Optimizing Management Strategies in
393,362
Education Group Integritas
Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis
Communications
Postgraduate Healthcare Education,
Type 1 Gaucher Disease: Optimizing Treatment and
63,950
LLC Postgraduate Institute for
Management Approaches
Medicine (PIM)
The France Foundation
Severe Asthma Science: Endotypes and Precision
292,680
Medicine Presidential Case Studies
UMA Education, Inc dba Global
Clearing the Air in Severe Asthma Management:
549,981
Education Group Integritas
Improving Patient Outcomes Through Shared Clinical
Communications
Decision Making
AKH Inc. Advancing Knowledge in
Masters of Pediatric Dermatology
20,000
Healthcare Tarsus Cardio dba South
Beach Symposium
PRIME Education, LLC
Atopic Dermatitis Across the Life Cycle: Taking the
199,700
Long View on Diagnostic, Treatment, and Management
Strategies
PRIME Education, LLC
Linking Patients, Providers, and Payers in Coordinated
316,500
Approaches to Severe Asthma Treatment
AKH Inc., Advancing Knowledge in
17th Annual South Beach Symposium
20,000
Healthcare Tarsus Cardio
PRIME Education, LLC
Stepping Up Managed Care and Specialty Pharmacy
499,075
Decision-Making to Support Integration of New
Evidence and Mechanisms in Asthma Treatment
Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy
AMCP Specialty Connect--Focus on Gene Therapy
35,000
(AMCP)
UMA MLG, LLC
The Unique Role of the Community Pharmacist in the
199,550
Management of Moderate-to-Severe Atopic Dermatitis in
the Pediatric Population
Rush University Medical Center Plexus
Applying the Latest Clinical Data and Emerging
60,000
Communications
Therapeutic Approaches in the Management of Prostate
Cancer Throughout the Disease Spectrum
Purdue University College of Pharmacy
PeerView Live, ``Unraveling the Complexities of
109,387
PVI, PeerView Institute for Medical
Prostate Cancer Management: Focus on Therapeutic
Education, Inc.
Decisions for Early Stage Disease and the
Implications for Later Stage Disease''
Rush University Medical Center Plexus
Community Uro-Oncology Forums: Understanding the
80,000
Communications
Disease Continuum and Navigating the Evolving
Treatment Paradigms in Prostate Cancer
American Health Resources, LLC
Updates in Myeloma Therapeutics: Bone Health,
8,000
Smoldering Disease, and CAR-T Cells
Siyemi Learning
Action Eczema: Global Atopic Dermatitis Educational
383,320
Resource Center
ScientiaCME
Genetic Disorders: Updates from The 15th Annual World
17,800
Symposium
NERGG, Inc.
NERGG 2018 Annual Meeting
6,000
UMA MLG, LLC
The CATALYST Initiative--A 3D View--Targeting
348,275
Inflammatory Cytokines: Addressing Articular and
Systemic Pathology in Patients with Moderate-to-
Severe Rheumatoid Arthritis
University of Nevada, Reno School of
2018 Fall Clinical Dermatology Conferencer and Beyond:
150,000
Medicine Foundation for Research and
Practical Approaches to Patient Management--Focus on
Education in Dermatology
Atopic Dermatitis
Trustees of Boston University Talem
Talem ACO Summit Series--Atopic Dermatitis: Improving
198,555
Health, LLC
Outcomes Through a Patient-Centered Approach
Cleveland Clinic Educational
7th Annual Basic & Clinical Immunology for the Busy
15,000
Foundation
Clinician
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Rural Health Summit Series: Updates in Atopic
201,343
The Board of Regents of the
Dermatitis for the Rural Primary Care Physician
University of Nebraska dba the
University of Nebraska Medical
Center
International Eczema Council
Atopic Dermatitis Phenotypes and Biomarkers
11,500
Excel Continuing Education
Fabry Disease: Role of the Genetic Counselor in an
81,900
Ever-Changing Landscape; The Role of the Genetic
Counselor in Pompe Disease
Specialty Pharma Education Center
Advancing Care in Prostate Cancer: Clinical
49,750
Understandings & Evolving Treatment and Management
Approaches
Massachusetts Eye And Ear Infirmary,
Surgery of the Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands
15,000
Department of Otolaryngology
President and Fellows of Harvard
College
Rush University Medical Center Plexus
VHA UroOncology Clinical Forums ``Advancing Strategies
90,000
Communications
in Prostate Cancer: Individualizing Treatment Plans
Based on the Rapidly Evolving Landscape and Disease
Continuum''
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
``D'' is for Diagnosis: Solving the Mystery of
100,000
(PER)
Lysosomal Storage Disorders
Muscular Dystrophy Association
Medical Education Tactics for the Physician and Care
211,525
Center Community: Hot Topics in NMD Webcast and MDA
Speaker Slides
Med-IQ, Inc.
Bridging the Gap Between Research and Clinical
245,887
Advances in Gaucher Disease Type 3
Medical Education Resources, Inc.
Managing Multiple Sclerosis: A Guide for Specialty
75,000
Impact Education, LLC
Pharmacy Professionals
Med Learning Group
A Multiple Sclerosis Virtual Reality Experience:
50,000
Reaching Diagnosis, Delivering Treatment, and Setting
Goals for Long-Term Success
Integrity Continuing Education, Inc.
2019 AAFP State Society CME Meetings and BioDigital
299,000
Human On-demand Simulation Activity--Ensuring Early
Diagnosis and Targeting Treatment to Remission in
Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis: Recommendations
for Primary Care Clinicians
Yale School of Medicine
2019 Update: What's New in the Field of Multiple
15,000
Sclerosis
Annenberg Center for Health Sciences
11th Annual Linda Morgante MS Nurse Leadership Program
45,000
at Eisenhower Academy for Continued
Healthcare Learning
Physicians' Education Resource, LLC
2019 ACTRIMS: An Interactive, Case-Based Discussion:
212,000
(PER)
Interpreting the Therapeutic Landscape in Multiple
Sclerosis
The Medical College of Wisconsin,
29th Annual International Prostate Cancer Update (IPCU
15,000
Inc. Carden Jennings Publishing Co.,
29)
Ltd.
UMA MLG, LLC
In Pursuit of the Best Outcomes in Rheumatoid
194,680
Arthritis: Inhibiting Inflammatory Pathology
NJ State Society of Physician
Focus on the Future
21,000
Assistants College of Saint
Elizabeth
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
Lysomal Storage Disorders--Common Presetations of
99,885
Enquiring Minds, LLC
Uncommon Diseases: Expert Guidance on Early
Identification and Therapeutic Optimization
Greenwood Genetic Center
Spring 2019 and Spring 2020 educational program:
82,003
Enhancing genetic understanding of lysosomal storage
diseases for practicing Physician Assistants (PA) and
PA students
ThinkGenetic Foundation
Closing the Genetics Gap: A Lecture for Healthcare
9,320
Advocates on Lysosomal Storage Diseases Designed to
Increase Access to Genetics Services in Medically
Underserved Parishes of Louisiana
National Association for Continuing
Conversations in Primary Care 2019 Live Virtual
64,000
Education
Symposium Series Individualizing Asthma Care:
Addressing Type 2 Inflammation
Excel Continuing Education
Newborn Screening for Fabry Disease: What
86,735
Neonatologists and Pediatricians Needs to Know
Excel Continuing Education
Exploring the Genetic Counselor's Role in Gaucher
42,330
Disease (satellite symposium at NSGC)
Mayo Clinic Arizona
Mayo Clinic 2019 Multiple Sclerosis & Autoimmune
7,500
Neurology Update
UT Southwestern Medical Center
41st Annual Carrell Krusen Neuromuscular Symposium
5,000
Medscape LLC
Improving Appropriate Use of PCSK9 Inhibitors in
736,125
Interventional Cardiology: Patient-Centered Care
Collaboration \3\
Perspectives Post-MI
Postgraduate Institute for Medicine
The iQ&A Case-by-Case, PCSK9 Cardiovascular Medicine
488,000
Intelligence zone: from trials to treatment-How Do
Collaboration \3\
Recent Guidelines and CV Outcome Trials Help Identify
High Risk Patients (Elevated LDL-C, Recent ACS,
Advanced ASCVD, PCI, Statin Intolerance and
Resistance, and Diabetes) Who Are Optimal Candidates
for PCSK9 Inhibitor-Mediated Therapy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a group for a single educational
activity; all applicants may be not be identified above. The Company funds other educational activities
(including fellowships and non-physician and patient education); all of which do not appear on this report,
but appear on other reports on this site.
\2\ ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during Q4, 2018 identified above based upon an
agreement. Recipients are required to return any unused funds. Information on unused funds returned by the
applicant on activities are not reported. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that may have been
provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities (e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
\3\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Regeneron, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
\4\ Collaboration (Shared) Funding--is the full amount of a grant funded under an agreement with Lexicon, some
or all of which may be shared between the collaborating entities.
Organization Name
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hawaii Chapter--National Hemophilia
The Coalition for Hemophilia B
Foundation
Hemophilia of North Carolina
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of Greater
West Virginia Chapter National
Florida
Hemophilia Foundation
The Coalition for Hemophilia B
Brandywine Valley Hemophilia
Annual Reqests
Foundation
Arizona Hemophilia Association
Hemophilia Association of the
Capital Area
Central California Hemophilia
National Hemophilia Foundation,
Foundation
Colorado Chapter
Hemophilia Foundation of Arkansas,
Hemophilia Foundation of Northern
Inc.
California
United Hemophilia Foundation, Inc.
Lone Star Chapter of the National
Hemophilia Foundation
Lone Star Chapter of the National
Mississippi Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation
Lone Star Chapter of the National
Lone Star Chapter of the National
Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation
Utah Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Association of the
Capital Area
Florida Hemophilia Association
Great Lakes Hemophilia Foundation
Bleeding Disorders Alliance
Gateway Hemophilia Association
Illinois
Arizona Hemophilia Association
Tennessee Hemophilia and Bleeding
Disorders Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of Northern
Nebraska Chapter of the National
California
Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Association of the
Northern Ohio Hemophilia Foundation
Capital Area
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
California
California
Hemophilia Alliance of Maine
Bleeding Disorders Association of
Northeastern New York, Inc.
Connecticut Hemophilia Society,
Idaho Chapter of the National
Inc.
Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of Minnesota/
Hemophilia Foundation of Michigan
Dakotas
Oklahoma Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia and Bleeding Disorders
of Alabama, Inc.
Cooley's Anemia Foundation
Oklahoma Hemophilia Foundation
Louisiana Hemophilia Foundation
Gateway Hemophilia Association
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Utah Hemophilia Foundation
Alaska Hemophilia Association
Nevada Chapter of the National
Utah Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation
Alaska Hemophilia Association
Hemophilia of South Carolina
Hemophilia Foundation of Oregon
Tennessee Hemophilia and Bleeding
Disorders Foundation
Tennessee Hemophilia and Bleeding
Hemophilia Foundation of Greater
Disorders Foundation
Florida
Hemophilia of Indiana, Inc.
Hemophilia Foundation of Maryland,
Inc.
Hemophilia Foundation of Maryland
Northern Ohio Hemophilia Foundation
Inc.
National Hemophilia Foundation,
National Hemophilia Foundation,
Colorado Chapter
Colorado Chapter
New England Hemophilia Association
Hemophilia Foundation of Arkansas,
Inc.
New England Hemophilia Association
New York City Hemophilia Chapter
Hemophilia Foundation of WNY, INC.
The Coalition for Hemophilia B
Woman's Retreat
Arizona Hemophilia Association
Hemophilia Foundation of Greater
Florida
The Bleeding Disorder Foundation of
National Hemophilia Foundation
Washington
The Hemophilia Association of New
Great Lakes Hemophilia Foundation
Jersey
The Hemophilia Association of New
Texas Central Hemophilia
Jersey
Association
National Hemophilia Foundation,
Hemophilia Association of San Diego
Colorado Chapter
County
Kentucky Hemophilia Foundation
Kentucky Hemophilia Foundation
(KHF)
(KHF)
Kentucky Hemophilia Foundation
Central California Hemophilia
(KHF)
Foundation
West Virginia Chapter of the
Foundation for Sickle Cell Disease
National Hemophilia Foundation
Research
Federation of American Societies
Gateway Hemophilia Association
for Experimental Biology
Great Lakes Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
California
United Hemophilia Foundation, Inc.
Florida Hemophilia Association
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
Nevada Chapter of the National
California
Hemophilia Foundation
Nevada Chapter of the National
Hemophilia of North Carolina
Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia of North Carolina
Hemophilia of Indiana, Inc.
Hemophilia of Indiana, Inc.
Hemophilia of Indiana, Inc.
Hemophilia Association of San Diego
Hawaii Chapter--National Hemophilia
County
Foundation
Oklahoma Hemophilia Foundation
Disabled Adventure Outfitters
National Hemophilia Foundation,
Hawaii Chapter--NHF
Colorado Chapter
Rocky Mountain Hemophilia &
Rocky Mountain Hemophilia &
Bleeding Disorders Association
Bleeding Disorders Association
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Association of the
Capital Area
Hemophilia Association of the
The Western Pennsylvania Chapter of
Capital Area
the National Hemophilia Foundation
Lone Star Chapter of the National
Central Ohio Chapter, NHF
Hemophilia Foundation
Bleeding Disorders Alliance
Central California Hemophilia
Illinois
Foundation
Hemophilia Alliance of Maine
New England Hemophilia Asssociation
Alaska Hemophilia Association
FAMOHIO, Inc.
FOUNDATION HOPE AND LIFE USA CORP.
National Hemophilia Foundation
Midwest Hemophilia Association
Great Lakes Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of WNY, INC.
Utah Hemophilia Foundation
Hope for Hemophilia
Hope for Hemophilia
West Virginia Chapter of the
Hemophilia of Iowa, Inc.
National Hemophilia Foundation
New York City Hemophilia Chapter
New England Hemophilia Association
Association of Pediatric Hematology
SISTERS AND CAREGIVERS BLEEDING
Oncology Nurses
DISORDER NETWORK, INC DBA BLOOD B
National Hemophilia Foundation,
Colorado Chapter, National
Colorado Chapter
Hemophilia Foundation
American Society of Hematology
Hemophilia Association of the
Southern Tier, Inc.
Mississippi Hemophilia Foundation
New York City Hemophilia Chapter
Comprehensive Health Education
New England Hemophilia Association
Services
Northern Ohio Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Association of the
Capital Area
Global Genes
Mary M. Gooley Hemophilia Center,
Inc.
Midwest Hemophilia Association
Hemophilia of South Carolina
Arizona Hemophilia Association
Sickle Cell Disease Association of
America, Inc.
Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research
Greater Boston Sickle Cell Disease
Society, Inc.
Association, Inc.
Bleeding Disorders Alliance
Hope for Hemophilia
Illinois
Central Ohio Chapter National
New York City Hemophilia Chapter
Hemophilia Foundation
New York City Hemophilia Chapter
The Hemophilia Association of New
Jersey
Arizona Hemophilia Association
Nebraska Chapter of the National
Hemophilia Foundation
Nevada Chapter of the National
Sickle Cell Disease Association of
Hemophilia Foundation
America, Michigan Chapter
Hemophilia of South Carolina
Hemophilia of Iowa, Inc.
Empowering Women with Bleeding and
Tennessee Hemophilia and Bleeding
Clotting Disorders (Global Blood
Disorders Foundation
Disorder Foundation)
Hemophilia Foundation of Oregon
The Hemophilia Association of New
Jersey
Hemophilia Foundation of Arkansas,
Connecticut Hemophilia Society,
Inc.
Inc.
Bleeding Disorders Advocacy Network
National Hemophilia Foundation,
West Virginia Chapter
New England Hemophilia Association
Western Pennsylvania Chapter of the
National Hemophilia Foundation
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of Greater
Florida
Hemophilia Foundation of Greater
National Hemophilia Foundation,
Florida
West Virginia Chapter
Idaho Chapter of the National
Tri-State Bleeding Disorder
Hemophilia Foundation
Foundation
Northwest Ohio Hemophilia
New York City Hemophilia Chapter
Foundation
Hemophilia Association of the
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
Capital Area
California
Hemophilia of North Carolina
Oklahoma Hemophilia Foundation
Bleeding Disorders Association of
Louisiana Hemophilia Foundation
Northeastern New York, Inc.
Eastern Pennsylvania Chapter of the
Sangre De Oro, Inc.
National Hemophilia Foundation
National Hemophilia Foundation
Midwest Hemophilia Association
United Hemophilia Foundation, Inc.
Texas Central Hemophilia
Association
Hemophilia Foundation of Northern
Central Ohio Chapter, NHF
California
The Bleeding Disorder Foundation of
Nebraska Chapter of the National
Washington
Hemophilia Foundation
The Coalition for Hemophilia B
Northern Ohio Hemophilia Foundation
West Virginia Chapter of the
Hemophilia and Bleeding Disorders
National Hemophilia Foundation
of Alabama, Inc.
Academia Medica del Sur, Inc.
Hemophilia Association of New York,
Inc.
Texas Central Hemophilia
New York City Hemophilia Chapter
Association
Tri-State Bleeding Disorder
Hemophilia Alliance of Maine
Foundation
Nevada Chapter of the National
FOUNDATION HOPE AND LIFE USA CORP.
Hemophilia Foundation
Central California Hemophilia
American Society of Gene & Cell
Foundation
Therapy
The Coalition for Hemophilia B
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Nevada Chapter of the National
Hemophilia Association of the
Hemophilia Foundation
Capital Area
Hemophilia Council of California
Hemophilia Foundation of Maryland,
Inc.
Tri-State Bleeding Disorder
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
Foundation
California
United Hemophilia Foundation, Inc.
The Bleeding Disorder Foundation of
Washington
The Bleeding Disorder Foundation of
Rocky Mountain Hemophilia &
Washington
Bleeding Disorders Association
New England Hemophilia Association
Arizona Hemophilia Association
Hemophilia Foundation of Maryland
Western Pennsylvania Chapter of the
National Hemophilia Foundation
Western Pennsylvania Chapter of the
Hemophilia Foundation of Arkansas,
National Hemophilia Foundation
Inc.
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
Hemophilia Council of California
California
Hemophilia Foundation of Maryland,
The Western Pennsylvania Chapter of
Inc.
the National Hemophilia Foundation
New England Hemophilia Association
Arizona Hemophilia Association
Hawaii Chapter--National Hemophilia
Hawaii Chapter--National Hemophilia
Foundation
Foundation
Hemophilia Foundation of Southern
Arizona Hemophilia Association
California
Hemophilia of North Carolina
Virginia Hemophilia Foundation
Connecticut Hemophilia Society,
Idaho Chapter of the National
Inc.
Hemophilia Foundation
Hemophilia Association of New
Bleeding Disorders Alliance of
Jersey
North Dakota
Hemophilia Foundation of Oregon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Payment amount
Project name
(in (USD))
Payment date
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Industry Symposium
$7,500.00
3/13/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Coalition for Hemophilia B 12th
$20,000.00
3/14/2018
Annual Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 HNC Walks in Charlotte & Raleigh
$7,500.00
3/14/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Weekend
$2,500.00
3/16/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gainesville Clot Trot
$2,500.00
3/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WVNHF Men's and Women's Day
$3,000.00
3/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Coalition for Hemophilia B 2018
$8,000.00
3/20/2018
Annual Sponsorship Run
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Big Red Run 2018
$1,500.00
3/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FAME Phoenix and Tucson
$3,000.00
3/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Infusion Classes
$1,000.00
3/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
World Hemophilia Day
$1,000.00
3/22/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Educations Days 2018
$5,000.00
3/22/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Northwest Arkansas Educational Day
$1,500.00
3/22/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
World Hemophilia Day
$2,500.00
3/23/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Meeting & Family Education
$3,000.00
3/26/2018
Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hill Country Family Education Day
$1,000.00
3/26/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Southeast Texas Family Education Day
$1,000.00
3/26/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Men's Retreat
$2,500.00
3/26/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas Bleeding Disorders Conference
$6,000.00
3/27/2018
Exhibit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas Bleeding Disorders Conference
$50,000.00
3/27/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women and Bleeding Disorders
$1,500.00
3/27/2018
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Education Day
$2,500.00
3/27/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8th Annual Walk in the Jungle
$5,000.00
3/27/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Camp
$1,000.00
3/28/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BDAI 2018 Statewide Family Education
$2,500.00
3/28/2018
Weekend & World
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Bleeding Disorder Walk
$1,000.00
3/28/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp HONOR
$1,000.00
3/29/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Be A Factor 5 k
$500.00
3/29/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders Health
$2,500.00
3/30/2018
Fair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Education Weekend
$3,000.00
3/30/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Education Weekend
$2,000.00
4/3/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spring Wellness Program
$1,500.00
4/4/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teen Leadership Summit
$1,000.00
4/4/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Information Day
$5,000.00
4/4/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Meeting
$5,000.00
4/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$2,500.00
4/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spring Social
$1,500.00
4/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Victory for Women
$2,800.00
4/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HFMD Annual Members Meeting
$1,500.00
4/6/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HFM's 2018 National Conference for
$100,000.00
4/6/2018
Women with Bleeding Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHF Camp Independence
$4,000.00
4/9/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Clot Not
$2,500.00
4/9/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 CAF Care Walk
$7,500.00
4/9/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 ``Unite for Bleeding Disorders''
$2,500.00
4/9/2018
Health Fair and Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Camp Globeclotters
$2,500.00
4/9/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Camp Notaclotamongus
$1,250.00
4/10/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teen/Young Adult Program
$15,000.00
4/10/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual State Educational Meeting
$3,500.00
4/10/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Website ad and direct mailing
$4,000.00
4/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Youth Leadership Weekend 2018
$500.00
4/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Independent Firefly
$1,000.00
4/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Utah Hemophilia Foundation's Family
$2,000.00
4/11/2018
Resource Fair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Frozen Chozen
$3,500.00
4/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HELLO- State Annual Meeting and
$2,500.00
4/16/2018
Educational Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Oregon Unite for Bleeding
$2,500.00
4/16/2018
Disorders Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Race for Ian
$500.00
4/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 48th Annual Meeting
$3,000.00
4/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
17th Annual Family Education Program
$2,800.00
4/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Brave Eagle
$1,500.00
4/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Race to Stop the Bleeding
$4,000.00
4/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HFM Family Educational Dinner and
$4,000.00
4/19/2018
Display Night
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gears for Good Charity Bike Ride
$1,000.00
4/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colorado Family Camp 2018
$1,500.00
4/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spanish Program: Greeley
$1,000.00
4/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Camp
$5,000.00
4/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eighth Annual Center for Bleeding
$1,500.00
4/20/2018
Disorders Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
9th Annual Walk
$10,000.00
4/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYC Unite for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$5,000.00
4/20/2018
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Patient Summer Social
$1,000.00
4/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Coalition for Hemophilia B Fall
$72,500.00
4/20/2018
Woman's Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Education Days
$7,500.00
4/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tampa Superhero Walk For Bleeding
$2,500.00
4/20/2018
Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Western Washington Spring Education
$1,500.00
4/20/2018
Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 New Jersey Hemophilia Walk
$4,000.00
4/23/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7th Annual Hemophilia Awareness Walk
$2,500.00
4/30/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Wisconsin Bleeding Disorders
$4,000.00
5/1/2018
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hemophilia Association Annual Meeting
$5,000.00
5/15/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 TexCen Annual Meeting and Summer
$3,000.00
5/20/2018
Education Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Social Factor: Colorado Spring
$1,000.00
5/21/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Industry Symposium
$3,500.00
5/22/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Kentucky Unite for Bleeding
$2,500.00
6/5/2018
Disorders Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Annual Education Meeting
$1,750.00
6/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 KHF Camp Discovery--Summer Camp
$2,000.00
6/5/2018
Program for Children and Teens
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$1,000.00
6/7/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WVNHF Industry Symposium
$3,000.00
6/7/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12th Annual Sickle Cell Disease
$5,000.00
6/11/2018
Research and Educational
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FASEB Conference on ``Genome
$2,000.00
6/13/2018
Engineering: Cutting-Edge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Family Education Weekend
$2,000.00
6/14/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Klotty Pine 2018
$1,000.00
6/14/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Blood Brothers and Sisters
$2,000.00
6/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Education Conference
$5,000.00
6/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
35th Annual Florida Bleeding Disorders
$6,000.00
6/17/2018
Conference (Formerly known as the
``Family Education Symposium'')
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Familia de Sangre
$50,000.00
6/18/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Northern Nevada Family Education Day
$1,500.00
6/18/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite For Bleeding Disorders
$1,000.00
6/18/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Union Latina (Latin Union) Educational
$2,500.00
6/18/2018
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Men's Educational Retreat
$1,500.00
6/18/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Hemophilia of Indiana Annual
$4,000.00
6/19/2018
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Unite For Bleeding Disorders Walk
$3,500.00
6/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Doug Thompson Teen Leadership Camp
$1,500.00
6/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Teen Camp
$2,000.00
6/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hawaii Teen Summit
$7,500.00
6/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHF Annual Meeting 2018
$3,500.00
6/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teen Adventure Camp
$2,500.00
6/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mile High Summer Camp 2018
$1,000.00
6/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Koko Ohana Family Camp
$2,500.00
6/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RMHBDA Walk for Bleeding Disorders
$1,500.00
6/21/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RMHBDA BIG SKY FAMILY CAMP
$1,000.00
6/21/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Youngblood--Summer Camp
$1,000.00
6/21/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Summer Camp
$1,000.00
6/21/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HACA Fall Festival and Walk
$7,500.00
6/21/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Western Pennsylvania Walk, Run, and
$2,000.00
6/21/2018
Cornhole Tournament
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$3,000.00
6/22/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COC-New Patient Orientstion
$1,750.00
6/22/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BDAI 2018 Unite Walk for Bleeding
$2,500.00
6/25/2018
Disorders Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Education Day
$5,500.00
6/26/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hike4HAM
$2,500.00
6/27/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Retreat
$2,000.00
6/27/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alaska Bleeding Disorder Walk--Exhibit
$1,750.00
6/27/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FAMOHIO Annual Meeting and Educational
$12,500.00
6/27/2018
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Back to School Educational Event
$2,500.00
6/28/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NHF 2018 Bleeding Disorders Conference
$237,000.00
6/29/2018
Sponsorships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MHA UNITE for Bleeding Disorders Walk-
$2,500.00
7/2/2018
a-Thon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Wisconsin Unite for Bleeding
$5,000.00
7/2/2018
Disorders Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
``In my Blood'' Bleeding Disorders
$2,000.00
7/2/2018
Awareness Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Valor 2018
$6,000.00
7/2/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Superhero Run/Walk--Covington, LA
$5,000.00
7/3/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Superhero HOPE Run/Walk--Wichita, KS
$5,000.00
7/3/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WVNHF Family Camp
$3,000.00
7/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Meeting
$1,500.00
7/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kids Day Camp
$7,000.00
7/6/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BLeaders Teen Retreat
$5,000.00
7/15/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BITS AND PIECES OF Pediatric
$1,000.00
7/16/2018
Hematology, Oncology & BM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BBBDN Back to School Educating for
$5,000.00
7/16/2018
Success
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Western Slope Social Factor
$1,000.00
7/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colorado Unite for Bleeding Disorders
$1,500.00
7/17/2018
Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASH Corporate Friends
$35,000.00
7/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual BDAST 2018 Hike Fundraiser
$3,000.00
7/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Retreat
$4,000.00
7/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYCHC 2018 Women's Retreat
$10,000.00
7/23/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National LadyBugs Womens Summit
$50,000.00
8/2/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hispanic Heritage Symposium
$3,500.00
8/2/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITE for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$2,500.00
8/2/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Retreat
$2,000.00
8/2/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Patient Advocacy Summit
$33,000.00
8/7/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Finger Lakes Triathlon
$5,000.00
8/7/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MHA Family Education Weekend--
$2,000.00
8/8/2018
Connecting the Bleeding
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Educational Family Camp and Adult
$3,000.00
8/10/2018
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NACCHO 2019
$180,000.00
8/13/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
46th Annual SCDAA National Convention
$25,000.00
8/14/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HTRS Corporate Colleague--Sustaining
$10,000.00
8/16/2018
Member
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Walk for Sickle Cell Disease
$5,000.00
8/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Liaison Project
$5,000.00
8/22/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 HOPE Conference
$15,000.00
8/23/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders 5K
$2,500.00
8/28/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TORCH Teen Retreat
$7,000.00
8/29/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bilingual Back to School Event
$5,000.00
8/29/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hemophilia Association of New Jersey
$2,500.00
8/29/2018
(HANJ) Fall Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Statewide Meeting
$10,000.00
8/29/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorder Walk
$1,000.00
9/4/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fall Fam Jam
$1,000.00
9/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sickle CELLebration
$3,000.00
9/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Turkey Trot 5k Walk for Hemophilia
$2,500.00
9/6/2018
and Bleeding Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorder Walk
$1,500.00
9/6/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Empowering Women with Bleeding and
$3,500.00
9/7/2018
Clotting Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blazin for Bleeders 5k/walk
$1,000.00
9/7/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 HFO Insurance Forum
$3,000.00
9/7/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 PACT Workshop
$15,000.00
9/8/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Family Retreat/Annual Meeting
$3,500.00
9/10/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Meeting
$1,500.00
9/10/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 BDAN Fall Family Retreat
$2,500.00
9/10/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spokes Men for Bleeders
$500.00
9/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fall Fest
$5,000.00
9/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WPCNHF'S Erie Educational Event
$2,000.00
9/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$5,000.00
9/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Orlando Creepy Crawl 5K and Vampire
$3,000.00
9/11/2018
Mile
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jacksonville Creepy Crawl 5K and
$3,000.00
9/11/2018
Vampire Mile
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders--Annual
$2,500.00
9/17/2018
Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$1,000.00
9/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSBDF Annual Meeting
$1,500.00
9/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unite for Bleeding Disorders Walk
$1,000.00
9/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Latino Retreat
$10,000.00
9/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spanish-Language Education Event
$1,500.00
9/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inaugural Health Fair
$2,500.00
9/18/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Adult Retreat
$1,500.00
9/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHF Family Education Retreat
$1,000.00
9/20/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Meeting
$2,000.00
9/21/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
42nd Annual Meeting and Educational
$5,500.00
9/26/2018
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trick or Trot Family Walk
$3,000.00
9/26/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient and Family Education Weekend
$2,500.00
10/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Bleeding Disorders Conference
$35,000.00
10/8/2018
Final Night Event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wichita Education Day
$1,500.00
10/9/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Winter Education Meeting and Holiday
$3,500.00
10/9/2018
Festival
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8th Annual Unite for Bleeding
$2,500.00
10/9/2018
Disorders Walk and Fun Race
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Education Day
$2,500.00
10/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COC-Education Retreat
$3,250.00
10/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eastern Washington Annual Meeting 2018
$1,500.00
10/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nebraska Industry Symposium
$5,000.00
10/16/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Coalition for Hemophilia B
$3,000.00
10/16/2018
Meetings on the Road
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOHF Annual Education Meeting
$5,500.00
10/16/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Meeting
$3,000.00
10/17/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Harvest
$6,000.00
10/18/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Issues and Challenges in the
$2,500.00
10/22/2018
Management of Hemophilia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Steven Margolies, MD Family
$6,000.00
10/22/2018
Educational Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 TexCen Chapter Winter Education
$3,000.00
11/1/2018
Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYCHC Annual Education Day
$7,500.00
11/2/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSBDF Education Dinner
$2,000.00
11/5/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Winterfest
$1,500.00
11/6/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Family Conference
$2,250.00
11/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Holiday Educational Program
$2,000.00
12/6/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
College and Career Fair
$1,500.00
12/11/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASGCT Patient Education Videos
$5,000.00
12/13/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Coalition for Hemophilia B Patient
$10,000.00
12/18/2018
Survey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Advocacy Training
$2,500.00
12/18/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grassroots Advocacy Project
$5,000.00
12/19/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State Advocacy Training
$500.00
1/3/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Silver-level Corporate
$15,000.00
1/4/2019
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Meeting and Family Educational
$10,000.00
1/7/2019
Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSBDF Winter Program-Journey Around
$1,500.00
1/7/2019
the World
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4th Annual Industry Forum
$5,000.00
1/11/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Advocacy Education and Training
$5,000.00
1/15/2019
Seminar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Latino Group Weekend 2019
$1,500.00
1/16/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Winter Education Day 2019
$1,500.00
1/16/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RMHBDA EDUCATION WEEKEND AND ANNUAL
$2,000.00
1/16/2019
MEETING
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New England Hemophilia Association
$1,500.00
1/16/2019
Winter Camp
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Purpose Driven Leadership Program
$2,500.00
1/16/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maryland Advocacy Days
$5,000.00
1/21/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WPCNHF's New Parent Network
$4,000.00
1/21/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WPCNHF's Semi-Annual Education Weekend
$5,000.00
1/21/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Men In Action/Infusing Love Group's
$1,500.00
1/21/2019
Valentine Event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medial Symposium
$5,000.00
1/21/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Retreat
$5,000.00
1/21/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
emPOWERment Forum
$2,500.00
1/22/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018 Corporate Program Sponsorship--
$1,875.00
2/4/2019
Silver
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Four Bioverativ Branded Educational
$1,250.00
2/4/2019
Dinners
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WPCNHF's New Parent Network
$1,000.00
2/4/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consumer Medical Symposium
$3,000.00
2/12/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zoo Walk 2019
$4,000.00
2/12/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hawaii Future Leaders
$2,500.00
2/13/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hawaii Ohana Education Weekend 2019
$7,500.00
2/13/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Retreat
$3,500.00
2/13/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bleeding Disorder Awareness Kick Off
$1,500.00
2/13/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2019 Annual Meeting
$2,000.00
2/13/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teen--Young Adult Program
$15,000.00
2/13/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
15th Annual CHS Alpine Walk
$2,000.00
2/20/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Victory for Women
$2,800.00
3/7/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Winter Membership Gathering
$5,000.00
3/7/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2019 Annual Meeting
$3,000.00
3/13/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YETI--Youth Effectively Transitioning
$5,000.00
3/18/2019
to Independence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2015 SANOFI US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legal Name
Project Title
Payment Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A R M S Inc.
Homecoming & Project Little
$5,000.00
Soldier
Academy of Managed
Improving patient outcomes and
$45,000.00
Care Pharmacy
management of hyperlipidem
ACS Organic Chemistry
Graduate Research Symposium
$1,000.00
Division
AHIP Foundation
Executive Leadership Program
$55,000.00
Alabama Kidney
2015 Huntsville Kidney Walk
$1,000.00
Foundation
Alabama Kidney
2015 Birmingham Kidney Walk
$1,000.00
Foundation
Alabama Kidney
Dothan Kidney Walk
$1,000.00
Foundation
Albany American
Saratoga Springs Tour de Cure
$5,000.00
Diabetes Association
ALL IN TOGETHER
All in Together Campaign:
$37,500.00
CAMPAIGN INC.
Advancing and Empowering Women
Allergy & Asthma
US Anaphylaxis Summit
$30,000.00
Network Mothers of
Asthmatics
Allergy & Asthma
AAP Anaphylaxis Champions
$100,000.00
Network Mothers of
Program
Asthmatics
Allergy & Asthma
Allergy & Asthma Day Capitol
$50,000.00
Network Mothers of
Hill 2015
Asthmatics
Alliance For A
Alliance for a Healthier
$25,000.00
Healthier Generation
Generation
Inc.
Alliance for Aging
2015 Aging in Motion Coalition
$15,000.00
Research
Amerian Diabetes
American Diabetes Association
$2,500.00
Association
Diabetes Health and Wellness
Expo
American Academy of
American Academy of Pediatrics
$35,000.00
Pediatrics-Key Cards
Key Card Sponsorship
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
2015 AACR Annual Meeting MICR
$10,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Networking and Resource Center
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
2015 AACR Network Hubs
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Sponsorship
American Cancer
ACS CAN Seattle Research
$2,500.00
Society
Breakfast and ACS CAN advocacy
activities
American Cancer
ACS CAN CA Research Events and
$5,000.00
Society
ACS CAN advocacy activities
American Cancer
ACS CAN's advocacy activities
$1,500.00
Society
in Arkansas and nationwide
American Cancer
ACS CAN Virginia Research
$1,000.00
Society
Breakfast and advocacy
activities
American Cancer
ACS CAN's advocacy activities
$1,000.00
Society
in Louisiana and nationwide
American Cancer
ACS CAN Mississippi Health
$1,000.00
Society
Forum and ACS CAN advocacy
activities
American Cancer
ACS CAN Iowa Research Event and
$2,000.00
Society
ACS CAN advocacy activities
American Cancer
2015 Minnesota Policy Breakfast
$1,000.00
Society
and ACS CAN advocacy
activities
American Cancer
2015 Oklahoma Policy Forums
$750.00
Society
American Cancer
2015 Pennsylvania Advocacy
$1,000.00
Society
Event
American Cancer
2015 Maryland Advocacy
$1,000.00
Society
Breakfast
American Cancer
Gemson Awards
$2,500.00
Society
American Cancer
Nationwide Hope Lodge
$25,000.00
Society Inc.
Partnership
American Chemical
Division of Medicinal Chemistry
$2,500.00
Society Division of
Program 250th ACS national me
Medicinal Chemistry
American College of
American College of Allergy,
$53,000.00
Allergy, Asthma &
Asthma & Immunology FIT Bowl
Immunology-FIT Bowl
American College of
2015 Patient Engagement
$25,000.00
Cardiology
Pavilion
American College of
Sanofi/Regeneron Meeting
$10,412.60
Cardiology
American College of
Moving to the Quadruple Aim:
$280,369.00
Physicians, Inc.
ACP Quality Connect: Diabetes
American Diabetes
Step Out: Walk to Stop Diabetes
$5,000.00
Assocation
American Diabetes
Central Iowa Tour de Cure
$5,000.00
Association
American Diabetes
Tour de Cure Southeast
$1,500.00
Association
Wisconsin (Grafton)
American Diabetes
Tour de Cure Madison
$1,500.00
Association
American Diabetes
2015 American Diabetes
$2,000.00
Association
Association--WI Gala
American Diabetes
Father of the Year/Camp Sugar
$2,000.00
Association
Falls
American Diabetes
Father of the Year Awards
$5,000.00
Association
American Diabetes
Stop Diabetes Through Advocacy
$2,000.00
Association
Workshop
American Diabetes
Boston Step Out Walk to STOP
$5,000.00
Association
Diabetes
American Diabetes
Central MA Step Out Walk to
$5,000.00
Association
STOP Diabetes
American Diabetes
2015 Kiss a Pig Gala
$2,500.00
Association
American Diabetes
2015 Rochester Tour de Cure
$2,500.00
Association
American Diabetes
Step Out: Walk to Stop Diabetes
$5,000.00
Association
American Diabetes
Portland Father of the Year
$2,500.00
Association
Awards Dinner
American Diabetes
Jim Hansen, MD Memorial
$3,500.00
Association
Symposium Series
American Diabetes
St. Louis Tour de Cure
$500.00
Association
American Diabetes
Diabetes Awareness and
$50,000.00
Association
Intervention--via Step Out:
Walk to St
American Diabetes
2015 World Diabetes Day
$5,000.00
Association
American Diabetes
75th Anniversary & Awards
$50,000.00
Association
Celebration
American Diabetes
Step Out Walk to STOP Diabetes
$2,500.00
Association
American Diabetes
American Diabetes Expo--Exhibit/
$57,000.00
Association Expo-
Speaker/Booth Signage/Program
Exhibit/Speaker/
BoothSignage/Program
AMERICAN DIABETES
Diabetes Hospitality Days: Stop
$75,000.00
ASSOCIATION INC.
Diabetes In Boston
AMERICAN DIABETES
2015 Pathways to Stop Diabetes
$2,500,000.00
ASSOCIATION INC.
AMERICAN DIABETES
Step Out: Walk to Stop Diabetes
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATION INC.
AMERICAN DIABETES
Step Out: Walk to Stop Diabetes
$2,500.00
ASSOCIATION INC.
AMERICAN DIABETES
Father of the Year Awards Gala
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATION INC.
American Diabetes
2015 Tour de Cure
$5,000.00
Association, Indiana
Indiana
American Diabetes
ADA Indiana's Josiah Kirby
$15,000.00
Association, Indiana
Lilly Sr. Distinguished
Service Award
American Diabetes
Father of the Year Gala
$5,000.00
Associaton
American Heart
AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION--
$75,000.00
Association
MOBILE APP
American Heart
2015 Walking Challenge
$100,000.00
Association
American Heart
American Heart Association
$50,000.00
Association
Advertising Space (Key Cards)
American Heart
2015 Heart Innovation Forum
$15,000.00
Association
American National Red
2015-2016 General Blood
$25,000.00
Cross
Services Support and High
School Sc
American Pharmacists
Emerging Insulins
$79,000.00
Association
American Society for
Second Regional Bone Marrow
$12,700.00
Blood and Marrow
Transplant conference for
Transplantation
Nurses
American Society of
2015 ASN Abstract CD
$80,000.00
Nephrology
Sponsorship
American Society of
2015 Sponsorship Opportunities
$50,000.00
Transplantation
Americares Foundation
US Disaster Assistance
$10,000.00
Inc.
America's Health
CMO Roundtable
$45,000.00
Insurance Plans
APhA Foundation
Primary Care and Patient
$249,550.00
Empowerment through Diabetes
Patie
Arizona Diabetes
Diabetes: A Prescription for
$5,000.00
Foundation
Care
Arrow Lake Foundation
Arrow Lake Foundation
$50,000.00
Activities Plan
Arthritis Foundation
Research Update Events
$10,000.00
Northeast Region,
Inc.
Arthritis Foundation
Advocacy Program and Advocacy
$15,000.00
Northeast Region,
Training Series
Inc.
Association for
IQ/AAALAC International Global
$5,000.00
Assessment and
3Rs Awards
Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Ca
Association of
32 National Oncology Conference
$50,000.00
Community Cancer
Centers
Association of
2015 Membership Dues
$6,250.00
Corporate
Contributions
Professionals
Asthma & Allergy
Advocacy Day
$1,000.00
Foundation of
America, St. Louis
Chapter
Asthma & Allergy
Allertrain Master Trainer
$1,500.00
Foundation of
Program
America, St. Louis
Chapter
Asthma and Allergy
2015 KFA Anaphylaxis Patient
$33,000.00
Foundation of America
Education
Asthma and Allergy
2015 Anaphylaxis Awareness
$250,000.00
Foundation of America
Campaign
ASTS Foundation
ASTS Program Support
$75,000.00
Autoimmune Advocacy
Living with Autoimmunity--3
$2,500.00
Alliance
separate events
Bay Area Association
Help! I Just Learned I have
$1,200.00
of Kidney Patients
Chronic Kidney Disease! What
do I do?
Bay Area Bioscience
CALBIO 2015
$10,000.00
Association
Baylor Health Care
STEEEP Academy Lectureship
$135,000.00
System Foundation
Series
Be The Match
Quick Reference Guidelines--
$90,000.00
Foundation
Transplant Consultation and
Post-Transplant
BHCAG FOUNDATION
MNBTE Recognition Event
$5,000.00
Bill, Hillary, and
Program Support--CHMI
$100,000.00
Chelsea Clinton
Foundation
Bill, Hilary, and
National Health Transformation
$50,000.00
Chelsea Clinton
Foundation
Biocom
Global Life Science Partnering
$10,000.00
Conference
BIONJ INC.
Bio NJ Sponsorship event
$10,000.00
BIONJ INC.
BIONJ INC. BioPartnering
$3,000.00
BIONJ INC.
CEO Summit
$7,500.00
Blood and Marrow
Survivorship Symposium Pre-Plan
$5,000.00
Transplant
Information Network
Blood and Marrow
Ask the Multiple Myeloma Expert
$7,500.00
Transplant
Information Network
Blood and Marrow
Transplant 101: An introduction
$7,500.00
Transplant
to hematopoietic cell
Information Network
transplant
Blood and Marrow
Caregiver 101: The Role of
$7,500.00
Transplant
Caregiver in Support of Bone
Information Network
Marrow
Blood and Marrow
Enhancing the Power of Peer
$7,500.00
Transplant
Support
Information Network
Blood and Marrow
BMT InfoNet Web Site Redesign--
$75,000.00
Transplant
Phase 1
Information Network
Bringing Hope Home
General Operating Support
$10,000.00
Inc.
Buffalo American
Buffalo Niagara Tour de Cure
$5,000.00
Diabetes Association
Cambridgeport
2015 Summer Programs at
$5,000.00
Neighborhood
Magazine Beach Park
Association, Inc.
Camp Nejeda Foundation
Helping Children with type 1
$20,000.00
diabetes live happier,
healthier lives
Cancer Resource
Boston Prostate Cancer Walk Run
$5,000.00
Foundation
Cancer Support
Celebration of Hope: A Free,
$5,000.00
Community Greater
Full-Day, Educational and
Philadelphia
Inspirational
Cardio Renal Society
Path to Wellness National Pilot
$100,000.00
of America
Center for Healthcare
Diversity, Inclusion, & Life
$9,500.00
Innovation
Sciences Symposium
Central New Jersey
Leaders of Tomorrow (LOT)
$10,000.00
Chapter Of The
Program
National Black Mba
Association
CEO Roundtable On
Project Data Sphere initiative
$1,000,000.00
Cancer, Inc.
Chicago Hispanic
Vive tu Vida/Get Up! Get
$1,000.00
Health Coalition
Moving! Health and Wellness
Fair
Children with Diabetes
Platinum Sponsorship--Children
$75,000.00
With Diabetes--Friends for
Life
Children with Diabetes
Gold Level sponsorship of the
$100,000.00
Children with Diabetes Friends
for Life
Childrens Inn At NIH
Sanofi US Legacy Endowment Fund
$1,000,000.00
Inc.
at The Children's Inn at NIH
Children's Medical
Food Allergy Camp
$5,000.00
Center Foundation
Chordoma Foundation
New York Regional Chordoma
$2,500.00
Community Conference
Chris4Life Colon
5th Annual Blue Hope Bash
$3,000.00
Cancer Foundation
Christ the King Prep
Corporate Work Study Program
$57,000.00
Cleveland Clinic
Advances in Organ
$134,276.00
Transplantation--Annual
Fellows Conference
CNY American Diabetes
2015 CNY Tour de Cure
$4,000.00
Association
Coastal Area Health
Community Health Worker Core
$25,000.00
Education Center Inc.
Consensus (C3) Project
Colon Cancer Alliance
Blue Star Concert
$1,000.00
Committee Encouraging
2015 Membership Dues
$15,000.00
Corporate
Philanthropy
Community Oncology
2015 Community Oncology Payer
$25,000.00
Alliance
Exchange Summit III Oncology
Conquer Cancer Fdn Of
Conquer Cancer Foundation
$50,000.00
The American Society
General Mission Support
Of Clinical Oncology
Council on Foundations
2015 Membership Dues
$15,000.00
CT Coalition for Organ
Premier Charity of the Hartford
$1,500.00
and Tissue Donation,
Marathon
dba, Donate Life
Connect
Dallas Fort Worth
DFWBGH 11th Annual Benefits
$5,000.00
Business Group on
Forum
Health
DaVita Village Trust
2015 Tour DaVita
$2,500.00
Deirdre O Brien Child
Clinical Counseling Program
$10,000.00
Advocacy Center Inc.
Diabetes Care and
DCE NewsFlash and 2 e-Blasts
$21,500.00
Education with the
Academy of Nutrition
and Diete
Diabetes Education and
2015 Industry Partners Advisory
$15,000.00
Camping Association
Council (IPAC)
Diabetes Foundation
Dancing for Diabetes Awards
$10,000.00
Inc.
Dinner
Diabetes Hands
Online Community for People
$12,500.00
Foundation
with Diabetes
Diabetes Hands
DHF--Hero Sponsorship
$25,000.00
Foundation
DiabetesSisters
2015 DiabetesSisters' PODS
$20,000.00
Meetup Program
Diplomacy Matters
Spotlighting Humanitarian
$2,500.00
Institute
Innovation & Patents for
Humanity
Direct Relief
Auvi-Q epinephrine injections
$75,000.00
for students throughout
California
Direct Relief
U.S. Hurricane/All Hazards
$10,000.00
preparedness Program
Employers Health
Employer Health 2015 Annual
$6,500.00
Coalition, Inc.
Symposium
Epilepsy Foundation of
Parent Advocacy toolkit
$8,000.00
NC
Federal Circuit Bar
Global Series: 2015 Shanghai
$10,000.00
Association
Conference
Charitable and
Educational Fund
Federation of Clinical
FOCIS 2015 Annual Meeting
$14,500.00
Immunology Societies
Fight Colorectal
Patient Resource Guide for
$5,000.00
Cancer
Stage III and IV
Finger Lakes American
2015 Finger Lakes Tour de Cure
$4,000.00
Diabetes Association
Florida Health Care
Seeking Value in Cancer Care
$5,000.00
Coalition
Florida Health Care
Health Care Purchasers as
$7,500.00
Coalition
Consumers: Smart Shopping for
Health Care
Food Allergy &
FAACT Education Programs
$150,000.00
Anaphylaxis
Connection Team
Food Allergy Research
FARE National Food Allergy
$25,000.00
Education
Conference
Food Allergy Research
FARE Teen Summit
$25,000.00
Education
Food Allergy Research
THE FOOD ALLERGY BALL
$25,000.00
Education
Food Allergy Research
FAREWalk for Food Allergies
$200,000.00
Education
Food Bank of Somerset
Back Pack Program
$5,000.00
County Inc.
Foundation for
FBR Educational Programs--Bench
$10,000.00
Biomedical Research
to Bedside, Social Ambassadors
Foundation For Prader
Multiple Projects
$1,000.00
Willi Research
Fundacion Centro
Diabetes Summer Camp 2015
$10,000.00
Pediatrico de
Diabetes
Fundacion Centro
XIV Gala
$3,500.00
Pediatrico de
Diabetes
Fundacion Centro
8th World Diabetes Month
$5,000.00
Pediatrico de
Celebration
Diabetes
Garden State Equality
Teach and Affirm Students in
$2,500.00
Education Fund Inc.
New Jersey
Global Healthy Living
Managed Care Organization
$24,000.00
Foundation
Education (Overview)
Gordon Research
Gordon Research Atherosclerosis
$20,000.00
Conference
Meeting
Governors Books From
Tennessee's Imagination Library
$2,500.00
Birth Foundation
Program
Greater New England
Economic Development
$4,000.00
Minority Supplier
Development Council
Health Action Council
Annual Conference
$4,200.00
Healthcare
Woman of the Year
$18,150.00
Businesswomen's
Association
HEART OF FLORIDA
SP 2014 United Way Campaign
$2,269.50
UNITED WAY
Payout
Heart To Heart
US Crisis Readiness & Response
$10,000.00
International Inc.
Idaho Immunization
Immunization Summit
$2,000.00
Coalition
Illinois Diabetes
Illinois Diabetes Caucus
$3,500.00
Caucus Foundation
Foundation
Illinois
Business Day & Annual Lunch
$1,000.00
Manufacturers'
Sponsorships
Association
International Chinese
2015 International Chinese
$2,000.00
Statistical
Statistical Association (ICSA)/
Association
Graybi
International Eczema
International Eczema Council
$100,000.00
Council
International Isotope
Sponsorship of 12th
$3,250.00
Society, Inc.
International Symposium on the
Synthesis
International Myeloma
9th Annual Comedy Celebration
$5,000.00
Foundation
benefiting the Peter Boyle
Research Fund
International Myeloma
6th Annual International
$35,000.00
Foundation
Myeloma Working Group Summit
International Myeloma
Patient Programs 2015
$100,000.00
Foundation
International Society
RSG DREAM Conference
$10,000.00
for Computational
Biology
International Society
25th ISHC Congress
$1,000.00
of Heterocyclic
Chemistry
International Society
ACoP6
$5,000.00
of Pharmacometrics
JDRF
Imagine Gala
$100,000.00
JDRF
JDRF One Walk Philadelphia and
$2,500.00
Bucks County
JDRF
JDRF One Walk
$7,500.00
JDRF
JDRF Central AR One Walk
$2,500.00
JDRF--Eastern PA
JDRF One Walk Moosic, Poconos,
$2,500.00
Chapter
Lehigh Valley and Berks County
JDRF Greater Dallas
JDRF One Walk, Dallas
$2,500.00
JDRF International
JDRF One Walk Boston 2015
$10,000.00
JDRF International
JDRF OneWalk
$5,000.00
JDRF International
JDRF Research Updates
$2,000.00
Jefferson University
Quality and Safety Leadership
$100,000.00
(School of Population
Series
Health)
Jefferson University
Supporting Patient Access to
$79,700.00
(School of Population
Diabetes Care: Follow-on to
Health)
Janua
Jersey Battered Womens
Vocational Development Program
$5,000.00
Service
Joslin Diabetes
A Taste of Ginger
$25,000.00
Center, Inc.
Joslin Diabetes
National Diabetes Month/High
$50,000.00
Center, Inc.
Hopes Gala
Juvenile Diabetes
Rock the Cure
$1,000.00
Research Foundation
Kean University
2015 Group Summer Scholars
$15,000.00
Foundation Inc.
Research Program
Keystone Symposia on
Cancer Immunotherapy: Immunity
$25,000.00
Molecular and
and Immunosuppression Meds
Cellular Biology
Kidney Health Alliance
Share Your Spare 5k for Get
$750.00
of KY
Healthy Get Transplanted
Kids Corporation li
Kids Corp General Operating
$10,000.00
Lagrant Foundation
Internship Program
$25,000.00
Large Urological Group
LUGPA Annual Meeting Gold Level
$85,000.00
Practice Association
Membership
LUGPA
Leukemia & Lymphoma
Man & Woman of the Year
$3,500.00
Society
Living Well Cancer
General Operating Support
$2,500.00
Resource Center
MA Conference for
MA Conference for Women
$20,000.00
Women Inc.
Map International
United States Disaster Relief
$10,000.00
March of Dimes
Supporting NICU Babies and
$86,000.00
Foundation
Families
Maryland Health Care
Specialty Rx Forum
$7,500.00
Coalition DBA
MidAtlantic Business
Group on Health Care
Massachusetts
Annual Conference. Payment
$2,000.00
Association of Health
Reform--Three Years Later
Plans
MedStar Washington
MedStar Washington Medical
$3,000.00
Hospital Center
Center--Current Issues in the
Care
Mended Hearts
Patient Advocacy Network
$100,000.00
Mended Hearts
2015 Mended Hearts National
$50,000.00
Education and Training
Conference
Michigan Biosciences
MichBio Conference Description
$1,500.00
Industry Association
Mid Atlantic Lifespan,
Senior Care Providers
$4,000.00
Inc.
Roundtables With Local
Hospitals
Midland Adult Services
Midland Meals on Wheels
$10,000.00
Inc.
Employment Training Program
Migrant Clinicians
Health Champions: Reducing
$500.00
Network
Disease to Improve Health
Milken Institute
The Research Acceleration and
$10,000.00
Innovation Network (TRAIN)
Milken Institute
2015 Milken Institute
$1,000,000.00
Conference Sponsorships &
Engagement
Minnesota Society of
MSHP Corporate Sponsorship
$6,000.00
Health-System
Pharmacists
MIT
13th US-Japan Symposium on Drug
$7,000.00
Delivery Systems
MIT
14th Annual Koch Institute
$5,000.00
Summer Symposium ``CANCER
COMMITTEE''
MIT $100K Competition
MIT $100K Competition
$25,000.00
Multiple Myeloma
Advances in Minimal Residual
$25,000.00
Research Foundation
Disease Testing in Myeloma
Multiple Myeloma
Advances in Minimal Residual
$25,000.00
Research Foundation
Disease Testing in Myeloma
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
Forum on Drug Discovery,
$85,000.00
SCIENCES
Development and Translation
National Alliance of
11th Annual Meeting
$5,000.00
State Prostate Cancer
Coalitions
National Arbor Day
Chippewa National Forest tree
$4,138.00
Foundation
planting
National Association
Childhood Obesity
$10,000.00
for the Advancement
of Colored People
National Committee for
NCQA's 25th Anniversary
$10,000.00
Quality Assurance
(``NCQA'')
National Consumers
Health Policies for Better
$5,000.00
League
Outcomes and Balanced Budgets
National Eczema
The Decade of Eczema: Roadmap
$200,000.00
Association
to Advocacy
National Forum for
13th Annual Meeting of the
$25,000.00
Heart Disease and
National Forum for Heart
Stroke Prevention
Disease and Stoke Prevention
Inc.
National Foundation
TB Trials Consortium
$671,292.00
For The Ctrs For
Disease Contr &
Prevention Inc.
National Health
Voluntary Health Leadership
$20,000.00
Council
Conference
National Health
Policy Development Fund
$70,000.00
Council
National Kidney
Patient Empowerment Workshop
$2,000.00
Foundation
National Kidney
Kansas City Kidney Walk
$1,000.00
Foundation
National Kidney
Wichita Kidney Walk
$250.00
Foundation
National Kidney
2015 Boston Kidney Walk
$15,000.00
Foundation
National Kidney
Champion of Hope Tribute Dinner
$1,000.00
Foundation of
Michigan
National Kidney
Gift of Life Gala
$1,500.00
Foundation of West
Tennessee
National Kidney
NKF of West Tennessee Wolf Mash
$250.00
Foundation of West
Dash 5K
Tennessee
National Kidney
2015 New York City Kidney Walk
$25,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Kidney
NKF Cares 2015
$25,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Kidney
NKF Peers 2015
$25,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Kidney
Eight Annual Mid-Atlantic First
$5,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Year Renal Fellowship
Symposium
National Kidney
7th Annual Central New Jersey
$1,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Kidney Walk
National Kidney
Philadelphia Kidney Walk
$500.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Kidney
Chester County Kidney Walk
$500.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Kidney
Wilmington Kidney Walk
$500.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Kidney
Pittsburgh Kidney Walk
$500.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Kidney
Northeast Ohio Kidney Walk
$1,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Serving Ohio
National Kidney
2015 Patient Symposium
$1,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Serving Ohio
National Patient
NPAF Policy Consortium
$20,000.00
Advocate Foundation
National Press
Training Journalists on
$40,000.00
Foundation
Advances in Biologics and
Biosimilars
National TB
2015 National TB Conference:
$500.00
Controllers
Sponsorship Request
Association
National Transitions
National Transition of Care
$250,000.00
of Care Coalition
Coalition
NBCH
Hypoglycemia Action Brief
$17,500.00
NBCH
Annual Conference
$3,500.00
NBCH
ASCVD Action Brief
$17,500.00
NCOMS
NC Oncology Management Society
$5,000.00
NEHI
New Policy: Better Use of
$25,000.00
Medicines in Diabetes
Neuropathy Action
9th Annual ``Neuropathy Action
$2,500.00
Foundation
Awareness Day''
New Jersey Hall of
Mobile Museum
$2,500.00
Fame
New Jersey Public
NJPHA Sponsorship
$5,000.00
Health Association
New York Stem Cell
NYSCF 10th Annual Translational
$2,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Stem Cell Research Conference
NJ SEEDS
College Scholars Program
$10,000.00
North Coast Health
Celebration of Caring
$2,500.00
Northeast Business
eValue8 - Health Plan
$9,000.00
Group on Health
Performance Review
Northeast Business
Specialty Pharmacy Conference
$5,000.00
Group on Health
Northeastern Section
German Exchange Program
$2,000.00
of the American
Chemical Society
NSHMBA Foundation
NSHMBA New Jersey Annual
$5,000.00
Partnership
Oklahoma Center for
The transformation of
$3,500.00
Healthcare
Healthcare
Improvement
Opportunity Through
Arizona Pavilion at BIO 2015
$1,000.00
Entrepreneurship
Foundation
Organization for
OFII Annual Dinner
$15,000.00
International
Investment
Partnership For
2016 Membership Dues
$19,000.00
Quality Medical
Donations
Patient Advocate
Prostate and CRC Co-Pay Relief
$550,000.00
Foundation
Fund
PATIENT EMPOWERMENT
The Latest News on Advanced
$20,000.00
NETWORK
Prostate Cancer Research and
Treatment
PCMA
2015 sPCMA Business Forum
$60,000.00
Sponsorship
PCMA
2015 Annual Meeting
$75,000.00
Presidential Sponsorship
Pediatric Cancer
NHL 2015 Pediatric Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Research Foundation
Pennsylvania
CBO Dinner
$5,000.00
Biotechnology
Association
Perimeter Bicycling
2015 El Tour de Tucson
$15,000.00
Association of
America, Inc.
Pharmaceutical
PhRMA Foundation Grants and
$100,000.00
Research and
Fellowships
Manufacturers of
America Foundation
Premier Cares
Premier Cares Foundation
$1,500.00
Foundation
Prostate Cancer Walk
Preventive
Cholesterol Patient Education
$100,000.00
Cardiovascular Nurses
Association
PRIDE
PRIDE Conference
$6,000.00
Project Hope The
Responding to the Nepal
$10,000.00
People To People
Earthquake
Health Foundation
Inc.
Prostate Cancer
22nd Annual Scientific Retreat
$300,000.00
Foundation
Raritan Valley
Galileo Scholarships: Providing
$17,500.00
Community College
Access to STEM Education
Foundation
Raritan Valley
Preparing for the Next
$10,000.00
Community College
Generation Science Standards
Foundation
Regents of the
V-BID Summit 2015: A Decade of
$40,000.00
University of
Transforming the Health Care
Michigan
Renal Support Network
KidneyTalk Podcast
$1,000.00
Renal Support Network
Live & Give Newsletter
$1,500.00
Renal Support Network
CKD Patient Education Meetin
$1,500.00
Renal Support Network
13th Annual Patient Essay
$1,000.00
Contest
Resource Center of
Transitional Housing Program
$5,000.00
Somerset Inc.
Rutgers University
Vets 4 Warriors
$10,000.00
Foundation
RVCC Foundation
STEM Education: Equity Issues
$10,000.00
and Workforce Pipeline
RVCC Foundation
College Campus Experience Day
$3,000.00
for STEM High School Students
Sage Bionetworks
2015 Paris Assembly
$15,000.00
Sanofi US Matching
Sanofi US Matching Gifts--Q2
$277,628.31
Gifts--2015
2015
Sanofi US Matching
Sanofi US Matching Gifts--Q1
$427,531.29
Gifts--2015
2015
SARSEF-SOUTHERN
The Future of Biomedical
$5,000.00
ARIZONA RESEARCH
Research
SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING
Scripps Translational
The Future of Genomic Medicine
$10,000.00
Science Institute
VIII
Society of Toxicologic
2015 ACVP/ASVCP/STP Combined
$2,500.00
Pathology
Annual Meeting
Society of Toxicology
Society of Toxicology Annual
$10,000.00
Meeting
Somerset County
SCBP 2015 program of work
$20,000.00
Business Partnership
Somerset Medical
Fun 'N Fit
$25,000.00
Center Foundation
Inc.
Somerset Medical
EMS Program
$5,000.00
Center Foundation
Inc.
Somerset Medical
El Poder Sobre La Diabetes
$10,000.00
Center Foundation
Inc.
South Dakota Diabetes
Virtual Nurse Model: School
$5,100.00
Coalition
Project
St. Louis Children's
Food Allergy Management and
$75,000.00
Hospital Foundation
Education
Stop Hunger Now Inc.
Stop Hunger Now Program
$10,000.00
Expansion to New York City
Metro
Stowe Weekend of Hope
Stowe Weekend of Hope
$5,000.00
T. Leroy Jefferson
2015 Community Health Fair
$2,500.00
Medical Society
Taking Control of Your
The 9th Annual Diabetes Forum
$10,000.00
Diabetes
Tennessee Kidney
2015 Gift of Life Walk/5K
$2,000.00
Foundation
Tennessee Kidney
Spring Soiree 2015
$2,500.00
Foundation
Teratology Society
Teratology Society 55th Annual
$1,500.00
Meeting
The American
Major Symposia--Roots and
$10,000.00
Association of
Mechanisms of Human Autoimmun
Immunologists, Inc.
The American College
ACVP/ASVCP/STP Combined Annual
$6,000.00
of Veterinary
Meeting
Pathologists
The American Fallen
Portrait Sponsorship
$25,000.00
Soldiers Project Inc.
The American Kidney
A Pairing for Prevention 2015
$5,000.00
Fund, Inc.
The American Kidney
The Hope Affair 2015
$50,000.00
Fund, Inc.
The American Kidney
9th Annual New York Spring
$1,500.00
Fund, Inc.
Event
The Bus Stops Here
Hall Of Fame Induction for
$35,000.00
Foundation
Jerome Bettis
The Center For Great
Adult Women's Program
$10,000.00
Expectations Inc.
The Childrens Health
Medical Home Initiative
$665,000.00
Fund
The Cleveland Clinic
A Celebration of Survivorship
$5,000.00
Foundation-BMT
An Educational Symposium for
Cleveland Clinic
BM
Sponsorship
The Council of State
Bowhay Institute for
$5,000.00
Government, Ltd.
Legislative Leadership
Development
The Diabetes Coalition
Giving Diabetes the Blues
$2,500.00
of Mississippi/
Mississippi Rural
Health Association
The FH Foundation
CASCADE FH Registry
$500,000.00
The Flood Sisters
7th Annual Love.Give.Life.
$2,000.00
Kidney Foundation of
Fashion Show/Gala
America
The Friends of Matheny
Matheny Center of Medicine and
$5,000.00
Dentistry
The Life Raft Group
Research Team Meeting
$5,000.00
The Salvation Army
Healthy Food Pantry Program
$5,000.00
The University of
First Annual Immuno-Oncology in
$25,000.00
Texas Foundation,
Myeloma 2015 Workshop
Inc.
Trustees of Boston
Boston University's 15th Annual
$1,500.00
University
CMD Symposium on Molecular
Discovery
Trustees of the
Research Training in
$20,000.00
University of
Pharmacoepidemiology
Pennsylvania
Tufts Medical Center
CEVR Database Subscription
$35,000.00
TULANE CANCER CENTER
NOLA Bluedoo Party/Walk/Run
$1,000.00
Tuskegee Human And
Donation for Public Education
$5,000.00
Civil Rights
Multicultural Center
UCSF Cancer Center (c/
2015 HDFCCC Symposium:
$5,000.00
o UCSF Foundation)
Breakthroughs in Cancer
Immunotherapy
United Network for
Transplant Living Program
$25,000.00
Organ Sharing
United States Soccer
Soccer for Success--Paterson,
$10,000.00
Federation Foundation
NJ
Inc.
United Way of Greater
Merial--Duluth 2014 United Way
$23,984.25
Atlanta
Campaign
United Way of Hall
2014 United Way Campaign Match--
$2,841.50
County Inc.
Merial Select
United Way of
SP 2014 United Way Campaign
$7,221.00
Lackawanna and Wayne
Payout
Counties
United Way of
Sanofi Pasteur 2014 United Way
$521.00
Massachusetts Bay
Campaign Payout
Inc.
United Way of Monroe
SP 2014 United Way Campaign
$56,881.53
County
Match
United Way of
2014 United Way Campaign--
$5,000.00
Northeast Georgia
Merial Athens
United Way of Northern
Caregivers Coalition
$100,000.00
New Jersey
Unitio Inc.
T1D Education Event Series
$45,000.00
Univeristy of Arizona
Alternative Muscle Club
$2,700.00
Foundation for the
meeting
benefit of Univeristy
of Arizona
University of Arizona
Support for the Undergraduate
$3,000.00
Foundation
Biology Research Program
Conference
University of Arizona
Applied Biosciences GIDP Merit
$5,000.00
Foundation
Scholarship
University of Arizona
Keep Engaging Youth in Science
$6,400.00
Foundation
(KEYS) High School Summer
Internships
University of
UCSF Diabetes Center 15th
$5,000.00
California, San
Anniversary Symposium
Francsico Foundation
University of Florida
New Developments in Clinical
$1,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Pharmacy and Clinical
Pharmacology
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
M-Cersi Conference on Patient
$10,000.00
BALTIMORE FOUNDATION
Focused Drug Development
INC.
University of North
Pharmacoepidemiology Program
$20,000.00
Carolina at Chapel
Donation
Hill
University of Southern
USC/UCLA/UCSF Tri-Institutional
$3,000.00
California
Retreat
University of Southern
National Unity 2015 Conference:
$5,000.00
Mississippi
Community Health Workers
Foundation
US China Health Summit
5th US-China Health Summit at
$70,000.00
Inc.
Harvard University
Us TOO International
Us TOO 25th Anniversary
$10,000.00
Educational Symposium & Gala
Celebration
Vision y Compromiso
13th Annual Promotoras and
$10,000.00
Community Health Workers
Conference
Washington Legal
2015 General Operating Support
$25,000.00
Foundation
Washington Policy
WPC's 2015 Annual Dinner
$3,500.00
Center
Wellness Community of
School-Based Support Groups
$15,000.00
Central New Jersey
Winter Urologic Forum
Winter Urologic Forum (WUF)
$15,000.00
(WUF)
Symposia Timeslot
WomenHeart: The
WomenHeart Science & Leadership
$50,000.00
National Coalition
Symposium
for Women with Heart
Disease
WomenHeart: The
National Science & Policy
$25,000.00
National Coalition
Summit on Women's Heart Health
for Women with Heart
Disease
Women's Venture Fund
Highest Leaf Awards
$15,000.00
YMCA of Greater Boston
YMCA's Diabetes Prevention
$5,000.00
Program
ZERO--The End of
ZERO Prostate Cancer Run/Walk
$1,500.00
Prostate Cancer
Delaware
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Payments made by Sanofi US (2016)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legal Name
Payment Amount
Project Title
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
$48,070
American Diabetes Association
ASSOCIATION EXPOS
EXPO
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$35,000
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR CANCER
Transplant Surgeons
RESEARCH--Networking Hub
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$35,000
American Society of Transplant
Transplant Surgeons
Surgeons--Bronze Level Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taking Control of Your
$200,000
Taking Control of Your
Diabetes
Diabetes--Gold Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children with Diabetes
$35,000
2016 Children with Diabetes
(CWD) Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MedStar Washington
$3,000
MedStar Washington Hospital
Medical Center
Center--Current Issues in the
Care of Dialysis and
Transplant Patient
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Joslin Diabetes
$25,000
A Taste of Ginger
Center, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts General
$5,000
Collaborative Novel-Novel
Hospital
Combination Therapies Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater New England
$7,000
Economic Development
Minority Supplier
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Healthy Capital
$2,500
Diabetes Community Resource
District Initative
Guide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Get Moving Challenge
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Tour de Cure
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
2016 Step Out: Walk to Stop
Association
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
$2,500
Father of the Year Awards Gala
ASSOCIATION INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Buffalo American
$2,500
2016 Buffalo Niagara Tour de
Diabetes Association
Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CNY American Diabetes
$2,500
2016 Tour de Cure
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Albany American
$2,500
Saratoga Springs Tour de Cure
Diabetes Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Tour de Cure Michigan
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,000
2016 Finger Lakes Tour de Cure
Association Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$10,000
2016 High Risk Community
Association
Initiatives for Southwest
Florida
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Charlotte Step Out: Walk to
Association
Stop Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Tour de Cure Hawaii
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Step Out: Walk to Stop Diabetes
Association
Upstate, SC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
American Diabetes Association's
Association
Boston Step Out Walk to STOP
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
American Diabetes Association's
Association
Connecticut Step Out Walk to
STOP Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
American Diabetes Association's
Association
Central Massachusetts Step Out
Walk to STOP Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
2016 New Orleans Father of the
Association
Year
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
2016 Indiana Tour de Cure
Association, Indiana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
$75,000
Diabetes Hospitality Days: Stop
ASSOCIATION INC
Diabetes in New Orleans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Kidney
$25,000
NKF Patient Programs 2016
Foundation, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asthma and Allergy
$100,000
AAFA Patient Education and
Foundation of America
Outreach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asthma and Allergy
$10,000
KFA Strides for Safe Kids Mall
Foundation of America
Walk and Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asthma and Allergy
$15,000
KFA Patient Education and
Foundation of America
Outreach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Northeast Business
$20,000
eValue8--Health Plan
Group on Health
Performance Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food Allergy Research
$100,000
FOOD ALLERGY 101 Online
Education
Training Component and School
Action Campaign Grassroots
Advocacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Heart
$2,000
Peoria Heart and Stroke Ball
Association |
and Peoria and Bloomington
American Stroke
Heart Walk
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Heart
$15,000
2016 Heart Innovation Forum
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Heart
$2,000
Springfield Heart Ball
Association |
American Stroke
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ATS Foundation Inc
$25,000
Eighth Annual ATS Foundation
Research Program Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BHCAG FOUNDATION
$2,500
Employer Leadership Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Alliance of
$5,000
11th Annual Meeting
State Prostate Cancer
Coalitions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York Stem Cell
$2,000
The NYSCF Conference
Foundation, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Opportunity Through
$1,000
Arizona Pavilion at BIO 2016
Entrepreneurship
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$1,000
Healthier Somerset
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diabetes Foundation
$10,000
25th Anniversary Awards Dinner
Inc.
& Talent Competition
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
One Walk Philadelphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
JDRF One Promise Gala
Allentown--Passport to a Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
Rockin' Docs for Diabetes Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
2016 JDRF Poconos One Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$12,000
JDRF One Promise Gala
Philadelphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
2016 JDRF Moosic One Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
2016 JDRF Reading One Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
One Walk Newtown
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
2016 JDRF Lehigh Valley One
Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500
ACE For A Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF Central PA
$2,500
JDRF One Walk--Lancaster
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF New York City
$15,000
44th Annual Promise Ball
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF International
$2,500
34th Annual Boston Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF INTERNATIONAL
$50,000
2016 TypeOneNation Summits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF INTERNATIONAL
$50,000
2016 JDRF Government Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF Greater Dallas
$2,500
JDRF One Walk, Dallas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500
Rock the Cure
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$10,000
JDRF Imagine Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Comprehensive
$10,000
Emerging Issues in Oncology--An
Cancer Network
NCCN Roundtable Discussion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
$2,500
ASN Annual Meeting
Neurochemistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Orthopaedic
$50,000
Early Osteoarthritis/Prevention
Society for Sports
of Disease Progression
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diabetes Foundation of
$2,000
LIVE-A-BETES: Learning To Live
Mississippi
Well With Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Renal Physicians
$10,000
RPA Kidney Quality Improvement
Association
Registry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York & New Jersey
$8,000
Annual Sponsorship
Minority Supplier
Development Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$3,000
2016 Gordon Research Conference
Conference
(GRC) entitled Autophagy in
Stress, Development, and
Disease: From the basics to
therapeutic targets
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$2,000
Drug Carriers in Medicine and
Conference
Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$10,000
Gordon Research Conference
Conference
Antibody Biology & Engineering
March 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PATIENT EMPOWERMENT
$20,000
2016 Town Meeting for Advanced
NETWORK
Prostate Cancer Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PATIENT EMPOWERMENT
$25,000
Online Advanced Prostate News
NETWORK
Coverage for Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bioscience Association
$1,500
WV Bioscience Summit 2016
of WV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arthritis Foundation
$2,000
Sponsorship for Arthritis
Foundation Crystal Ball
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Transitions
$125,000
NTOCC
of Care Coalition
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Medical
$50,000
AMSSM Foundation Research Grant
Society for Sports
Awards
Medicine Foundation,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biocom
$10,000
Global Life Science Partnering
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biocom
$10,000
Global Life Science Partnering
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taking Control of Your
$200,000
Taking Control Of Your Diabetes
Diabetes
Conferences and Health Fairs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prescription Drug
$1,000
Legislative Reception and
Assistance Foundation
Celebration of Access
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Cleveland Clinic
$95,275
Advances in Organ
Foundation
Transplantation--Annual
Fellows Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Employers Health
$6,500
Employer Health 2016 Annual
Coalition, Inc.
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Respiratory Health
$750
Lung Health Education
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Us TOO International
$15,000
Prostate Cancer News You Can
Use
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Us TOO International
$5,000
Prostate Cancer Educational
Webinar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Us TOO International
$5,000
Us TOO Prostate Cancer Business
Leadership Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blood and Marrow
$25,000
Celebrating a Second Chance at
Transplant
Life 2016 Survivorship
Information Network
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blood and Marrow
$7,500
2016 BMT InfoNet Transplant
Transplant
Webinar Series
Information Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA
$80,000
2016 sPCMA Business Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA
$95,000
2016 Annual Meeting
Presidential Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regents of the
$40,000
V-BID Summit 2016
University of
Michigan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minnesota Society of
$6,000
MSHP 2016 Corporate Business
Health-System
Partnership Program
Pharmacists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Be The Match
$25,000
National Sponsorship for Be The
Foundation
Match Walk+Run
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mid-America Coalition
$5,000
4th Annual Workforce &
on Health Care
Community Well-Being Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Virus Network,
$10,000
8th International Global Virus
Inc.
Network Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CrowdCare Foundation,
$10,000
Muscles for Myeloma
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRIDE
$6,000
PRIDE Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The diaTribe
$100,000
d16 Executive Forum
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
US China Health Summit
$70,000
5th US-China Health Summit at
Inc.
Harvard University
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater Philadelphia
$5,000
GPBCH 2016 Annual Conference
Business Coalition on
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food Allergy &
$100,000
FAACT Education Programs
Anaphylaxis
Connection Team
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deep South Cancer
$5,000
2016 Cycliad Charity Bicycle
Foundation
Ride
------------------------------------------------------------------------
California Life
$2,500
CLSA Life Sciences Academy
Sciences Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Globalization of
$3,500
GPEN2016
Pharmaceutics
Education Network,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
$20,000
Public Policy Forum 2016
of Diabetes Educators
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federation of American
$5,000
FASEB conference on Muscle
Societies for
Satellite Cells and
Experimental Biology
Regeneration
(FASEB)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teratology Society
$1,500
Teratology Society 56th Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$145,000
BIO International Convention
Innovation
Organization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$40,000
BIO Europe Spring and BIO
Innovation
Europe International
Organization
Partnering Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maryland Black Caucus
$2,000
Maryland Black Caucus
Foundation, Inc.
Foundation, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$25,083
2016 ACS CAN Fundraising Events
Society Cancer Action
and ACS CAN advocacy
Network
activities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mid Atlantic Lifespan,
$4,000
Senior Care Providers
Inc.
Roundtables With Local
Hospitals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACS Organic Chemistry
$1,500
ACS-DOC Graduate Research
Division
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society of Toxicology
$10,000
Society of Toxicology Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
$50,000
Forum on Neuroscience and
SCIENCES
Nervous System Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
$85,000
Forum on Drug Discovery,
SCIENCES
Development and Translation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Allergy & Asthma
$100,000
AAP Asthma, Allergy &
Network Mothers of
Anaphylaxis Champion Program
Asthmatics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Virginia Bio
$1,500
Legislative Reception
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMGA Foundation Inc
$200,000
Together 2 Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Society
$70,000
World Kidney Day 2016
of Nephrology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Health Care
$7,500
``The Health Care Revolution:
Coalition
Building the Health Rosetta''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Caucus of
$2,000
Scholarship
Black State
Legislators
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fundacion Centro
$15,000
Diabetes Summer Camp 2016
Pediatrico de
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Drug
$15,000
American Drug Utilization
Utilization Review
Review Symposium
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The University of
$25,000
Second Annual Immuno-Oncology
Texas Foundation,
and Myeloma Workshop
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
El Paso Diabetes
$2,500
2016 Diabetes Walk/Run
Association, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National TB
$2,500
Using the Stories and Voices of
Controllers
TB Survivors for Patient
Association
Education, Building a
Supportive Community, and
Advocacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
French American
$1,000
FACS XVI
Chemical Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas Tech Foundation,
$286,000
Community Health Worker (CHW)
Inc.
Core Consensus Project 2016:
Increasing Stakeholder
Engagement and Endorsement,
Defining CHW Roles and Skills
in Clinical and Community
Settings, and CHW Skill
Assessment Approaches and
Tools
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Houston Business
$6,000
The Employer's Specialty
Coalition on Health
Pharmaceutical Dilemma--
Challenges & Opportunities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNM Comprehensive
$1,000
Hoops4Hope
Cancer Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Utah
$50,000
Western Atrial Fibrillation
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WithinReach
$5,000
Improving Health Access and
Immunization Policy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NASPA
$5,000
NASPA Leadership Conference
Awareness Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Eczema
$300,000
Roadmap to Advocacy
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society on
$5,000
2016 Aging in America
Aging
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milken Institute
$500,000
2016 Milken Institute
Conference Engagement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$100,000
IMF Patient Programs 2016
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$5,000
IMF 10th Annual Comedy
Foundation
Celebration benefitting the
Peter Boyle Research
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$35,000
7th Annual Internaltional
Foundation
Myeloma Working Group Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
California Center for
$2,500
Pre-diabetes Epidemic in
Public Health
California--What Now?
Advocacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Out & Equal
$25,000
2016 Out & Equal Workplace
Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLBTQ Legal Advocates
$3,000
GLAD 2016 Summer Party
& Defenders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gay Men's Health
$5,000
AIDS Walk New York
Crisis, Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Aid
$25,000
The Children's Aid Society 5th
Society
Annual KTP Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jersey Battered
$7,000
JBWS Grand Tastings XXII
Women's Service, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Hope, Inc.
$10,000
2016 Silver Corporate Partner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RESOURCES USA INC
$7,500
French Talks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Court Appointed
$1,000
Night of a Thousand Stars Gala
Special Advocates of
Mercer County, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Machestic Dragons
$5,000
10th Annual ``Paddle for Pink''
Community Dragon Boat Festival
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Lebanese
$10,000
St. Jude Gourmet Gala
Syrian Associated
Charities, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Kidney
$1,000
Champion of Hope Tribute Dinner
Foundation of
Michigan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Congressional
$25,000
Gold Membership
Award Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research!America
$25,000
20th Annual Advocacy Awards
Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society for Women's
$10,000
2016 SWHR Annual Gala Dinner
Health Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$2,500
Relay For Life of Bridgewater
Society Cancer Action
Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Arizona
$3,000
Sponsorship of the 28th Annual
Foundation
Undergraduate Biology Research
Program Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diabetes Hands
$37,500
Online Community for People
Foundation
with Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston University
$2,500
Boston University School of
School of Public
Public Health 40th Anniversary
Health
Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pro Bono Partnership
$10,000
Pro Bono Partnership 2016 Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Christ The King
$5,000
8th Annual President's Gala
Preparatory School of
Newark NJ Corp.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health Fund
$25,000
2016 Annual Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Aid
$25,000
The Children's Aid Society's
Society
Keeping the Promise Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Heart
$5,000
Heart & Stroke Ball
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Good Grief Inc.
$2,500
2016 Great Pumpkin Ball
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Way of Northern
$500
Pathways for Caregivers 2016
New Jersey
Reprint
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Easterseals New Jersey
$1,350
46th Annual Raritan Valley
Workshop Dinner Dance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Safe+Sound Somerset
$10,000
Soaring to New Heights
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deirdre O'Brien Child
$2,000
Gala Sponsorship
Advocacy Center Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Center For Great
$5,000
2016 Gift of Hope Gala
Expectations Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset County
$500
Second Annual Workplace Health
Business Partnership
& Wellness Expo 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RESOURCES USA INC.
$5,000
Bastille Day 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RESOURCES USA INC
$5,000
Bastille Day events
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER SUPPORT
$5,000
Inspiring Hope
COMMUNITY CENTRAL NEW
JERSEY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Auxiliary of the
$5,000
57th Annual Auxiliary Autumn
Robert Wood Johnson
Ball
University Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pocono Mountains
$6,000
Pocono Mountains Community
Community Challenge
Fundraiser
Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Kidney
$50,000
2016 The Hope Affair
Fund, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Partnership for a
$4,500
PHA Fit to Celebrate Gala
Healthier America
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$75,000
2017 Corporate Sponsor
Transplant Surgeons
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vision y Compromiso
$5,000
Hacia Una Vida y Sana, the 13th
Annual Promotoras and
Community Health Workers
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Turn 2 Foundation Inc.
$15,000
Turn 2 Foundation 20th Annual
Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AAALAC International
$5,000
IQ/AAALAC International Global
3Rs Award Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asthma & Allergy
$1,000
Fall 2016 AAFA-STL Printed
Foundation of
Newsletter
America, St. Louis
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Autoimmune Advocacy
$2,500
A Grapevine Grows
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operation Warrior
$7,500
Warrior Wishes 2016 Army/Navy
Wishes Foundation
Game
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington Legal
$30,000
2016 General Operating Support
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maryland Black Caucus
$2,500
Legislative Weekend
Foundation, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research!America
$10,000
National Health Research Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Friends of Cancer
$25,000
Friends of Cancer Research 20th
Research
Anniversary Cancer Leadership
Awards Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project Hope The
$10,000
2016 Project HOPE Gala
People To People
Health Foundation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Virginia Public
$700
Lighten Up, It's Just Politics
Access Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMGA Foundation Inc.
$10,000
AMGA Foundation 50th
Anniversary Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEO Roundtable on
$500,000
Project Data Sphere initiative
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conference of Western
$5,000
CWAG 2016 Winter Dinner
Attorneys General
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Western Governors'
$10,000
WGA Annual Contribution
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colon Cancer Alliance
$3,500
2016 Blue Hope Bash
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Statistical
$9,500
Breiamn Award
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington Policy
$4,000
2016 Annual Dinner
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEHI (Network for
$75,000
Health Care Without Walls
Excellence in Health
Innovation)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cheshire Health
$1,000
Cheshire Stepping Out for
Foundation
Diabetes Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts General
$5,000
The Role of Tumor
Hospital
Microenvironment: a 40-year
Journey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts General
$5,000
Massachusetts General Hospital
Hospital
Immunology Seminar Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YMCA of Greater Boston
$10,000
YMCA's Diabetes Prevention
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MIT 100K
$25,000
MIT 100K Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship
Competition
Competition
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Joslin Diabetes
$10,000
High Hopes Gala
Center, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Joslin Diabetes
$2,500
Ritmos de salud (healthy
Center, Inc.
rhythms)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multi Regional
$50,000
Multi Regional Clinical Trials
Clinical Trials
Center of Brigham and Women's
Center of Brigham and
Hospital and Harvard
Women's Hospital and
Harvard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation for
$12,500
Animal Research Communications
Biomedical Research
Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation for
$20,000
Public Education to Advance
Biomedical Research
Understanding of Animal
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts Society
$2,500
The MSMR Annual Meeting of
for Medical Research,
Members
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Hospital
$10,000
PCMM Retreat
Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation for
$5,000
Scientific Symposium in honor
Neurologic Diseases,
Vijay K. Kuchroo
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lake Norman Community
$1,000
Sunset and Sandals
Health Clinic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple Myeloma
$50,000
Multiple Myeloma Educational
Research Foundation
Programming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
CNY Diabetes Community Forum
Association Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$5,000
Community Awareness Training
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Step Out Walk to Stop Diabetes--
Association
Phoenix
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
2016 Kiss a Pig Gala
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
American Diabetes Association's
Association
Connecticut Tour de Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$5,000
American Diabetes Association
Association
New England Classic Multi-Day
Tour de Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
American Diabetes Association's
Association
Kennebunks Tour de Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
American Diabetes Association's
Association
Ocean State Tour de Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
American Diabetes Association's
Association
North Shore Tour de Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$10,000
ADA Indiana's Josiah Kirby
Association, Indiana
Lilly Sr. Distinguished
Service Award Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
2016 Father of the Year Awards
Association
Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$50,000
Diabetes Awareness and
Association
Intervention--via Step Out:
Walk to Stop Diabetes, the Red
Rider/Red Strider Program and
the Annual Diabetes Conference
in NJ
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
2016 World Diabetes Day Summit
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$20,000
Unmasking Diabetes Gala &
Association
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Step Out Walk to Stop Diabetes
Association
of the Triangle
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Tour De Cure + Step Out: Walk
Association
to Stop Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500
Father of the Year Awards
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Health
$100,000
The Patient Perspective on the
Council
Value of Treatments
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Health
$95,000
Health Technology Assessments
Council
and Value: The Patient
Perspective
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Kidney
$50,000
2016 New York City Kidney Walk
Foundation, Inc.
and Patient Journeys
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Kidney
$15,000
2016 Boston Kidney Walk
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Organization for
$15,000
2016 OFII Annual Dinner
International
Investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Healthcare
$8,850
HBA Woman of the Year Elite
Businesswomen's
Table
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States Bone and
$20,000
Burden of Musculoskeletal
Joint Initiative, NFP
Diseases in the United States
(BMUS) Report
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States Bone and
$80,000
Experts in Arthritis (EIA)
Joint Initiative, NFP
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
$150,000
LDL Address the Risk Think Tank
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Leukemia &
$2,500
Lowcountry Light The Night Walk
Lymphoma Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Leukemia &
$16,000
Light The Night Sponsorship
Lymphoma Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE LEUKEMIA &
$50,000
Band Against Cancer: The Sarah
LYMPHOMA SOCIETY
Cannon Tour
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moses E. Cheeks Slam
$2,500
Moses E. Cheeks Slam Dunk for
Dunk for Diabetes
Diabetes Basketball Camp
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Foundation
$25,000
2016 Get in Rhythm. Stay in
for Women's Health
Rhythm. Atrial Fibrillation
(dbaStopAfib.org)
Patient Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Alliance of
$5,000
Advanced Prostate Cancer
State Prostate Cancer
Laminate
Coalitions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Alliance of
$5,000
12th Annual Meeting of the
State Prostate Cancer
National Alliance of State
Coalitions
Prostate Cancer Coalitions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colorectal Cancer
$10,000
Guide in the Fight for Late
Coalition Inc
Stage CRC Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Myotonic Dystrophy
$3,000
MDF Annual Conference
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Jersey Association
$1,000
3Rs Sharing Conference V
for Biomedical
Research, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academy of Managed
$15,000
AMCP 2016 Partnership Forum:
Care Pharmacy
Enabling the Exchange of
Clinical and Economic Data Pre-
FDA Approval
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academy of Managed
$18,000
AMCP Oncology Management
Care Pharmacy
Partnership Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIONJ INC.
$10,000
Annual Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Oncology
$15,000
Oncology Care Model Filming
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Oncology
$7,500
Community Oncology Alliance CMS
Alliance
Oncology Care Model Payer
Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Oncology
$25,000
2016 Community Oncology Payer
Alliance
Exchange Summit V Oncology
Payment Reform
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF International
$2,500
JDRF One Walk 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$5,000
JDRF One Walk Pittsburgh
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$5,000
JDRF One Walk Westmoreland
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500
JDRF One Walk Rochester
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500
JDRF One Walk Southern Tier
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF NENY
$2,500
JDRF Saratoga One Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF--Western New York
$2,500
JDRF Buffalo One Walk
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF International
$2,500
JDRF One Walk Boston 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$10,000
Mambo for Myeloma ASH
Hematology
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Kidney
$5,000
2016 A Pairing For Prevention
Fund, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Kidney
$75,000
New To Dialysis Campaign
Fund, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE TRANSPLANTATION
$50,000
TTS Transplantation Leadership
SOCIETY
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PROMIS Health
$10,000
PROMIS: Measuring Health
Organization (PHO)
Outcomes Around the World
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Foundation for
$5,000
International Research
Peripheral Neuropathy
Symposium/Advances in
Neuropathy--Emerging Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PQA, Inc.
$5,000
PQA Leadership Summit 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PQA, Inc.
$25,000
PQA Insulin Adherence Committee
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MMORE: Multiple
$5,000
MoveMMORE Seattle 2016
Myeloma Opportunities
for Research &
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Society
$5,000
ACoP7 meeting
of Pharmacometrics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Galien Foundation
$15,000
The Galien Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MassChallenge, Inc.
$4,000
2016 MC Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MassChallenge, Inc.
$40,000
MassChallenge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alliance for
$5,000
Cell & Gene Meeting on the Mesa
Regenerative Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oklahoma Center for
$3,000
Transformation of Healthcare:
Healthcare
CPC Learning Session
Improvement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Literacy
$225,000
The Blue Ribbon Online
Missouri
Clearinghouse of Kidney
Transplantation and Living
Donation Resources (BROC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Literacy
$50,000
My Transplant Coach Application
Missouri
Development Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Center for Medical
$40,000
GPC--Real World Evidence
Technology Policy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Center for Healthcare
$7,500
2016 Diversity, Inclusion, &
Innovation
Life Sciences Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIO Ventures for
$10,000
2016 BIO International
Global Health (BVGH)
Convention Africa Pavilion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Transitions
$50,000
NTOCC Mission Support
of Care Coalition
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American College
$6,000
2016 ACVP/ASVCP Concurrent
of Veterinary
Annual Meeting
Pathologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
South Dakota Diabetes
$1,000
Third Annual Sweet Success
Coalition
Extravaganza
------------------------------------------------------------------------
T. Leroy Jefferson
$2,000
2016 Community Health Fair:
Medical Society
Healthy Children for a Healthy
Future
------------------------------------------------------------------------
North Coast Health
$1,000
Celebration of Caring 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academy of Nutrition
$18,000
DCE On the Cutting Edge
and Dietetics on
newsletter
behalf of Diabetes
Care and Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
America's Health
$55,000
Executive Leadership Program
Insurance Plans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Liver
$2,500
Diabetes and NASH Webinar
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Us TOO International
$2,500
12th Annual SEA Blue Chicago
Prostate Cancer Walk & Run
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blood and Marrow
$2,500
BMT InfoNet Resource Directory
Transplant
update and reprint
Information Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chicago Hispanic
$1,000
10th Annual Vive tu Vida/Get
Health Coalition
Up! Get Moving! Health and
Wellness Fair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Council of State
$5,000
Bowhay Institute
Government, Ltd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Bone Marrow
$5,000
Update, Edit and Transplant
Transplant Link
Survivors' Guide for Bone
Marrow, Stem Cell and Cord
Blood Transplant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Society
$8,000
Corporate Membership
for
Application
Pharmacoepidemiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Be The Match
$90,000
Quick Reference Guidelines--
Foundation
Transplant Consultation and
Post-Transplant Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$10,000
Meet the Faculty Networking
Transplantation
Session @ 2016 AST Fellows
Symposium on Transplantation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Iowa Pharmacy
$10,000
2016 Leadership in Pharmacy
Association
advocacy program
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mid-America Coalition
$4,000
Type 2 Diabetes in Kansas City:
on Health Care
A Collaborative Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
St. Louis Children's
$50,000
Food Allergy Management and
Hospital Foundation
Education (FAME)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Missouri Biotechnology
$1,000
BIO Benchmarking Program
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Metabolic Endocrine
$25,000
14th Annual World Congress on
Education Foundation
Insulin Resistance Diabetes
and Cardiovascular Disease
(WCIRDC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The diaTribe
$5,000
10th Annual Diabetes Forum
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater Philadelphia
$1,000
GPBCH Annual Wellness Summit
Business Coalition on
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project Access of
$500
Diabetic Walk
Howard County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Diabetes
$14,000
Access to Insulin Patient
Volunteer Leadership
Advocacy Study
Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keystone for
$5,000
Foundation2016 Conference
Incubating Innovation
in Life sciences
Network (KiiLN)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALL IN TOGETHER
$25,000
All In Together Campaign Women
CAMPAIGN INC
in Healthcare Policy Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington Health
$6,600
2016 Alliance Membership
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
IIT Association of
$2,500
2016 PanIIT Leadership
Greater New England
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
California Life
$7,500
2016 Life Sciences Academy
Sciences Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Kansas Chamber
$884
Corporate Membership
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Delaware Diabetes
$2,500
Delaware Diabetes Coalition
Coalition
2016 EXPO
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Legislative
$10,000
Life Sciences Academy
Exchange Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$10,000
ODTC White Paper
Innovation
Organization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$20,000
State Policy Maker Round Tables
Innovation
on Value of Biopharmaceutical
Organization (BIO)
Industry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
$50,000
Sustaining Sponsorship
of Pharmaceutical
Scientists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society for Women's
$10,000
National Conference on Women's
Health Research
Health Research--Diabetes/
Metabolism
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International
$33,000
IPEC-Americas 2016 Membership
Pharmaceutical
Dues
Excipients Council of
the Americas (IPEC-
Americas)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FSH Society
$2,500
FSHD Connect Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Society
$10,000
RECOMB/ISCB Conference on
for Computational
Regulatory and Systems
Biology, Inc.
Genomics with DREAM Challenges
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WomenHeart: The
$25,000
Access NOW! Campaign
National Coalition
for Women with Heart
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Springboard 2000
$15,000
Health Innovation Hub
Enterprises, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$1,000
2016 ACS CAN Michigan Forum and
Society Cancer Action
ACS CAN advocacy activities
Network
nationwide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
APhA Foundation
$168,870
Consensus Consortium on Patient
Self-Management Credentialing
(PSMC) and Value-Based Health
Benefit Design Considerations
in Patient-Centered, Team-
Based Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society of Toxicology
$2,500
The Use of Cardiomyocytes for
the Assessment of
Proarrhythmic Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Holiday Trails
$2,500
Family Diabetes Camp and Summer
Camperships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women In Government
$5,000
2016 Healthcare Summit Diabetes
Foundation, Inc.
Programming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women In Government
$20,000
Diabetes Campaign--Phase II
Foundation, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Advocate
$35,000
Understanding What Patients
Foundation
Value and What and Matters to
Them During Their Treatment:
The Prostate Cancer Research
Program (PCRP)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Organ Donation and
$4,500
National Critical Issues Forum
Transplantation
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arthritis Foundation,
$40,000
ICER Survey
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgia Life Sciences
$1,500
Georgia Life Sciences Coalition
Coalition
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Cytokine
$15,000
4TH ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
and Interferon
INTERNATIONAL CYTOKINE AND
Society Inc.
INTERFERON SOCIETY (ICIS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
$25,000
AACE Diabetes Resource Center,
of Clinical
2016-17
Endocrinologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ZERO--The End of
$5,000
ZERO Prostate Cancer Community
Prostate Cancer
Advocacy Events
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Diabetes Coalition
$2,500
Giving Diabetes the Blues
of Mississippi/
Mississippi Rural
Health Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Southern
$5,000
National Unity 2016 Conference:
Mississippi
Community Health Workers -
Foundation
Social Change Agents Advancing
Health Equity and Improving
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NBCH
$25,000
High Value Health: Making the
Dream a Reality
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fundacion Centro
$5,000
World Diabetes Month
Pediatrico de
Celebration 2016
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fundacion Centro
$3,500
XV Annual Gala Dinner
Pediatrico de
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TULANE CANCER CENTER
$1,000
NOLA Bluedoo Run/Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCSL Foundation for
$7,500
NCSL LegisBrief Sponsorship
State Legislatures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arizona Diabetes
$2,500
Arizona Diabetes Foundation
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federation of Clinical
$10,000
FOCIS 2016 Annual Meeting
Immunology Societies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society of Dermatology
$30,000
SDPA 14th Annual Fall
Physician Assistants
Dermatology Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colon Cancer Alliance
$10,000
2016 Live Your Best Life mCRC
Patient Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Eczema
$100,000
Leaders in Eczema Forum Series
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress of California
$1,500
Script Your Future Senior
Seniors Education and
Leader Education
Research Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of Black
$20,000
Improving Access to Innovative
Cardiologists
Therapies in High-Risk
Populations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lymphoma Research
$3,000
Understanding Transplantation
Foundation
and Lymphoma Patient Guide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prostate Cancer
$250,000
23rd Annual Scientific Retreat
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$8,708,932
Product Donations made
by Sanofi US to the
Sanofi Foundation for
North America *
(estimate)
$343,602,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Donations made by the Sanofi Foundation for North America
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legal Name
Payment Amount
Project Title
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of Boston
$125,000
National CHW Association
University
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tufts Center for the
$12,500
Assessing the Use of Real World
Study of Drug
Evidence to Support Regulated
Development
Medical Research and Post-
Marketing Safety Monitoring
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge Arts Council
$5,000
2016 Summer Programs for
Fund
Magazine Beach Park
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$25,000
Disaster Relief--Hurricane
Matthew
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$5,000
AmeriCares Airlift Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$25,000
Ecuador Earthquake Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$10,000
U.S. Disaster Assistance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Christ The King
$59,000
Corporate Work Study Program
Preparatory School of
Newark NJ Corp
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAACP
$10,000
Childhood Obesity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
$2,500,000
Pathway to Stop Diabetes
ASSOCIATION INC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Kidney
$5,000
New Jersey Kidney Transplant
Foundation, Inc.
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March of Dimes
$86,000
Supporting NICU Babies and
Foundation
Families
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heritage of Pride,
$2,899
NYC Pride March
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health Fund
$5,000
Baton Rouge--Emergency Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Salvation Army
$10,000
Healthy Food Pantry Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Columbia Univeristy
$100,000
Project on Non-Communicable
Mailman School of
Diseases
Public Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE LEUKEMIA &
$19,640
Fiscal Year 2017 Myeloma
LYMPHOMA SOCIETY
Patient Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stop Hunger Now Inc.
$10,000
Stop Hunger Now Disaster Ready
Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Garden State Equality
$5,000
Pledge and Protect LGBT Seniors
Education Fund Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Nejeda Foundation
$10,000
Camp Nejeda: Helping Kids with
Type 1 Diabetes Live Happier,
Healthier Lives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Matheny School and
$10,000
Matheny Center of Medicine and
Hospital Inc.
Dentistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Way of Northern
$100,000
Caregivers Coalition
New Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jersey Battered
$5,000
Community Counseling Services
Women's Service, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food Bank of Somerset
$10,000
Back Pack Program
County Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Hope, Inc.
$25,000
Residential Recovery Programs
for Homeless Veterans and
Disabled Individuals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hyacinth Foundation, A
$15,000
Hyacinth Psychosocial Support
New Jersey Non-profit
Services
Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kean University
$15,000
2016 Group Summer Scholars
Foundation Inc
Research Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Visiting Nurse
$10,000
Hospice Care and Adult Day Club
Association of
Services
Somerset Hills
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NJ SEEDS
$10,000
Young Scholars Program--Health
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$30,000
Fun n' Fit
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$5,000
Quality CPR Saves Lives
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$10,000
El poder
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deirdre O'Brien Child
$10,000
Clinical Counseling
Advocacy Center Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Midland Adult Services
$10,000
Midland Helping Hands
Inc
Employment Training Program
and Midland Meals on Wheels
Employment Training Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Center For Great
$10,000
Adult Women & their Children
Expectations Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dress For Success
$10,000
Dress for Success Morris County
Morris County Inc.
Transforming Lives Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dress For Success
$10,000
FOUNDATIONS OF SUCCESS
Morris County Inc.
WORKSHOPS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Partnership for
$10,000
Community of Practice
Quality Medical
Donations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$3,000
College Campus Experience Day
Community College
for STEM High School Students
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$10,000
Preparing for the Next
Community College
Generation Science Standards
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$7,500
Galileo Scholarships: Expanding
Community College
Access to STEM Education
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rutgers University
$10,000
Vets4Warriors
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Fallen
$15,000
Portrait Sponsorship
Soldiers Project Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Strengthen Orlando d/b/
$5,000
OneOrlando Fund
a OneOrlando Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alliance For A
$25,000
America's Healthiest Schools
Healthier Generation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diabetes Scholars
$10,000
Diabetes Scholars Foundation
Foundation
College Scholarships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Map International
$10,000
US Disaster Relief
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Head and Neck Cancer
$1,000
Research on Xerostomia in HNC
Alliance
patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States Soccer
$10,000
Soccer for Success--Camden
Federation Foundation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Quality USA dba
$10,000
Camp Quality NJ
Camp Quality NJ
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operation Warrior
$5,000
Warrior Wishes 2016 Mission
Wishes Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Transitions
$25,000
NTOCC Program Support
of Care Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sheltered Yoga
$5,000
Sheltered Yoga Curriculum and
Programming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dare to Dream Ranch
$1,000
The Dare to Dream Ranch
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Provention Health
$106,790
LDL Management Forum
Foundation Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$50,000
Hurricane Matthew Response
International Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$5,000
Louisiana Flood Reponse
International Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$10,000
U.S. Disaster Relief
International Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
$1,265
General Operating Support
Blood and Marrow
Transplantation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pharmaceutical
$270,000
PhRMA Foundation Grants &
Research and
Fellowships
Manufacturers of
America Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgetown University
$100,000
Health Promotion and Chronic
Illness: An Educational
Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Advocate
$550,000
Metastatic Prostate &
Foundation
Metastatic CRC Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of North
$20,000
Pharmacoepidemiology Program
Carolina at Chapel
Hill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Way of Greater
$23,226
2016 Merial United Way Campaign
Atlanta
Sanofi Foundation Match
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Way of Greater
$24,000
Merial 2016 UW Campaign Match
Atlanta
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED WAY OF
$5,000
Merial 2016 UW Campaign Match
NORTHEAST GEORGIA
INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED WAY OF
$5,000
Merial Athens 2015 UW Campaign
NORTHEAST GEORGIA INC
Match
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED WAY OF HALL
$4,000
2016 Merial United Way Campaign
COUNTY INC.
Sanofi Foundation Match
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED WAY OF HALL
$3,615
2015 Merial United Way Campaign
COUNTY INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Arizona
$5,000
Applied Biosciences Graduate
Foundation for the
Interdisciplinary Programs
benefit of GIDP
Merit Scholarship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct Relief
$25,000
Hurricane Matthew Response in
Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct Relief
$5,000
Louisiana Flood Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cancer Support
$8,000
Bringing Multiple Myeloma
Community
Journey Partners to the Cancer
Support Community
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Partners in Research
$25,000
Sanofi Biogenius Canada
Canada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sanofi US Matching
$116,524
Sanofi US Matching Gifts--Q4
Gifts--2015
(December) 2015 Match
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tufts Medical Center
$35,000
CEVR Database Subscription
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple Myeloma
$19,640
Mambo for Myeloma
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health Fund
$25,000
Flint Emergency Response & Long
Term Need
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health Fund
$665,000
Medical Home Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Volunteers of America
$5,000
Agape House
Delaware Valley
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cancer Support
$15,000
School-Based Support Groups
Community Central New
Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of the
$20,000
Research Training in
University of
Pharmacoepidemiology
Pennsylvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation Fighting
$100,000
Supporting Research to Find
Blindness
Preventions, Treatments and
Cures for Retinal Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$15,000
Galileo Scholarships: Providing
Community College
Access to STEM Education
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$10,000
Preparing for the Next
Community College
Generation Science Standards
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arbor Day Foundation
$5,305
Trees in Celebration-Green
Printing Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rutgers University
$125,000
Health Outcomes, Policy, and
Foundation
Economics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arrow Lake Foundation
$146,722
General Mission Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bill, Hillary, and
$50,000
National Health Transformation
Chelsea Clinton
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regents of the
$25,000
V-BID
University of
Michigan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Medical College of
$1,265
CIBMTR General Operating
Wisconsin, Inc.
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALL IN TOGETHER
$37,500
All in Together Campaign:
CAMPAIGN INC.
Advancing and Empowering Women
Leaders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Childrens Inn at NIH
$500,000
Sanofi US Legacy Endowment Fund
Inc.
at The Children's Inn at NIH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kids Corporation II
$10,000
Kids Corp General Operating
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$25,000
Nationwide Hope Lodge
Society Cancer Action
Partnership
Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boy Scouts of America,
$1,000
STEM Scouts, BSA
Catalina Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kino Learning Center
$2,000
STEM Funding
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SARSEF-SOUTHERN
$5,000
Finding the Next Generation of
ARIZONA RESEARCH
STEM Researchers
SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING
FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$19,640
International Myeloma
Foundation
Foundation Mission Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$2,000
MMJP Donation to Support the
Foundation
International Myeloma
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$6,715,031
Total 2016 Sanofi
$352,310,932
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Payments made by Sanofi US (2017)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legal Name
Payment Amount
Project Title
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AAALAC International
$2,500.00
IQ Consortium/AAALAC
International Global 3Rs
Awards Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academy of Managed
$30,000.00
2017 AMCP Partnership Forums
Care Pharmacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academy of Nutrition
$18,000.00
DCE On the Cutting Edge
and Dietetics on
newsletter
behalf of Diabetes
Care and Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALL IN TOGETHER
$25,000.00
National Women's Leadership
CAMPAIGN INC.
Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alliance for Patient
$150,000.00
Keep My Rx Campaign
Access
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alliance for the
$50,000.00
Webinars on Nonmedical
Adoption of
Switching of Diabetes
Innovations in
Patients
Medicine (Aimed
Alliance)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alliance for the
$42,000.00
Campaign to End Nonmedical
Adoption of
Switching of Diabetes
Innovations in
Patients
Medicine (Aimed
Alliance)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
$250,000.00
Practice Management Center
Dermatology Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
$25,000.00
AACE 26th Annual Scientific &
of Clinical
Clinical Congress General
Endocrinologists
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
$150,035.00
AACE Multi-Site Proposal to
of Clinical
Extend the
Endocrinologists
Transculturalization of
Diabetes Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
$75,000.00
AADE Access and Affordability
of Diabetes
Forum
Educators
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
$20,000.00
2017 Public Policy Forum
of Diabetes
Educators
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$2,500.00
RUN FOR DAD
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$10,000.00
ACS CAN State Government
Society Cancer
Relations Director Training
Action Network
and Advocacy Activities
Nationwide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$25,000.00
2017 ACS CAN Fundraising
Society Cancer
Events and ACS CAN advocacy
Action Network
activities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$2,500.00
Relay For Life of Bridgewater
Society Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Chemical
$3,000.00
Division of Medicinal
Society Division of
Chemistry Program 253rd ACS
Medicinal Chemistry
national meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Chemical
$2,500.00
ACS MEDI-EFMC Frontiers in
Society Division of
Medicinal Chemistry 2017
Medicinal Chemistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Chemical
$3,000.00
Division of Medicinal
Society Division of
Chemistry Program 254th ACS
Medicinal Chemistry
National Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
$100,000.00
Heart House Roundtable:
Cardiology
Effective Prior Authorization
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
$100,000.00
ACC's 2017 LDL: Address the
Cardiology
Risk Think Tank
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
$20,000.00
Donald C. Jones Leadership and
Endocrinology
Endocrine Excellence Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
$2,000.00
Expand the body of knowledge
Laboratory Animal
in the fields of laboratory
Medicine
animal science and medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
$1,500.00
2017 ACT Corporate Membership
Toxicology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500.00
Tour de Cure Hawaii--Hele On
Association
Hawaii
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500.00
American Diabetes Month--
Association
Malama Ohana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Diabetes
$2,500.00
2017 RVA Tour de Cure &
Association
Fitness Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
$2,000,000.00
Pathway to Stop Diabetes
ASSOCIATION INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Drug
$20,000.00
American Drug Utilization
Utilization Review
Review Symposium
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Foundation
$25,000.00
2017 Get in Rhythm. Stay in
for Women's Health
Rhythm. Atrial Fibrillation
(dba StopAfib.org)
Patient Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Friends of
$15,000.00
Scholarship Fundraising Event--
Toulouse School of
Toulouse School of Economics
Economics Inc
Gala Event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Heart
$25,000.00
2017 National Health Tech &
Association
Innovation Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Heart
$30,000.00
Boston Heart & Stroke Ball
Association
Sponsor
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Heart
$15,000.00
Heart Innovation Forum
Association Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Medical
$50,000.00
AMSSM Research Grant Awards
Society for Sports
Program
Medicine Foundation,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Medical
$25,000.00
Multi-Site CRN OA Grant with
Society for Sports
Shark Tank competition
Medicine Foundation,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Orthopaedic
$55,000.00
Early Osteoarthritis and
Society for Sports
Prevention of OA Progression
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Pharmacists
$75,000.00
Osteoarthritis Pharmacist-
Association
Patient Companion Guide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Pharmacists
$80,000.00
Osteoarthritis Pharmacist Quiz
Association
Platform
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
$10,000.00
4th Annual ASBMT Fall Clinical
Blood and Marrow
Education Conference
Transplantation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
$2,500.00
ASN Annual Meeting
Neurochemistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
$1,500.00
Myelin Satellite Meeting
Neurochemistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
$70,000.00
2017 Town Hall Presentation
Preventive
Series
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$35,000.00
Kidney Week 2017--Sponsorships
Nephrology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$75,000.00
2018 Corporate Sponsor
Transplant Surgeons
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Statistical
$1,000.00
ASA Princeton-Trenton chapter
Association of
2017 Spring Symposium
Princeton-Trenton
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americans for Medical
$7,500.00
Raising Voices, Saving Lives
Progress Educational
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$12,000.00
Air Lift Benefit Sponsorship
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$70,000.00
Sanofi Solar Power Puerto Rico
Concept
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMGA Foundation Inc
$175,000.00
Together 2 Goal diabetes
campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Amigos Together For
$5,000.00
Domino Night Gala for After
Kids, Inc. d/b/a
School Program, Nurturing
Amigos For Kids
Parent Program and Blue
Ribbon Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arizona Diabetes
$3,000.00
Diabetes: A Prescription for
Foundation
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arkansas Pharmacy
$1,000.00
Immunization Summit
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arthritis Foundation
$1,200.00
2017 Delaware Bone Bash
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asian American Legal
$10,000.00
2017 Justice in Action Awards
Defense and
Gala
Education Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of
$7,500.00
Sponsorship of Health
American Medical
Workforce Research Conference
Colleges
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of Black
$25,000.00
Improving Healthcare Access
Cardiologists
for Minority and High Risk
Population Gala Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of Black
$100,000.00
ABC Advocacy Training Program
Cardiologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of
$5,000.00
AUTM 2017 Annual Meeting
University
Sponsorship
Technology Managers
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asthma & Allergy
$1,000.00
Asthma Coalition Meeting
Foundation of
America, St. Louis
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Austin Black
$2,500.00
Austin Black Physicians
Physicians
Association Scholarship
Association
Fundraiser
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Autoimmune Advocacy
$2,500.00
Living with Autoimmunity
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Be The Match
$37,500.00
Be The Match Walk+Run National
Foundation
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biocom
$10,000.00
Global Life Science Partnering
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIONJ INC.
$10,000.00
2017 Annual Dinner Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIONJ INC.
$2,500.00
2017 bioNJ BioPartnering
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$195,000.00
2017 BIO International
Innovation
Convention Sponsorship
Organization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$25,000.00
2017 BIO Europe Spring
Innovation
Sponsorship
Organization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$25,000.00
2017 BIO Europe Sponsorship--
Innovation
November
Organization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$10,000.00
2017 BIO Patient and Health
Innovation
Advocacy Summit
Organization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biotechnology
$57,500.00
2018 BIO International
Innovation
Convention
Organization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blood and Marrow
$25,000.00
Celebrating a Second Chance at
Transplant
Life 2017 Survivorship
Information Network
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham and Women's
$2,000.00
PKD symposium
Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cancer Support
$8,000.00
Bringing Multiple Myeloma
Community
Journey Partners to the
Cancer Support Community
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER SUPPORT
$5,000.00
2017 Wings of Hope
COMMUNITY CENTRAL
NEW JERSEY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER SUPPORT
$2,500.00
Inspiring Hope Advocate
COMMUNITY CENTRAL
Sponsorship
NEW JERSEY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASSS
$2,500.00
6th International Symposium on
Higher Order Structure of
Protein Therapeutics (HOS
2017)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASSS
$2,500.00
WCBP 2017: 21st Symposium on
the Interface of Regulatory
and Analytical Sciences for
Biotechnology Health Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASSS
$2,500.00
Advances in the Biotechnology
& Pharmaceutical Industries:
19th Symposium on the
Practical Applications for
the Analysis of Proteins,
Nucleotides and Small
Molecules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASSS
$2,500.00
14th Symposium on the
Practical Application of Mass
Spectrometry in the
Biotechnology Industry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASSS
$2,500.00
Analytical Technologies in the
Biopharmaceutical Industry
(AT Europe 2017)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASSS
$2,500.00
Bioassays 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Catalyst Inc.
$13,500.00
Catalyst International Women's
Day Gala Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chicago Hispanic
$500.00
Vive tu Vida!Get up! Get
Health Coalition
moving! Health and Wellness
Fair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health
$30,000.00
Children's Health Fund 2017
Fund
Annual Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health
$665,000.00
Medical Home Initiative
Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health
$665,000.00
Medical Home Initiative
Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Hospital
$10,000.00
2017 PCMM Scientific Retreat
Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Hospital
$500.00
Boston Postdoctoral
Corporation
Association Symposium on
Careers and Collaboration in
Science
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Christ the King
$5,000.00
Annual President's Gala
Preparatory School
of Newark NJ Corp
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISCRP
$25,000.00
AWARE for All: Clinical
Research Education Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISCRP
$160,000.00
AWARE for All Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coalition for
$5,000.00
Health RX: Building
Affordable Health
Affordability & Access event
Coverage
sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coastal Volunteers in
$1,000.00
Care & Management of Diabetic
Medicine
Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cold Spring Harbor
$15,000.00
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Laboratory
Corporate Sponsor Program
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
College Diabetes
$55,000.00
CDN Political Advocacy for
Network Inc.
Young Adults Guide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
College Diabetes
$20,000.00
2017 Corporate Membership
Network Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colorado Business
$7,000.00
Corporate Membership
Group on Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Health
$2,500.00
``Patient-Centered and
Coalition, Inc.
Population Health for Us''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Health Task
$500.00
2017 World Diabetes Day 5th
Force, Inc.
Annual BridgeWalk for
Diabetes Awareness and Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Hope, Inc.
$4,800.00
Veterans Pre-Holiday Dinner
and Gift Cards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Hope, Inc.
$10,000.00
2017 Corporate Partner Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Oncology
$25,000.00
2017 Payer Exchange Summit VII
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conference of Western
$5,000.00
CWAG 2017 Chair Initiative
Attorneys General
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress of
$2,500.00
Adherence Outreach and
California Seniors
Education with Seniors =
Education and
Script your Future
Research Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Council for the
$60,000.00
10th World Conference of
Advancement of
Science Journalists
Science Writing,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CrowdCare Foundation,
$20,000.00
Muscles for Myeloma
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CSweetener
$25,000.00
CSweetener Mentoring Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deep South Cancer
$5,000.00
Cycliad 2017
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deirdre O'Brien Child
$5,000.00
21st Annual Gala Solicitation
Advocacy Center Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diabetes Foundation
$1,000.00
Tastings & Tapas Fundraiser
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diabetes Foundation
$2,500.00
Live-A-Betes: Living Well with
of Mississippi
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diversity Alliance
$5,500.00
DA4S East Coast 2017
for Science, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diversity Alliance
$3,500.00
DA4S West Coast 2017
for Science, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Donate Life America
$26,025.00
Mission Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Donate Life Northwest
$10,000.00
Part II. Removing Barriers
through Knowledge: An
Educational Series for
Providers of Dialysis and
ESRD Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dress For Success
$15,000.00
Transforming Lives Celebration
Northern New Jersey--
10 Counties, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Employers Health
$7,500.00
2017 Employers Health
Coalition, Inc.
Innovations in Employee
Benefits Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Endocrine Society
$150,000.00
Hypoglycemia Quality
Improvement Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Families of SMA DBA
$5,000.00
2017 Annual SMA Conference
Cure SMA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Circuit Bar
$2,500.00
Major Regional Program--Boston
Association
Charitable and
Educational Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federation of
$2,000.00
FASEB SRC on the Biology of
American Societies
Cilia and Flagella
for Experimental
Biology (FASEB)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federation of
$25,000.00
FOCIS 2017 Annual Meeting
Clinical Immunology
Societies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Health Care
$5,000.00
FLHCC 24th Annual National
Coalition
Conference: Getting to Better
Care and Improved Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida International
$170,000.00
Expert Workshop State of the
University
Art Pertussis Prevention and
Foundation Inc.
Control in Latin America and
the Caribbean
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida International
$60,000.00
LATIN AMERICAN AND CARIBBEAN
University
DIABETES NETWORK: A FRAMEWORK
Foundation Inc
FOR ACTION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida International
$60,000.00
Assesment of acellular
University
vaccination programs in
Foundation Inc.
Mexico, Costa Rica and Panama
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida International
$25,000.00
Develop Guidelines for
University
Antimicrobial Stewardship For
Foundation Inc.
Latin America and Caribbean
region
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida International
$62,000.00
REVIEW OF NATIONAL
University
IMMUNIZATION CALENDARS OF THE
Foundation Inc.
EXPANDED PROGRAM OF
IMMUNIZATION (EPI) IN
COUNTRIES OF LATIN AMERICA
AND THE CARIBBEAN.
PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON
FINANCIAL AND FUNDING
MECHANISMS OF THE NATIONAL
IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMS.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food Allergy Research
$50,000.00
FARE Patient Registry
& Education, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation Fighting
$100,000.00
Research to Overcome Retinal
Blindness
Degenerative Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation for
$7,500.00
ANIMAL RESEARCH HELPS ANIMALS
Biomedical Research
CAMPAIGN
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation of the
$20,000.00
Foundation of the National
National Lipid
Lipid Association Young
Association
Investigator Abstract Award
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
French-American
$2,500.00
FACC Corporate Membership
Chamber of Commerce
in the United
States, Inc.--New
York Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Friends of Cancer
$25,000.00
Exploring New Biomarkers for
Research
Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Friends of Cancer
$50,000.00
2017 Mission Support
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
George Washington
$130,000.00
The George Washington
University
University Forum on Arbovirus
Infections
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLBTQ Legal Advocates
$3,000.00
18th Annual Spirit of Justice
& Defenders
Award Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Good Grief Inc.
$7,500.00
2017 Golf ``Fore'' the Kids
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Good Grief Inc.
$5,000.00
Great Pumpkin Ball Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$10,000.00
GRC: Pancreatic Diseases
Conference
``Exocrine and Endocrine
Pancreas: Molecules to
Human''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$1,000.00
High Throughput Chemistry and
Conference
Chemical Biology GRC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$2,500.00
The Enduring Potential of
Conference
Heterocycles as Synthetic
Targets, Cellular Probes, and
Drug Candidates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$2,000.00
2017 Gordon Research
Conference
Conference on Natural
Products & Bioactive
Compounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$3,000.00
2017 Gordon Research
Conference
Conference on Medicinal
Chemistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$3,000.00
Gordon Research Conference and
Conference
Seminar on ``Lysosomal
Diseases''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$5,000.00
Gordon Research Conference
Conference
(GRC) entitled ``Neuroimmune
communication in health and
disease''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
$5,000.00
2018 Biology of Spirochetes
Conference
Gordon Research Conference
and Gordon Research Seminar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater Detroit Area
$7,000.00
2017 GDAHC Membership Dues
Health Council, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater New England
$4,000.00
Economic Development
Minority Supplier
Sponsorship opportunities
Development Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Action Council
$4,500.00
Health Action Council Annual
Ohio
Event Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HealthCare 21
$25,000.00
Data Impact: Evaluating the
Business Coalition
Impact of Formulary Exclusion
on Pharmacy Data
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Healthcare
$3,000.00
2017 Woman of the Year event
Businesswomen's
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Healthcare
$10,000.00
2017 HBA Woman of the Year
Businesswomen's
event sponsorship
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$15,000.00
25th Anniversary Gala
International Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$8,500.00
Rutgers Fellows Volunteer
International Inc.
Service Trip
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hereditary Disease
$2,000.00
2017 Celebration of Discovery
Foundation
Symposium and Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Horton's Kids, Inc.
$15,000.00
Home Runs for Horton's Kids:
Comprehensive Programming for
At-Risk Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hunterdon Medical
$5,000.00
2017 Crystal Ball Sponsorship
Center Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hyacinth Foundation A
$1,000.00
Hyacinth Gala & Silent Auction
New Jersey Nonprofit
Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hyacinth Foundation A
$2,500.00
Hyacinth Gala & Silent Auction
New Jersey Nonprofit
Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Icahn School of
$5,000.00
ISMMS-Sanofi Quantitative
Medicine at Mount
Systems Pharmacology
Sinai
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ILSI Health and
$99,074.00
2017 HESI Membership and
Environmental Health
Committee Assessments
Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Institute for Cancer
$10,000.00
2017 In Vino Vita Sponsorship
Research dba The
Request
Research Institute
of Fox Chase Cancer
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Institute for Safe
$1,000.00
20th Annual ISMP Cheers Awards
Medication Practices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International
$5,000.00
NIH Oxford-Cambridge 2017
Biomedical Research
Global Doctoral Partnerships
Alliance
Annual Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International
$5,000.00
NIH Oxford-Cambridge 2016
Biomedical Research
Global Doctoral Partnerships
Alliance
Annual Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$50,000.00
8th International Myeloma
Foundation
Working Group (IMWG) Summit,
Madrid, Spain
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$50,000.00
2017 IMF Patient Programs
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$50,000.00
International Myeloma
Foundation
Foundation 2017 Asian Myeloma
Network (AMN) Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Iowa Pharmacy
$10,000.00
2017 Leadership Pharmacy
Association
leadership training program
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
2017 One Walk Allentown
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
2017 One Walk Bucks County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
2017 One Walk Reading
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
JDRF Passport to a Cure Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
Rockin' Docs for Diabetes Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
2017 One Walk Stroudsburg
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
2017 One Walk Moosic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
2017 One Walk Philadelphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$1,500.00
2017 JDRF One Walk Maine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$5,000.00
2017 Triangle Eastern NC
OneWalk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$10,000.00
2017 Triangle Eastern NC Hope
Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$5,000.00
JDRF One Promise Gala
Philadelphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$5,000.00
JDRF One Walk Westmoreland
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
JDRF One Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$5,000.00
25th Anniversary JDRF Promise
Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$2,500.00
JDRF TypeOneNation Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF
$5,000.00
JDRF Imagine Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF--Western New
$3,000.00
Journey to A Cure Gala
York Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF--Western New
$2,500.00
Buffalo JDRF One Walk 2017
York Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF--Western New
$5,000.00
Journey to a Cure Gala
York Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF Greater Dallas
$2,500.00
JDRF One Walk, Dallas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF International
$2,500.00
JDRF One Walk 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF International
$5,000.00
JDRF 35th Annual Boston Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF INTERNATIONAL
$50,000.00
2017 JDRF Government Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF International
$5,000.00
2017 JDRF One Walk Las Vegas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF NENY
$2,500.00
JDRF Saratoga One Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF NENY
$2,500.00
JDRF Albany One Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF New York City
$10,000.00
45th annual Promise Ball
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jersey Battered
$14,000.00
Grand Tastings XXIII
Women's Service,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Joslin Diabetes
$10,000.00
2017 High Hopes Gala
Center, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Joslin Diabetes
$10,000.00
A Taste of Ginger
Center, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Junior Achievement of
$5,000.00
Empowering NJ Students for
New Jersey, Inc.
Success
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$5,000.00
2018 Hope for a Cure Gala
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500.00
2017 JDRF One Walk Southern
Research Foundation
Tier
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500.00
2017 Hope for a Cure Gala
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500.00
JDRF One Walk Rochester
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500.00
2017 Rock the Cure
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juvenile Diabetes
$2,500.00
One Walk, Yonkers
Research Foundation
International
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keystone Symposia on
$50,000.00
Keystone Symposia Directors'
Molecular and
Fund
Cellular Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keystone Symposia on
$25,000.00
Keystone Symposia Directors'
Molecular and
Fund
Cellular Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lake Norman Community
$2,500.00
Sunset and Sandals
Health Clinic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lymphoma Research
$2,000.00
10th Annual Love to Find a
Foundation
Cure Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Machestic Dragons
$5,000.00
2017 Machestic Dragons ``
`Paddle for Pink' Community
Dragon Boat Festival''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Machestic Dragons
$500.00
2017 Machestic Dragons ``
`Paddle for Pink' Community
Dragon Boat Festival''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Map International
$10,000.00
Bill Foege Event Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March of Dimes
$2,500.00
Signature Chefs--Seattle
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts General
$1,500.00
18th Annual Paul S. Russell
Hospital--Transplant
Lecture in Transplantation
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
$5,000.00
Immune Engineering Symposium
Institute of
2017
Technology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
$5,000.00
Immune Engineering Symposium
Institute of
2017
Technology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
$5,000.00
Koch Institute Summer
Institute of
Symposium 2017
Technology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts Society
$1,000.00
MSMR Annual Meeting of Members
for Medical
Research, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MassChallenge, Inc.
$50,000.00
[emailprotected] 2018
Sanofi Gold Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medical Foundation of
$10,000.00
Osteoarthritis Action Alliance
North Carolina Inc
(OAAA) Community mini-grant
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Men's Health Network
$25,000.00
Men's Health Month Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mercy Health
$2,500.00
Stick it to Diabetes
Foundation Joplin
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mercy Health
$2,500.00
Mercy Gala of Hope
Foundation--Springfi
eld
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Metabolic Endocrine
$25,000.00
15th Annual World Congress on
Education Foundation
Insulin Resistance Diabetes
and Cardiovascular Disease
WCIRDC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Metabolic Endocrine
$100,000.00
1st Annual Congress--Heart in
Education Foundation
Diabetes (HiD)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Metabolic Endocrine
$25,000.00
15th Annual World Congress on
Education Foundation
Insulin Resistance Diabetes
and Cardiovascular Disease--
WCIRDC = Request 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mid-America Coalition
$5,000.00
5th Annual Workforce &
on Health Care
Community Well-Being Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Middle Atlantic
$1,000.00
Bradford award/student career
Reproduction and
event
Teratology
Association (MARTA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moses E. Cheeks Slam
$2,500.00
Chicago Camp Slam Dunk for
Dunk for Diabetes
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple Myeloma
$20,000.00
Stem Cell Care Package Program
Research Foundation
and Re Birthday Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple Myeloma
$20,000.00
Multiple Myeloma Patient
Research Foundation
Summits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Myotonic Dystrophy
$3,000.00
2017 MDF Conference
Foundation
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NASPA
$5,000.00
OA Mobility Discussion and
Event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
$50,000.00
Forum on Neuroscience and
SCIENCES
Nervous System Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
$85,000.00
Forum on Drug Discovery,
SCIENCES
Development and Translation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Alliance of
$17,000.00
Supporting Employers to
Healthcare Purchaser
Effectively Manage Rheumatoid
Coalitions
Arthritis Action Brief
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Alliance of
$2,000.00
13th Annual Meeting of NASPCC
State Prostate
Cancer Coalitions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Bone Marrow
$5,000.00
PEER SUPPORT FOR BONE MARROW,
Transplant Link
STEM CELL TRANSPLANT
COMMUNITY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Bone Marrow
$2,500.00
Resource Directory
Transplant Link
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Committee
$10,000.00
NCQA's Quality Talks 2017
for Quality
Assurance
(``NCQA''')
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National
$10,000.00
NCCN 12th Annual Congress:
Comprehensive Cancer
Hematologic Malignancies
Network
Patient Advocacy Pavilion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Eczema
$50,000.00
National Eczema Association's
Association
Grassroots Advocacy Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Forum for
$25,000.00
National Forum Cholesterol
Heart Disease and
Initiative (Phase 3)
Stroke Prevention
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Forum for
$25,000.00
National Forum Value & Access
Heart Disease and
Initiative
Stroke Prevention
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Health
$130,000.00
Patient Perspective on the
Council
Value of Treatments
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Hispanic
$5,000.00
Diabetes and Renal Disease
Medical Association
among Latino Patients
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Kidney
$1,000.00
2017 Champion of Hope Tribute
Foundation of
Dinner
Michigan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Kidney
$50,000.00
Connecting Diabetes,
Foundation, Inc.
Cardiovascular Disease, and
Kidney Disease `` Patient
Awareness Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Lipid
$30,000.00
Expansion of Discovering the
Association
Barriers to Access of PCSK9
Inhibitors: an NLA Assessment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Minority
$25,000.00
Diabetes Working Group: Vision
Quality Forum
20/20
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National TB
$5,000.00
Sponsorship for the 2017
Controllers
National TB Conference:
Association
Poster Discussion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCSL Foundation for
$7,500.00
NCSL LegisBrief Sponsorship
State Legislatures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New England
$5,000.00
New England Immunology
Immunology
Conference
Conference, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Jersey Public
$500.00
New Jersey Public Health
Health Association
Association 2017 Annual
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New Jersey Society of
$5,000.00
Sponsorship/Membership
Oncology Managers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York & New Jersey
$10,000.00
Annual Event Sponsorship
Minority Supplier
Development Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NewYorkBIO
$8,000.00
NewYorkBIO 2017 Annual
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NJ AIDS Services
$2,500.00
New Jersey AIDS Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
North Eastern Section
$2,000.00
6th Advances in Chemical
Of American Chemical
Sciences
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NorthCrest Medical
$2,500.00
NorthCrest Gala
Center Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Northeast Business
$20,000.00
eValue8--Health Plan
Group on Health
Performance Assessment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYU School of
$5,000.00
The Skirball Institute 18th
Medicine, an
Symposium Honoring Dan
administrative unit
Littman, MD
of New York
University
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ohio Chamber of
$1,250.00
2017 Salt Fork Policy
Commerce
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operation Jersey
$500.00
Gala of Giving II
Cares
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operation Warrior
$10,000.00
2017 Army Navy Game
Wishes Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oregon State
$7,500.00
OSU College of Pharmacy,
University
Pharmacy Partners Program
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Organization for
$15,000.00
2017 OFII Annual Dinner
International
Investment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Out & Equal
$25,000.00
2017 Workplace Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Advocate
$5,000.00
16th Annual A Promise of Hope
Foundation
Affair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Advocate
$250,000.00
Patient Advocate Foundation Co-
Foundation
Pay Relief Program Oncology
Donation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PATIENT EMPOWERMENT
$25,000.00
Virtual Town Meeting for
NETWORK
Advanced Prostate Cancer
Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Services Inc.
$5,000.00
PSI Advocacy Day and
Congressional Reception
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA
$80,000.00
2017 sPCMA Business Forum
Sponsorship, Presidential
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA
$95,000.00
2017 Annual Meeting
Presidential Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pharmaceutical
$270,000.00
PhRMA Foundation Grants &
Research and
Fellowships
Manufacturers of
America Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PQA, Inc.
$7,500.00
PQA 2017 Leadership Summit:
Connecting the Dots to
Enhance Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PQA, Inc
$100,000.00
An Accelerated Strategy for
Advancing an Insulin
Adherence/Persistence Quality
Measure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Preventive
$50,000.00
Access to Innovative Medicine
Cardiovascular
Campaign
Nurses Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pro Bono Partnership
$15,000.00
Pro Bono Partnership 2017 Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project Hope The
$10,000.00
2017 Gala--Project HOPE: A
People To People
Voice for Global Health
Health Foundation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prostate Cancer
$10,000.00
Chemotherapy Patient Education
Education Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prostate Cancer
$25,000.00
Interactive Patient Education
Education Council
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prostate Cancer
$300,000.00
24th Annual Scientific Retreat
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Public Health
$5,000.00
Building Health Equity in
Advocates
Diabetes Prevention and
Treatment Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$3,000.00
College Campus Experience
Community College
Sessions for STEM High School
Foundation
Students
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$10,000.00
Preparing for the Next
Community College
Generation Science Standards--
Foundation
District Partnership Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$125,000.00
Sanofi Nursing Simulation Lab:
Community College
Preparing Nursing Students to
Foundation
Meet the Community's Health
Care Needs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$25,000.00
Galileo Scholarships:
Community College
Providing Access to STEM
Foundation
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$46,100.00
Sanofi US Corporate Mentor
Community College
Program at RVCC
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$3,250.00
An Evening of Elegance for
Community College
Education
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$10,000.00
Preparing for the Next
Community College
Generation Science Standards
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raritan Valley
$15,000.00
Galileo Scholarships:
Community College
Providing Access to STEM
Foundation
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regents University of
$10,000.00
March Kidney Fair, March 26,
California Los
2017
Angeles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research!America
$10,000.00
National Health Research Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research!America
$25,000.00
Advocacy Awards Dinner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RESOURCES USA INC
$10,000.00
Bastille Day 2017--Washington
DC--Celebrates the Franco-
American relationship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RESOURCES USA INC.
$5,000.00
Bastille Day 2017--Boston
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rutgers University
$20,000.00
The Sanofi US Scholarship for
Foundation
Veterans in the Rutgers
Business School Executive
Education Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rutgers University
$5,000.00
Andrew Giovanni Woman in
Foundation
Neuroscience Endowed Travel
Scholarship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SDHB Pheo-Para
$9,900.00
SDHB Pheo-Para Coalition Gala
Coalition, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Seeding Labs
$2,000.00
Positively Instrumental: 2017
Instrumental Access Launch &
Donor Recognition Event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society for
$25,000.00
Trainee Professional
Neuroscience
Development Awards at
Neuroscience 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society of Toxicology
$10,000.00
Society of Toxicology (SOT)
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOME INC.
$5,000.00
2017 SOME Gala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Alliance for
$1,000.00
NJ Smart Workplace Recognition
the Future d.b.a
Breakfast
RideWise
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$2,500.00
Healthier Somerset
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Springboard 2000
$25,000.00
Health Innovation Hub 2017
Enterprises, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State University of
$2,500.00
Wellstone Family Conference
Iowa Foundation
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
T1 Today, Inc., dba
$29,625.00
Round Table on Impact of Non-
Children with
Medical Switching of Insulin
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
T1 Today, Inc., dba
$48,500.00
Forced Non-Medical Switching
Children with
Awareness--November 2017
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
T1 Today, Inc., dba
$20,000.00
Friends for Life Orlando
Children with
Supporting Sponsorship
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
T1 Today, Inc., dba
$49,500.00
Round Table on Impact of Non-
Children with
Medical Switching of Insulin--
Diabetes
San Diego
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taking Control of
$25,000.00
Educating Patients and Their
Your Diabetes
Caregivers About The Role Of
Treatments In Diabetes
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taking Control of
$60,000.00
Taking Control Of Your
Your Diabetes
Diabetes 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taking Control of
$20,000.00
ONE: The Ultimate Conference &
Your Diabetes
Retreat for Adult Type 1's
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TBA Foundation
$15,000.00
Pat's Myeloma Survival School
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teratology Society
$1,500.00
Teratology Society 57th Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ALBERT B SABIN
$300,000.00
Arbovirus Surveillance
VACCINE INSTITUTE
Strengthening Phase II
INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Fallen
$5,700.00
2018 Portrait Donation
Soldiers Project Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Heart
$25,000.00
American Heart Association
Association
Multicultural Initiatives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Heart
$50,000.00
Go Red for Women; Health
Association
Education Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Heart
$25,000.00
Heart and Stroke Ball Campaign
Association
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Kidney
$50,000.00
The Hope Affair 2017--Imagine
Fund, Inc.
the Possibilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Kidney
$5,000.00
2017 A Pairing For Prevention
Fund, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Kidney
$20,000.00
The Hope Affair Sponsorship
Fund, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BIOBREAK
$5,000.00
BioBreak Industry Sponsorship
ORGANIZATION INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Broad Institute,
$2,000.00
Glom-NExT3 Symposium
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Center For Great
$5,000.00
2017 Gift of Hope Gala
Expectations Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Aid
$25,000.00
Children's Aid Keeping the
Society
Promise Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's
$2,000.00
2017 Conference on Clinical
Hospital of
Trial Readiness in the
Philadelphia
Leukodystrophies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's
$2,000.00
2017 Conference on Clinical
Hospital of
Trial Readiness in the
Philadelphia
Leukodystrophies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Inn at
$10,000.00
An Evening for Hope
NIH, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Council of State
$5,000.00
Bowhay Institute for
Government, Ltd.
Legislative Leadership
Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Diabetes
$2,500.00
Giving Diabetes the Blues
Coalition of
Mississippi/
Mississippi Rural
Health Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The diaTribe
$50,000.00
Consensus Conference Glycemic
Foundation
Outcomes Beyond A1C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The diaTribe
$20,000.00
11th Annual Diabetes Forum
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The diaTribe
$90,000.00
Follow Up for d17: Executive
Foundation
Innovation Lab in Diabetes
and Prediabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Economic Alliance
$2,500.00
EAM Health Purchaser Forum
for Michigan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FH Foundation
$250,000.00
The CASCADE FHTM Registry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FH Foundation
$100,000.00
Advocates for Awareness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FH Foundation
$75,000.00
2017 FH Global Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Galien Foundation
$15,000.00
PRIX GALIEN USA GALIEN FORUM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Health
$5,000.00
Inspire Sponsorship
Collaborative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE LEUKEMIA &
$50,000.00
Blood and Marrow Stem Cell
LYMPHOMA SOCIETY
Transplantation Booklet and
Guide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Medical College
$10,000.00
2017 BMT Tandem Meetings--
of Wisconsin, Inc.
Administrative Directors
Reception
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Mended Hearts,
$25,000.00
Patient Advocacy Network (PAN)
Inc.
Training
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Mended Hearts,
$10,000.00
National Education & Training
Inc.
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Mesothelioma
$2,000.00
Sponsorship--Clinical Trial
Applied Research
Awareness
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The New York Academy
$5,000.00
Challenge 2030: Tomorrow's
of Science
innovators tackle today's
grand challenges
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Ohio State
$25,000.00
Pharmacy Patient Counseling
University
Education
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Ohio State
$1,000.00
Pharmathon 5k
University
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Partnership for
$5,000.00
PQMD London Educational Forum
Quality Medical
Donations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Pennsylvania
$150,000.00
SARP SUPPLEMENTAL FUNDING
State University
AGREEMENT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE TRANSPLANTATION
$7,500.00
The 14th Congress of the
SOCIETY
International
Xenotransplantation
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE TRANSPLANTATION
$15,000.00
9th Congress of the
SOCIETY
International Pediatric
Transplant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Virginia Public
$700.00
Lighten Up, It's Just Politics
Access Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The World Orphan Fund
$500.00
2017 Annual Wisconsin Gala
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thomas Jefferson
$65,000.00
Population Health Leadership
University
Series (formerly Quality and
Safety Leadership Series)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thomas Jefferson
$100,000.00
Quality and Safety Leadership
University
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tree Canada
$14,089.00
Operation ReLeaf Fort McMurray
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of Boston
$65,000.00
National Association of
University
Community Health Workers
Communications and
Organizational Development
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of Boston
$1,000.00
Boston University's 16th
University
Annual CMD Symposium on
Molecular Discovery: From
Chemical Synthesis to
Biological Applications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of Boston
$20,000.00
iHEA's 12th World Congress in
University
Health Economics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of
$5,000.00
Translational Retinal Research
University of
& Therapies 2017 Symposium
Pennsylvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tufts Center for the
$30,000.00
Tufts CSDD 2017 Sponsorship
Study of Drug
Development c/o
Trustees of Tufts
College
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TULANE CANCER CENTER
$2,500.00
NOLA Bluedoo 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Florida
$5,000.00
11th Annual Clinical Pharmacy
Foundation
and Pharmacology Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
$5,000.00
UMN John S. Najarian Lecture &
Minnesota Foundation
50 Years of Pancreas
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of New
$1,000.00
2017 Hoops4Hope Legislative
Mexico Foundation =
Basketball Game
Hoops for Hope
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of North
$20,000.00
Pharmacoepidemiology Program
Carolina at Chapel
Hill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
$10,000.00
Unity 2017 Conference
Southern Mississippi
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Texas
$50,000.00
Third Annual International
Foundation-UT Austin
Immuno-Therapy in Myeloma
Scientific Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Utah
$50,000.00
2017 Western Atrial
Fibrillation Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Us TOO International
$15,000.00
Prostate Cancer Support Group
Meeting Webcast
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Us TOO International
$20,000.00
Prostate Cancer News You Can
Use
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Virginia Bio
$3,000.00
Women Building Bio--the XX
Factor
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Virginia Quality
$1,000.00
VQHN Eighteenth Annual Wrap Up
Healthcare Network
Event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vision y Compromiso
$10,000.00
Vision y Compromiso's 15th
Annual Conference for
Promotoras and CHWs,
``Resiliency: Our Strength in
Times of Change''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Waltham West Suburban
$6,000.00
Waltham West Suburban Chamber
Chamber of Commerce,
of Commerce Sponsorship
Inc.
Opportunities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington Legal
$30,000.00
2017 General Operating Support
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington Policy
$3,500.00
2017 Annual Dinner
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Western Governors'
$10,000.00
2017-2018 Bi-annual
Foundation
Conferences
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women In Government
$5,000.00
2017 Healthcare Summit--
Foundation, Inc.
Inspiration Station
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women In Government
$65,000.00
2017 Healthcare Summit--
Foundation, Inc.
Diabetes PSAs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WomenHeart: The
$25,000.00
2017 Wenger Awards
National Coalition
for Women with Heart
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WomenHeart: The
$45,000.00
Access NOW! Key Opinion
National Coalition
Leaders Thought Workshop &
for Women with Heart
Congressional Briefing
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wyoming Congressional
$5,000.00
WY Congressional Award
Award Council
Council's Spring Awards
ceremony
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ZERO--The End of
$8,000.00
Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy
Prostate Cancer
Sequencing in Prostate Cancer
Webinar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$13,245,248.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product Donations
$594,228,133
made by Sanofi US to
the Sanofi
Foundation for North
Americaestimate as
of March 2018)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Donations made by the Sanofi Foundation for North America
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legal Name
Payment Amount
Project Title
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$5,000.00
Hope Lodge of Framingham
Society Inc.
Operating Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Cancer
$25,000.00
Nationwide American Cancer
Society Inc.
Society Hope Lodge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American National Red
$25,000.00
2017-2018 American Red Cross
Cross
Biomedical Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Recreational
$3,200.00
Project Homecoming
Military Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Red Cross
$10,000.00
Disaster Relief & Home Fire
Preparedness Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Red Cross
$177,422.00
Disaster Relief--special
employee match
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
$5,000.00
Daniel R. Salomon Frontiers in
Transplantation
Transplantation Endowment
(FITE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$50,000.00
Hurricane Maria Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$100,000.00
Hurricane Harvey Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americares
$10,000.00
U.S. Disaster Assistance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Nejeda Foundation
$5,000.00
Camp Nejeda Campership Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Nejeda Foundation
$10,000.00
Camp Nejeda: Helping Kids with
Type 1 Diabetes Live Happier,
Healthier Lives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Camp Quality USA dba
$10,000.00
Camp Quality USA dba Camp
Camp Quality NJ
Quality NJ
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER SUPPORT
$15,000.00
Teens Connect School Based
COMMUNITY CENTRAL NEW
Support Groups
JERSEY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health Fund
$30,000.00
Asthma Video
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health Fund
$665,000.00
Medical Home Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Health Fund
$665,000.00
Medical Home Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Christ the King
$59,000.00
Christ the King Corporate Work
Preparatory School of
Study Program
Newark NJ Corp.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Christopher & Dana
$5,000.00
Reeve Patient Care & Cures--NJ
Reeve Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coastal Bend Food Bank
$1,000.00
Diabetes Hands On
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deirdre O'Brien Child
$10,000.00
Advocacy Program for Child
Advocacy Center Inc.
Victims of Abuse and/or
Neglect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct Relief
$100,000.00
Hurricane Harvey Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct Relief
$50,000.00
Responding to Hurricane Maria
in Puerto Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct Relief
$10,000.00
Emergency Prep Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dress For Success
$5,000.00
General Operating Expenses
Northern New Jersey--
10 Counties, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food Bank of Somerset
$12,500.00
Back Pack Program
County Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$25,000.00
Hurricane Relief Maria
International Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$10,000.00
US Crisis Relief
International Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heart To Heart
$25,000.00
Hurricane Harvey Response
International Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hyacinth Foundation A
$10,000.00
General Support-Sanofi in Our
New Jersey Nonprofit
Communities, Celebrating
Corporation
Diversity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hyacinth Foundation A
$10,000.00
General Support
New Jersey Nonprofit
Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
$18,950.00
International Myeloma
Foundation
Foundation Mission Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jersey Battered
$5,000.00
General Operating
Women's Service, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kids Corporation II
$10,000.00
Kids Corp General Operating
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Map International
$10,000.00
MAP's Domestic Medicine Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
March of Dimes
$86,000.00
Supporting NICU Babies and
Foundation
Family's
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Matheny School and
$5,000.00
Matheny Center for Medicine and
Hospital Inc.
Dentistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Matheny School and
$5,000.00
Matheny School STEM Program
Hospital Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Midland Adult Services
$5,000.00
Midland Helping Hands & Midland
Inc.
Meals on Wheels Employment
Training Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple Myeloma
$18,950.00
Mambo for Myeloma
Research Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NJ SEEDS
$10,000.00
Young Scholars Program--Health
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NJ Sharing Network
$5,000.00
Multicultural Outreach
Foundation
Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Partners in Research
$25,000.00
Sanofi Biogenius Canada
Canada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PATIENT EMPOWERMENT
$25,000.00
ASCO, AUA Coverage for Advanced
NETWORK
Prostate Cancer Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rise Against Hunger
$7,500.00
Rise Against Hunger Disaster
Ready Response Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rutgers University
$10,000.00
Vets4Warriors
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Safe + Sound Somerset
$10,000.00
Residential Children's Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sheltered Yoga
$5,000.00
Sheltered Yoga NJ Programming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset County YMCA
$6,000.00
Somerville YMCA/Annual Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$5,000.00
Quality CPR Saves Lives
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$10,000.00
El poder
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$10,000.00
El poder
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$18,560.00
1st Healthcare Conference for
Foundation
the LGBT Community
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Somerset Health Care
$5,000.00
Quality CPR Saves Lives
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Center For Great
$10,000.00
Adult Women & their Children
Expectations Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Center For Great
$10,000.00
Adult Women & their Children
Expectations Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Inn at
$500,000.00
Sanofi US Legacy Endowment Fund
NIH, Inc.
at The Children's Inn at NIH
Sanofi US Legacy Endowment
Fund at The Children's Inn at
NIH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Inn at
$500,000.00
Sanofi US Legacy Endowment Fund
NIH, Inc.
at The Children's Inn at NIH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Children's Inn at
$500,000.00
Sanofi US Legacy Endowment Fund
NIH, Inc.
at The Children's Inn at NIH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE LEUKEMIA &
$18,950.00
Fiscal Year 2017 Myeloma
LYMPHOMA SOCIETY
Patient Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Partnership for
$5,000.00
General Support for PQMD
Quality Medical
Donations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Salvation Army
$10,000.00
Healthy Food Pantry Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of University
$20,000.00
Research Training in
of Pennsylvania
Pharmacoepidemiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tyler Clementi
$5,000.00
New Jersey Programs
Foundation Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Way of Monroe
$59,069.70
SP 2017 UW Campaign Match
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Way of Northern
$75,000.00
Caregivers Coalition
New Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Visiting Nurse
$10,000.00
General Operating
Association of
Somerset Hills
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$3,682,101.70
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Total
$16,927,350
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sponsorships and Charitable Donations
1st Jan 2015-31st Dec 2015
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to
supporting sponsorships for specific activities and initiatives of
healthcare organizations and institutions, independent medical or
professional societies, trade organizations and organized patient groups
to improve patient care and provide information to the medical and/or
patient communities. The goal of our charitable giving approach is to
fund general operational support for patient/disease organizations, or
program support for community-based organizations. Sanofi US and Genzyme
Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical
company.
Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a
group for a single activity; all applicants may be not be identified
above. ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during
2015 identified above. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that
may have been provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities
(e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
Recipient Name(s)
Activity Title
Funding Amount
Acacia In Kenya
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Acacia In Kenya
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Accelerated Cure
MS Discovery: The Podcast of
$102,400.00
Project
the MS Discovery Forum
Accelerated Cure
Data Visualizations in
$89,400.00
Project
Multiple Sclerosis
Acid Maltase Deficiency
AMDA Patient Education
$35,000.00
Association Inc.
Programs
Acid Maltase Deficiency
The 2015 AMDA/IPA
$20,000.00
Association Inc.
International Pompe Patient
and Scientific Conference
Acid Maltase Deficiency
AMDA Patient Education
$12,000.00
Association Inc.
Programs
Acid Maltase Deficiency
Pull for Pompe Event
$3,000.00
Association Inc.
ALD Connect Inc.
ALD Connect Meeting
$4,000.00
Alport Syndrome
2015 International Workshop
$2,500.00
Foundation, Inc.
on Alport Syndrome
American Academy of
2015 Palatucci Advocacy
$50,000.00
Neurology Institute
Leadership Forum
American Academy of
Fellows Scholarship Program
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Residents Scholarship Program
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
2014-2015 Emerging Leaders
$17,500.00
Neurology Institute
Forum
American Academy of
Brain Health Fair
$10,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Association of
2015 Pan-American Scientific
$50,000.00
Clinical
Symposia on Clinical
Endocrinologists
Endocrinology in Latin
America
American Autoimmune and
50 Cents for 50 Million
$5,000.00
Related Diseases
Campaign AND Fight For
Association
Immunity Comedy Show
American Chemical
ACS BIOT 2015 Annual Meeting
$5,000.00
Society Merck And Co
Inc.
American College of
Summer Genetics Scholars
$75,000.00
Medical Genetics
Program
Foundation
American Physiological
Experimental Biology 2015
$3,000.00
Society
American Red Cross of
Women Who Care, A Leadership
$5,000.00
Massachusetts
Breakfast
American Society of
ASGCT 18th Annual Meeting
$5,000.00
Gene Therapy
American Society of
ASN Kidney Week 2015
$30,000.00
Nephrology
Exhibitor Spotlight
Andrew's Buddies
FightSMA Annual Research
$3,000.00
Corporation dba
Conference 2015
FightSMA
ANERA (American Near
ANERA (American Near East
$5,000.00
East Refugee Aid)
Refugee Aid) Annual Dinner
Ann & Robert H. Lurie
MPS Patient and Family
$2,000.00
Children's Hospital of
Conference
Chicago
Arizona Kidney
16th Annual Southwest
$6,000.00
Foundation
Nephrology Conference
Ashland Fire Department
Community Support for Ashland
$40,000.00
Association
Fire Department Association
Assistance Fund Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis Disease
$5,300,000.00
Patient Assistance Fund
Program
Assistance Fund Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis Disease
$500,000.00
Patient Assistance Fund
Program
Association For
Annual Conference; Family
$6,000.00
Glycogen Storage
Assistance; The Ray
Disease
Beauty Bus Foundation
6th Annual Beauty Drive for
$3,000.00
Patients and Caregivers
Berkshire Resource
2015 Annual Gala
$5,000.00
Project, Inc.
Big Brothers Big
Big Brothers Big Sisters
$10,000.00
Sisters of Central
Central Mass/Metrowest
Mass Metrowest Inc.
(BBBSCM) STEM Institute
Biomedical Science
Evening of Hope: To support
$75,000.00
Careers Program
underrepresented minority
students/fellows interested
in science
Biomedical Science
Hope Scholarship 2015-2016
$7,500.00
Careers Program
Boston Health Care For
Life Essentials Community
$25,000.00
The Homeless Program
Support Program
Inc.
Boston Plan For
Boston Teacher Residency: A
$15,000.00
Excellence in the
High-Quality Pipeline for
Public Schools
Boston Public Schools' STEM
Foundation
Teachers
Boston Private Industry
2015 Corporate Contribution's
$15,000.00
Council
Campaign
Boston Private Industry
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Council
Bottom Line
Boston STEM Success Program
$15,000.00
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Staffing & Transportation for
$25,000.00
MetroWest
Increased Membership at
BGCMW's Framingham Clubhouse
Boys and Girls Clubs of
2015 Bids for Kids Auction &
$10,000.00
MetroWest
Gala
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Volunteer Match
$4,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
The 2015 Great Pumpkin Glow
$5,000.00
Middlesex County Inc.
Breakthrough Greater
Full STEAM (Science
$10,000.00
Boston
Technology, Engineering,
Arts, and Math) Ahead
Program
Cambridge Family &
2015 Circle of Friends Gala &
$5,000.00
Children's Service
Auction
Cambridge School
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Camp Korey
Metabolic Disorders Family
$5,000.00
Weekend
Can Do Multiple
2015 TAKE CHARGE Program
$55,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
Can Do Program
$50,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
2015 JUMPSTART Program
$50,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
Can Do 2015 Online
$40,000.00
Sclerosis
Programming
Can Do Multiple
Vertical Express for Can Do
$25,000.00
Sclerosis
MS Events
Canavan Foundation
Jewish Genetic Disease
$4,500.00
Leadership Database
Expansion Project
Case Management Society
CMSA 25th Annual Conference &
$14,000.00
of America
Expo
Case Management Society
CMSA 25th Annual Conference &
$4,800.00
of America
Expo (Booth)
Case Management Society
Case Management Society of
$1,000.00
of New England
New England's 26th Annual
Conference and Exhibitor
Expo
CASSS--An International
CMC Strategy Forums
$2,500.00
Separation Science
Society
Charcot-Marie-Tooth
CMTA's Boston Patient/Family
$5,000.00
Association
Conference
Charcot-Marie-Tooth
CMTA's Boston Patient/Family
$2,000.00
Association
Conference
Children's Hospital
Global Pediatric Innovation
$20,000.00
Boston
Summit + Awards 2015
Children's Hospital
La Gala de Milagros para
$5,000.00
Corporation
Ninos
Church Hillers Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
City Sprouts, Inc.
After School Ecology Clubs
$7,000.00
Colon Cancer Coalition
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Community Boating, Inc.
Universal Access Program
$15,000.00
2015--Patient Assistance
Program
Community Farms
Fresh Food Access Program
$12,000.00
Outreach
Community Rowing, Inc.
Let's Row Boston
$15,000.00
Community Servings,
Pie in the Sky
$10,000.00
Inc.
Consortium of Multiple
29th Annual Meeting of the
$52,000.00
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
Sclerosis Centers Breakfast
Council on Renal
Patient Empowerment Workshop
$1,000.00
Nutrition of Western
PA
Courage to Make a
Courage: Living life without
$1,000.00
Difference Inc.
limit patient videos
Cradles to Crayons Inc.
Ready for School and Backpack-
$20,000.00
a-Thon
Cystic Fibrosis
Uncork the Cure Event
$10,000.00
Foundation
DEAF, Inc.--
Deaf-Accessible Medical Case
$10,000.00
Developmental
Management and Health
Evaluation and
Education
Adjustment Facilities,
Inc.
Deliver The Dream Inc.
Community Champions Awards
$2,500.00
Department of Neurology
Shop to Stop Multiple
$10,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis
Sclerosis
Center of Excellence
Dimock Community Health
Building the Road to
$150,000.00
Center
Recovery--Expanding and
Renovating Acute Treatment
Services
DISARM Education FUND,
Combating Rare Diseases and
$20,000.00
INC.
Raising Awareness in the
Developing World
East End House Inc.
Generating and Evaluating New
$20,000.00
Adventures in Science After
School (GENASAS)
East End House Inc.
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Emory Genetics
LSDC Patient Meetings
$27,390.00
Laboratory
Engineering Conferences
Integrated Continuous
$10,000.00
International
Biomanufacturing II
Conference
EveryLife Foundation
Rare Voice Awards Gala
$20,000.00
for Rare Diseases
EveryLife Foundation
EveryLife Foundation Annual
$10,000.00
for Rare Diseases
Rare Disease Scientific
Workshop: Patient Engagement
in the Clinical Development
Process
Fabry Support &
FSIG Expert Fabry Conference
$50,000.00
Information Group
2015
Fabry Support &
FSIG Patient Assistance Fund
$40,000.00
Information Group
Fabry Support &
FSIG Patient Assistance Fund
$40,000.00
Information Group
Fabry Support &
Rapid Assistance Funds--
$30,000.00
Information Group
Patient Assistance Program
Fabry Support &
FSIG Newsletter
$12,000.00
Information Group
Fabry Support &
2015 FSIG Fabry Fun Run/Walk
$1,500.00
Information Group
& FSIG Fabry Get Together
Meeting
Family Promise
Keep the Promise: An evening
$2,500.00
Metrowest Inc.
of food tasting to benefit
families that are homeless
Foundation of the
2016 CMSC Annual Meeting--
$414,000.00
Consortium of Multiple
Celebrating 30 Years of MS
Sclerosis Centers
Care
Foundation of the
FCMSC 2015-2016 Pilot
$44,000.00
Consortium of Multiple
Research Grant Award in
Sclerosis Centers
Multiple Sclerosis
Foundation of the
NARCOMS Now Patient Quarterly
$33,358.00
Consortium of Multiple
Magazine
Sclerosis Centers
Foundation of the
2015-2016 FCMSC Medical
$22,000.00
Consortium of Multiple
Resident Annual Meeting
Sclerosis Centers
Scientific Scholarships
Foundation of the
2015-2016 Workforce of the
$22,000.00
Consortium of Multiple
Future: Medical Student
Sclerosis Centers
Scholarships
Framingham Townwide PTO
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Council
Franciscan Children's
Adaptive Sports Program for
$10,000.00
Hospital and
Children with Disabilities
Rehabilitation Center
Friends of Hopkinton
Community Support for general
$4,000.00
SPEAC
operating
Friends of Resiliency
Academic Support component of
$10,000.00
for Life Inc.
Resiliency for Life (RFL)
Friends of Resiliency
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
for Life Inc.
Friends of the
Community Support for Friends
$16,000.00
Hopkinton Seniors
group to raise funds for
nutrition programs
FSH Society, Inc.
FSH Society
$2,000.00
Facioscapulohumeral Muscular
Dystrophy [FSHD] 2015
International Research
Consortium & Research
Planning Meetings
Fundacion de Esclerosis
MS Community Educational
$20,000.00
Multiple de Puerto
Conferences
Rico
Fundacion de Esclerosis
Abrazarte a la vida Patient
$2,500.00
Multiple de Puerto
Fundraising Event
Rico
Gateway Area Chapter
Community Walk MS 2015
$5,000.00
Gateway Area Chapter
Women on the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
2015
Generation Citizen Inc.
Generation Citizen Spring
$5,000.00
2015 Civics Day
Georgia Chapter of the
Non-AAP industry/foundation
$3,500.00
American Academy of
symposium
Pediatrics
Girl Scouts of Eastern
Girls Building Self-esteem
$10,000.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Global Genes
4th Annual RARE Tribute to
$25,000.00
Champions Event
Global Genes
Global Genes RARE Patient
$25,000.00
Advocacy Summit
Global Genes
Global Genes Corporate
$15,000.00
Alliance Program
Global Genes
Give RARE Disease Giving Day
$10,000.00
Global Genes
Pixar's The Good Dinosaur--
$10,000.00
Exclusive Screening &
Fundraiser
Global Genes
Tribute to Champions--
$7,460.00
Expression of Hope Art
Exhibit
Global Genes
RARE Toolkit & Educational
$5,000.00
Podcast Programs
Gordon Research
Lysosomal Diseases Gordon
$5,000.00
Conferences
Research Conference and
Gordon Research Seminar
Gordon Research
2015 CAG Repeat Disorders
$2,000.00
Conferences
Gordon Research Conference
Greater Boston Chamber
Chamber's 2015 Annual Meeting
$10,000.00
of Commerce
Habitat For Humanity
Holliston Build Project
$15,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester Inc.
Habitat For Humanity
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester Inc.
Health Care For All
Ethnic Media and Grassroots
$10,000.00
Inc.
Outreach to Improve Health
Coverage Access in
Framingham
Health Technology
HTAI Annual Meeting 2015
$20,000.00
Assessment
International
Hearts & Noses Hospital
Ongoing Hospital Clown Visits
$15,000.00
Clown Troupe Inc.
to Ill and Disabled Children
in Greater Boston
Holy Name Health Care
18th Annual Spring Fashion
$15,000.00
Foundation Inc.
Fling for MS
Horizons for Homeless
17th Annual Women's Breakfast
$3,500.00
Children
Huntington Study Group
HSG 2015: Building Our Future
$1,500.00
Ltd.
Huntington's Disease
Huntington's Disease Society
$2,500.00
Society of America
of America 30th Annual
Convention
Icahn School of
13th Annual Gala in Support
$25,000.00
Medicine at Mount
of the Corinne Goldsmith
Sinai
Dickinson Center for
Multiple Sclerosis at Mount
Sinai
Icahn School of
13th Annual Gala in Support
$12,000.00
Medicine at Mount
of the Corinne Goldsmith
Sinai
Dickinson Center for
Multiple Sclerosis at Mount
Sinai
International
2015 MS Perspectives
$75,000.00
Organization of
Publication
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International
2015 Annual Meeting IOMSN
$30,000.00
Organization of
Dinner
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International Society
Glycoproteinoses: Fourth
$5,000.00
For Mannosidosis &
International Conference on
Related Disease Inc.
Advances in Pathogenesis and
Therapy
International Society
31st International Conference
$2,000.00
For
on Pharmacoepidemiology
Pharmacoepidemiology
International Society
ISN Forefronts
$3,500.00
of Nephrology
``Immunomodulation of Cardio-
Renal Function--A focus on
cardio-renal pathophysiology
and immunity'' (Oct 22-25,
2015, Shenzhen, China)
Italian Home For
City Lights Gala
$5,000.00
Children Inc.
Japan Society of Boston
2015 Japan Society of Boston
$5,000.00
Annual Dinner
Jewish Federation of
Expanding Footprint of Jewish
$10,000.00
southern New Jersey
Genetic Disease Awareness in
South Jersey
Jewish Genetic Disease
Jewish Genetic Disease
$5,000.00
Consortium (JGDC)
Consortium Screening
Awareness Program
Jewish Genetic Diseases
PHOENIX--Our Heritage and our
$980.00
Center of Greater
Health--Ashkenazi Jewish
Phoenix
Genetics Disease and the
Founder Effect
Jewish Genetic Diseases
TUCSON--Our Heritage and our
$950.00
Center of Greater
Health--Ashkenazi Jewish
Phoenix
Genetic Disease and the
Founder Effect
Joseph M. Smith
JMSCHS's Prenatal Program
$15,000.00
Community Health
Center, Inc.
Kidney Foundation of
24th Annual Wine Affair Event
$1,000.00
Northwest Ohio
for Disease Awareness
Kidney Foundation of
Kilometers for Kidneys
$500.00
Northwest Ohio
Light of Life
Light of Life Foundation 2015
$25,000.00
Foundation
Patient Support Activities
Light of Life
Light of Life Foundation
$20,000.00
Foundation
Patient Awareness Program
Light of Life
Light of Life Foundation
$1,000.00
Foundation
Night of Comedy Fundraiser
Little Brothers/Friends
Medical Escort/Transport and
$7,500.00
of the Elderly
Prescription Escort Patient
Assistance Program
Little Miss Hannah
Little Miss Hannah Foundation
$8,000.00
Foundation
General Operating Support
Little Miss Hannah
Little Miss Hannah's Rainbows
$1,000.00
Foundation
in the Wind Festival
Lysosomal and Rare
Towards a patient-centered
$10,000.00
Disorders Research and
disease registry; Connecting
Treatment Center Inc.
the patches for Gaucher
Disease
March of Dimes
March for Babies
$15,000.00
March of Dimes
Black Ties for Babies Gala
$10,000.00
March of Dimes
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
March of Dimes
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
March of Dimes
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Margaret Fuller
Scholarships for Port/Area IV
$15,000.00
Neighborhood House
Youth to Attend Summer Camp
at Margaret Fuller House
Mass Insight Education
College Success Program
$15,000.00
and Research Institute
Inc.
Massachusetts Bay
STEM Mentor Program
$26,500.00
Community College
Foundation
Massachusetts
Patient Advocacy Summit--Live
$10,000.00
Biotechnology Council
& Breathe: Building a
Patient Centered Biotech
Massachusetts
BioTeach Life Sciences
$50,000.00
Biotechnology
Student Program
Education Foundation
Inc.
Massachusetts Institute
Cambridge Science Festival
$5,000.00
of Technology
Massachusetts Outdoor
DFW Plymouth Red-bellied
$5,000.00
Heritage Foundation
Cooter Head-starting Program
Inc.
Massachusetts Outdoor
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Heritage Foundation
Inc.
Massachusetts State
Massachusetts State Science &
$50,000.00
Science and
Engineering Fair
Engineering Fair, Inc.
Mercy Foundation
Mercy Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
$20,000.00
Achievement Center Wellness
Programs
Metrowest Free Medical
Chronic Disease Patient
$10,000.00
Program Inc.
Assistance Program
Mid America MS
The Race to Nowhere 2015
$5,000.00
Achievement Center
Mid America MS
The Race to Nowhere 2015
$2,500.00
Achievement Center
Mid America MS
Eat Bid Laugh Event
$2,500.00
Achievement Center
benefiting the Mid-America
Multiple Sclerosis
Achievement Center (MSAC) in
Kansas City
Milwaukee Synagogue for
Gaucher Disease Education
$5,000.00
Russian Jews
Program
MLD Foundation
RUSP Roundtable
$4,000.00
MS Cure Fund
Women Thriving With MS
$125,000.00
MS Cure Fund
Risks & Benefits Program
$103,700.00
MS Cure Fund
Resource Information Database
$12,360.00
Conversion and Website
Integration
MS Cure Fund
MS Cure Newsletter
$10,000.00
MS Cure Fund
Lifestyle Management Programs
$8,250.00
Fall 2015
MS Hope for a Cure Inc.
2015 MS Cycle for a Cure--A
$5,000.00
Ride for Research (6 event
sites)
MS Views and News Inc.
2015--MS Symposium SERIES--
$64,491.00
``The Neurological Aspects
of MS''
MS Views and News Inc.
Empowering MS Communities in
$46,000.00
America's Heartland series--
2
MS Views and News Inc.
BRING IT ON!--``Everything
$27,835.00
You Want to Know about MS''
a Q&A program
MS Views and News Inc.
Empowering MS Communities in
$22,000.00
America's Hearthland series
MS Views and News Inc.
Women's Health Issues with
$16,924.75
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Views and News Inc.
New and Emerging Therapies
$15,925.00
plus Invisible Symptoms of
MS
MS Views and News Inc.
New and Emerging Treatment
$14,750.00
Options plus Invisible
Symptoms of MS--Chicago
MS Views and News Inc.
BRING IT ON!--Everything you
$12,295.00
want to Know about MS--Q&A
MS Views and News Inc.
Women's Health with Multiple
$9,582.00
Sclerosis
MS Views and News Inc.
Men's Health Issues with
$9,178.50
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Views and News Inc.
2015 Renewal of Annual
$7,900.00
Display Sponsorship
MS Views and News Inc.
MS Views and News--5th Annual
$3,000.00
Bowlathon Fundraiser to
Benefit MS Education and
Stem Cell Research
MSWorld, Inc.
2015 MSWorld Conference
$20,000.00
Coverage
MSWorld, Inc.
2015 MSWorld ``Wellness
$20,000.00
Unleashed Program''
Multiple Sclerosis
Crossfire: The Science and
$436,320.00
Association of America
Emotion of Risk
Multiple Sclerosis
MSAA MRI Patient Assistance
$350,000.00
Association of America
Fund
Multiple Sclerosis
Hot Topics in Multiple
$217,941.00
Association of America
Sclerosis: An Interactive
Series of MS Patient
Education Programs
Multiple Sclerosis
Swim for MS In Person Program
$58,985.00
Association of America
Pilot Series
Multiple Sclerosis
MSAA's 2015 Improving Lives
$15,000.00
Association of America
Benefit
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Festival Program
$10,000.00
Center of Georgia
Multiple Sclerosis
Health, Hope & Hops Program
$7,000.00
Center of Georgia
Multiple Sclerosis
Foundation's Assistive
$50,000.00
Foundation
Technology Program
Multiple Sclerosis
Support Group News quarterly
$27,300.00
Foundation
informational newsletter
Multiple Sclerosis
African Americans with MS--
$20,000.00
Foundation
The Medical, Cultural and
Psychological Differences
Multiple Sclerosis
Resource Website
$117,367.00
International
Communications Support
Federation Foundation
Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
Middle East Patient Awareness
$78,245.00
International
Program
Federation Foundation
Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
Arab Region Patient Awareness
$60,117.00
International
Program
Federation Foundation
Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
World MS Day 2015 Campaign
$46,947.00
International
Federation Foundation
Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
Latin America Resource
$41,950.00
International
Analysis Project
Federation Foundation
Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
Global Patient Awareness
$39,122.00
International
Program
Federation Foundation
Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
MSQLP's 9th Annual Walk 'n
$1,500.00
Quality of Life
Roll Fundraiser
Project Corporation
Multiple Sclerosis
2015 Mission Steps Wak & MS
$8,000.00
Resources of Central
Awareness Day
New York, Inc.
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Lake
Mary, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 MDA Muscle Summit
$8,000.00
Association--Alameda,
CA
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Newsletter
$2,000.00
Association--Albany,
NY
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 MDA Research Seminar
$2,000.00
Association--Albany,
NY
Muscular Dystrophy
New Mexico MDA Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Albuquerq
ue, NM
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 MDA Muscle Summit
$8,000.00
Association--Allentown
, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Greater Lehigh
$1,000.00
Association--Allentown
Valley
, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
17th Annual Black and Blue
$5,000.00
Association--Ark
Ball
Valley, Richmond, VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Greater Fort
$1,000.00
Association--Ark
Wayne
Valley, Richmond, VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Ft Myers, FL
$1,000.00
Association--Ark
Valley, Richmond, VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Pittsburgh
$1,000.00
Association--Ark
Valley, Richmond, VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Springfield, MO
$1,000.00
Association--Ark
Valley, Richmond, VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Richmond, VA
$1,000.00
Association--Ark
Valley, Richmond, VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Central Texas
$1,000.00
Association--Austin,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 Muscular Dystrophy
$1,000.00
Association--Billings,
Summer Camp of Montana
MT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Montana
$1,000.00
Association--Billings,
MT
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Health Patient Care
$1,000.00
Association -
Services Program
Birmingham, AL
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Idaho Summer Camp
$1,000.00
Association--Boise, ID
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Superhero Muscle Walk and
$1,000.00
Association--Boise, ID
5k Fun Run
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Chattanooga
$2,500.00
Association--Brentwood
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Nashville
$1,000.00
Association--Brentwood
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 Nashville Muscle Team
$1,000.00
Association--Brentwood
Gala
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Nashville
$1,000.00
Association--Brentwood
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association--Brookfiel
Milwaukee
d, WI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association--Brookfiel
Madison
d, WI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Broomall,
PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Quad Cities
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Des Moines
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Iowa City
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Iowa City
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Waterloo
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Des Moines
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Mucscle Walk Morgantown
$1,000.00
Association--Charlesto
n, WV
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Charlotte
, NC
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA--LGMD Genetic Testing
$700,000.00
Association--Chicago,
Program
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Pompe Testing Program
$60,000.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 Muscle Summit
$8,000.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Illinois Muscle Summit
$8,000.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$2,000.00
Association--Chicago,
Association, Third Quarter
IL
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA-ALS Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 Southern Ohio Muscular
$1,000.00
Association--Cincinnat
Dystrophy Association Summer
i, OH
Camp
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association--Cincinnat
Cincinnati
i, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association--Cleveland
Cleveland
, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Winter Newsletter
$2,500.00
Association--Columbia,
SC
Muscular Dystrophy
Road Map to Independence for
$2,000.00
Association--Columbia,
Young Adults Resource
SC
Program
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Fall Newsletter
$2,000.00
Association--Columbia,
SC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Columbia,
SC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Denver
$1,000.00
Association--Denver,
CO
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Chicagoland &
$2,000.00
Association--Downers
Muscle Walk of Rockford
Grove, IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--El Paso,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Greater Mishawaka
$1,000.00
Association--Fort
Wayne, IN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association--Fort
Mishawaka
Wayne, IN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Western Colorado
$1,000.00
Association--Grand
Junction, CO
Muscular Dystrophy
Partners in Progress: an MDA
$5,000.00
Association--Green
Muscle Symposium
Bay, WI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Green Bay
$1,000.00
Association--Green
Bay, WI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Greenvill
e, SC
Muscular Dystrophy
Limb-Girdle Muscular
$10,000.00
Association--Harrisbur
Dystrophy Education Program,
g, PA
First Quarter, 2015
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 Central PA MDA Muscle
$8,000.00
Association--Harrisbur
Summit
g, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Central PA
$1,000.00
Association--Harrisbur
g, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Hawaii
$1,500.00
Association--Honolulu,
HI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Houston
$1,000.00
Association--Houston,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Patient and Family Healthcare
$2,000.00
Association--Jacksonvi
Newsletter
lle, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Knoxville
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Knoxville
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Family Engagement Events
$1,000.00
Association--Knoxville
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Las
Vegas, NV
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Little Rock
$1,000.00
Association--Little
Rock, AR
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp
$5,000.00
Association--Los
Angeles, CA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Louisville
$1,000.00
Association--Louisvill
e, KY
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Louisvill
e, KY
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Conference
$1,500.00
Association--Mancheste
r, NH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk St Louis
$1,000.00
Association--Maryland
Heights, MO
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 Central New Jersey MDA
$8,000.00
Association--Maywood,
Muscle Summit
NJ
Muscular Dystrophy
2nd Quarter/4th Quarter Print
$2,000.00
Association--Maywood,
Newsletters 2015
NJ
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Memphis,
TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Metairie,
LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Baton Rouge
$1,000.00
Association--Metairie,
LA
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA South Alabama Chapter
$2,000.00
Association--Montgomer
Quarterly Family Newsletter
y, AL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$2,000.00
Association--New
Association 2015 2nd Quarter
Haven, CT
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Metro NY
$1,000.00
Association--New York,
NY
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$2,000.00
Association--North
Association 1st Quarter 2015
Haven, CT
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
18th Annual MDA Black and
$2,000.00
Association--North
Blue Ball
Haven, CT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$1,500.00
Association--North
Association 2015 3rd Quarter
Haven, CT
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 Mohegan Sun Southern New
$1,000.00
Association--North
England MDA Muscle Walk
Haven, CT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association--Okemos,
Lansing Area
MI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Okemos,
MI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Omaha, NE
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Medford
$1,000.00
Association--Portland,
OR
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Portland,
OR
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Raleigh
$1,000.00
Association--Raleigh,
NC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Reston,
VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Fall 2015 Newsletter
$1,200.00
Association--Rochester
, NY
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Salt Lake
City, UT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Salt Lake City
$1,000.00
Association--Salt Lake
City, UT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk San Antonio & 5K
$1,000.00
Association--San
Fun Run
Antonio, TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Twin Cities
$1,500.00
Association--Shrevepor
t, LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Patient Newsletter
$1,500.00
Association--Southfiel
d, MI
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp 2015
$1,000.00
Association--Spokane,
WA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Spokane
$1,000.00
Association--Spokane,
WA
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp 2015
$1,000.00
Association--St
Petersburg, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp 2015
$1,000.00
Association--St
Petersburg, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Tampa Bay
$1,000.00
Association--St
Petersburg, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Muscle Walk--Exhibit
$1,000.00
Association--Tempe, AZ
Booth for Patient Education
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Muscle Walk Tucson--
$1,000.00
Association--Tempe, AZ
Exhibit Booth for Patient
Education
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Baltimore
$1,000.00
Association--Towson,
MD
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Ark-La-Tex
$1,000.00
Association--Tucson,
AZ
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Central New
$1,000.00
Association--Tucson,
Jersey
AZ
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA 4th Quarter Newsletter
$2,000.00
Association--Warwick,
RI
Muscular Dystrophy
Newsletter-CAMP
$2,000.00
Association--Westborou
gh, MA
Muscular Dystrophy
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Association--Westborou
gh, MA
Muscular Dystrophy
Quarterly Newsletter
$3,000.00
Association--Westbrook
, ME
Muscular Dystrophy
Pompe Support Dinner
$2,000.00
Association--Westbrook
, ME
Muscular Dystrophy
Pompe Awareness and Education
$1,500.00
Association--Westbrook
Day
, ME
Muscular Dystrophy
Pompe Awareness and
$1,000.00
Association--Westbrook
EducationDay
, ME
Muscular Dystrophy
Limb-Girdle Support Group
$1,000.00
Association--Westbrook
, ME
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk Maine
$1,000.00
Association--Westbrook
, ME
Muscular Dystrophy
2015 MDA Muscle Walk and
$2,000.00
Association--Wilmingto
Educational Symposium
n, NC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Greenville and
$1,500.00
Association--Wilmingto
Patient Educational
n, NC
Symposium
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk of Central Ohio
$1,000.00
Association--Worthingt
on, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Worthingt
on, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Westborou
gh, MA
Museum of Science
Genzyme/Museum of Science
$66,980.00
Teacher Sabbatical Program
2014
Museum of Science
The Science Behind the Stars
$10,000.00
Event
National Fabry Disease
2015 NFDF Education and
$45,000.00
Foundation
Community Patient Assistance
Program
National Fabry Disease
2015 NFDF Core Patient
$40,000.00
Foundation
Assistance Program
National Fabry Disease
2015 NFDF Core Patient
$40,000.00
Foundation
Assistance Program
National Fabry Disease
2015 Fabry Family Camp and
$25,000.00
Foundation
Annual Educational
Conference
National Fabry Disease
2015 Fabry Family Camp and
$25,000.00
Foundation
Annual Educational
Conference
National Fabry Disease
2015 Fabry Family Camp and
$25,000.00
Foundation
Annual Educational
Conference
National Fabry Disease
2015 Fabry Educational
$14,000.00
Foundation
Meetings
National Fabry Disease
2015 Fabry Emergency
$10,000.00
Foundation
Assistance and Ancillary
Expense Support
National Fabry Disease
2015 Fabry Emergency
$10,000.00
Foundation
Assistance and Ancillary
Expense Support
National Fabry Disease
2015 Family Patient
$5,000.00
Foundation
Assistance Program
National Fabry Disease
2015 Family Patient
$5,000.00
Foundation
Assistance Program
National Family
RareCaregivers.org: Caring
$10,000.00
Caregivers Association
for Rare Disease Caregivers
DBA Caregiver Action
Network
National Family
Creating the Voice: A
$5,000.00
Caregivers Association
Celebration of Family
DBA Caregiver Action
Caregiving Event
Network
National Gaucher
CARE Program--Patient
$1,250,000.00
Foundation
Assistance Program
National Gaucher
NGF Education, Awareness and
$400,000.00
Foundation
Resources Program for
Patients
National Gaucher
2015 National Gaucher
$25,000.00
Foundation
Conference
National Kidney
Louisville Kidney Walk
$1,000.00
Foundation Inc.
National Kidney
Great Chefs of the West Gala
$200.00
Foundation Inc.
National Kidney
Evansville Kidney Walk
$500.00
Foundation of Indiana
National Kidney
Northwest Kidney Walk
$500.00
Foundation of Indiana
National Kidney
Northeast Indiana Kidney Walk
$500.00
Foundation of Indiana
National Kidney
2015 Mardi Gras Kidney Ball
$1,000.00
Foundation of Michigan
National MPS Society
National MPS Society 29th
$20,000.00
Annual Family Conference
National MPS Society
National MPS Society 29th
$15,000.00
Annual Family Conference
National MPS Society
National MPS Society 5K Walk/
$10,000.00
Run
National Multiple
Southern New York Chapter's
$100,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Walk MS 2015
York, NY
National Multiple
Chapter Women Against MS
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Luncheon
Arizona
National Multiple
Spring Fling/Fall Ball
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Socialization Programs for
York, NY
People with MS
National Multiple
Moving Forward: An
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Educational Program for
York, NY
Those Newly Diagnosed with
Multiple Sclerosis
National Multiple
The National Multiple
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Sclerosis Society, Alabama--
Alabama-Mississippi
Mississippi Chapter's MS
Chapter
Dinner of Champions
National Multiple
MS Symposium
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Alabama-Mississippi
Chapter
National Multiple
Arizona Chapter's Walk MS
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
2015
Arizona Chapter
National Multiple
Women Against MS Luncheon--
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Patient Wellness Program
Brentwood, TN
National Multiple
Newly Diagnosed with MS
$1,150.00
Sclerosis Society--
Meeting
Brentwood, TN
National Multiple
Women's Day Out: Health,
$450.00
Sclerosis Society--
Beauty, Wellness and MS
Brentwood, TN
National Multiple
Central Virginia Chapter's
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Walk MS 2015
Central Virginia
Chapter
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Central Virginia
Chapter
National Multiple
Mind and Body Wellness
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Educational Symposium
Central Virginia
Chapter
National Multiple
Colorado-Wyoming Chapter's
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Walk MS 2015
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
I Ride with MS at Bike MS
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Colorado Event
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
2015 SH & Patient Support
$8,610.00
Sclerosis Society--
Groups
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
Optimal Health with MS--
$8,350.00
Sclerosis Society--
Integrating Lifestyle,
Colorado-Wyoming
Alternative & Conventional
Chapter
Medicine
National Multiple
Fitness as a Lifestyle 2015--
$4,710.00
Sclerosis Society--
Patient Wellness Program
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
National MS Society
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Scholarship Program
Denver, CO
National Multiple
Navigator Patient Resource
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Program
Gateway Area Chapter
MS
National Multiple
Walk MS 2015
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Gateway Area Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS
$50,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Greater Illinois
Chapter
National Multiple
MuckFest MS Chicago Race
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Greater Illinois
Chapter
National Multiple
7th Annual Women on the Move
$7,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Luncheon
Greater Illinois
Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS Boston
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Muckfest MS Boston
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Bike MS Ride the Vineyard
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
National MS Walks Worcester
$2,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
and Boston
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Maine Living Well with MS
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Program
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Vermont Living Well with MS
$1,250.00
Sclerosis Society--
Conference
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Hidden Symptoms of MS
$1,250.00
Sclerosis Society--
Conference
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
New Hampshire Spring
$1,250.00
Sclerosis Society--
Education Conference
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Rhode Island Living Well with
$1,250.00
Sclerosis Society--
MS Spring Conference
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Connecticut Walk MS 2015
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Hartford, CT
National Multiple
National MS Society South
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Central Region BP 150 Bike
Houston, TX
Race Event
National Multiple
North Texas Walk MS 2015
$18,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Houston, TX
National Multiple
Tulsa & Central, OK Walk MS
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
2015
Houston, TX
National Multiple
San Antonio MS Walk 2015
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Houston, TX
National Multiple
2015 Oklahoma Leadership
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Events
Houston, TX
National Multiple
Lydia Emily Project
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
supporting BP 150 Bike Race
Houston, TX
Event
National Multiple
North Texas Bike MS 2015
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Houston, TX
National Multiple
On The Move Luncheon program
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
to raise funds and awareness
Houston, TX
for Multiple Sclerosis
National Multiple
I Ride With MS Oklahoma Bike
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Event
Houston, TX
National Multiple
Louisiana--New Orleans,
$3,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Shreveport, and Baton Rouge
Houston, TX
Walk MS 2015
National Multiple
Bike MS Event--Midland
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Houston, TX
National Multiple
On The Move Luncheon Baton
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Rouge
Houston, TX
National Multiple
Ohio Buckeye Chapter's Walk
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
MS 2015
Independence, OH
National Multiple
North Florida Walk MS 2015
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Jacksonville, FL
National Multiple
MS On the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Jacksonville, FL
National Multiple
MS On the Move Luncheon
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Jacksonville, FL
National Multiple
MS Awareness Mural
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS Kentucky
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Moving Mountains For MS: 2015
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Family Weekend Retreat
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Crystal Boots & Silver Spurs
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Fundraising Event
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Best of Louisville 2015
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Patient Resources Event
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Women on the Move--Patient
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Awareness Program
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Long Island Walk MS 2015
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Long Island Chapter
National Multiple
10th Annual Spring into
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Awareness Luncheon
Long Island Chapter
National Multiple
Southern California & Nevada
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--Los
Chapter's Walk MS 2015
Angeles, CA
National Multiple
40th Annual Dinner of
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--Los
Champions
Angeles, CA
National Multiple
Program on Fueling Impact in
$4,000.00
Sclerosis Society--Los
MS Research
Angeles, CA
National Multiple
Lydia Emily ``Make Your Mark
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--Los
on MS'' Mural Project that
Angeles, CA
will provide hope to the
local MS community and
greatly increase public
awareness of MS
National Multiple
Dinner of Champions Northern
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--Los
Nevada
Angeles, CA
National Multiple
Maryland Walk MS 2015
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Maryland Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS 2015
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--MI
Chapter
National Multiple
The 37th Annual Ambassadors
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Ball
National Capital
Chapter
National Multiple
National Capital Chapter's
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Walk MS 2015
National Capital
Chapter
National Multiple
National Capital Chapter's
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Walk MS 2015
National Capital
Chapter
National Multiple
11th Annual Women On The Move
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Luncheon
National Capital
Chapter
National Multiple
Bike MS Ride the Vine Event
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
National Capital
Chapter
National Multiple
A Day for Men Living with MS
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Program
National Capital
Chapter
National Multiple
Bike MS 'I Ride with MS'
$600,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Program
York, NY
National Multiple
The International Progressive
$100,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
MS Alliance 2015
York, NY
National Multiple
National MS Society E-
$75,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Communications Program
York, NY
National Multiple
North American Education
$35,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Program for people with MS
York, NY
and their families
National Multiple
Knowledge is Power 2015 at
$35,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Home Educational series
York, NY
National Multiple
MS Navigator: Information
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Program
York, NY
National Multiple
National MS Society
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
educational video
York, NY
programming for people with
MS and their families
through ``MS Learn Online''
National Multiple
2015 National MS Society,
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Southern NY Chapter
York, NY
Scholarship Program
National Multiple
2015 Women on the Move
$12,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Program
York, NY
National Multiple
2015 Gala/Dinner of Champions
$12,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York, NY
National Multiple
Research Symposium 2015: MS
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Research Discoveries:
York, NY
Wellness and Treatments for
Living Your Best Life
National Multiple
Medical Student Clinical
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Summer Fellowship
York, NY
National Multiple
MS Awareness and Education
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--NJ
Newsletter
Metro Chapter
National Multiple
New Jersey Metro Chapter's
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--NJ
Walk MS 2015
Metro Chapter
National Multiple
Northern California Chapter's
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Walk MS 2015
Northern California
National Multiple
Chapter DuskBuster 5k Race
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Event
Northern California
National Multiple
Ohio Valley Chapter's Walk MS
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
2015
Ohio Valley Chapter
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
and Fashion Show
Ohio Valley Chapter
National Multiple
Lydia Emily ``Make Your Mark
$33,554.00
Sclerosis Society--
on MS'' Mural Project that
Oregon Chapter
will provide hope to the
local MS community and
greatly increase public
awareness of MS
National Multiple
Oregon Chapter's Walk MS 2015
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Oregon Chapter
National Multiple
Bike MS 2015: Willamette
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Valley
Oregon Chapter
National Multiple
Gala MS 2015
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Oregon Chapter
National Multiple
Relationship Matters--Spring
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
2015
Oregon Chapter
National Multiple
Greater Delaware Valley and
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Delaware Chapter's Walk MS
Philadelphia, PA
2015
National Multiple
Women Against MS Luncheon--
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Patient Wellness Program
Philadelphia, PA
National Multiple
Pennsylvania Keystone
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Chapter's Walk MS Champaign
Pittsburgh, PA
(to include 23 Walk Events)
National Multiple
Walk MS 2015
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
2015 National MS Society,
$7,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Upstate NY Chapter
Rochester, NY
Scholarship Program
National Multiple
Bike MS Event
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
2015 MS Research Nights
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
Champions On the Move
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Luncheon
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
8th Annual Hudson Valley
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Multiple Sclerosis Symposium
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
2015 Health and Wellness Fair
$2,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
Everyday Matters: Living Your
$2,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Best Life with MS Program
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
On the Move Luncheon program
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
to raise funds and awareness
Rochester, NY
for Multiple Sclerosis
National Multiple
MS Service Day--Patient
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Assistance Program
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
Free From Falls--Patient
$750.00
Sclerosis Society--
Wellness Program
Rochester, NY
National Multiple
Utah-Southern Idaho Walk MS
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
2015
Salt Lake City, UT
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
and Fashion Show 2015
Salt Lake City, UT
National Multiple
Walk MS San Diego
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--San
Diego, CA
National Multiple
28th Annual MS Dinner Charity
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--San
Auction
Diego, CA
National Multiple
MS Dinner Auction Hawaii
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--San
Diego, CA
National Multiple
UC Irvine Lunch & Learn
$4,000.00
Sclerosis Society--San
Symposium
Diego, CA
National Multiple
Challenge Walk MS
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--San
Diego, CA
National Multiple
South Florida Chapter's Walk
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
MS 2015
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
MS Gala Luncheon 2015
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
Festival Hispano 2015--
$4,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Patient Awareness Program
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
Mind, Body & Soul--ESTERO
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Event
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
Mind, Body & Soul--Boca Raton
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Event
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS: North Dakota Walks,
$5,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
South Dakota Walks, and Twin
Upper Midwest Chapter
Cities Challenge Walk
National Multiple
Upper Midwest Chapter's Walk
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
MS 2015
Upper Midwest Chapter
National Multiple
Taste of Generosity Gala
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Dinner
Upper Midwest Chapter
National Multiple
St. Cloud MS Walk 2015
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Upper Midwest Chapter
National Multiple
Wisconsin Chapter's Walks MS
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
2015 (to include 20 Walk
Wisconsin Chapter
Events)
National Multiple
Georgia Chapter's Walk MS
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
2015
Georgia Chapter
National Multiple
Bike MS Cape Cod Getaway, the
$50,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
largest MS ride in New
Greater New England
England
Chapter
National Multiple
MileStones 2015 Program Ad
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society-
Greater New England
Chapter
National Multiple
Greater Northwest Chapter's
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society-
Walk MS Events
Greater Northwest
Chapter
National Multiple
Bike MS Race Event: I Ride
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society-
with MS
Greater Northwest
Chapter
National Multiple
Mood & Cognition in MS: What
$8,230.00
Sclerosis Society-
you can do--Patient Wellness
Greater Northwest
Program
Chapter
National Multiple
Northwest Chapter's Dinner of
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society-
Champions Gala
Greater Northwest
Chapter
National Multiple
Indiana Chapter's Walk MS
$8,500.00
Sclerosis Society
2015
Indiana State Chapter
National Multiple
Society's Financial Patient
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Assistance Program
Indiana State Chapter
National Multiple
MS Navigator: Information
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Program
Indiana State Chapter
National Multiple
39th Annual Dinner of
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--Los
Champions
Angeles, CA
National Multiple
Everyday Matters Patient
$909.00
Sclerosis Society--
Wellness Program
Upstate New York
Chapter
National Niemann-Pick
Hope is on the Horizon Family
$30,000.00
Disease Foundation
Patient Services Program
National Organization
Portraits of Courage 2015
$50,000.00
for Rare Disorders
National Organization
Volunteer Match
$9,000.00
for Rare Disorders
National Organization
Rare Disease Day Relay
$6,000.00
for Rare Disorders
National Organization
NORD's Rare Diseases and
$50,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Orphan Products Breakthrough
Inc.
Summit
National Tay-Sachs &
Imagine & Believe 2015 Event
$10,000.00
Allied Diseases
Association, Inc.
National Tay-Sachs &
37th Annual Family Conference
$5,000.00
Allied Diseases
Association, Inc.
National Tay-Sachs &
Raising Awareness of
$1,200.00
Allied Diseases
Ashkenazi Jewish Genetic
Association, Inc.
Diseases through the
Forward's annual genetics
issue
Nebraska Kidney
Patient & Family Education
$500.00
Association
Day
Neurologic Disease
MS: Today and Tomorrow
$5,995.00
Foundation
Caregiver Wellness Program
Neurologic Disease
Newly Diagnosed MS Patient
$4,995.00
Foundation
Educational Series 2015
Neuropathy Action
9th Annual Neuropathy Action
$2,500.00
Foundation
Awareness Day
New England Healthcare
The Nick Littlefield Health
$25,000.00
Institute
Policy Fellowship
New England Healthcare
Innovators in Health Awards
$25,000.00
Institute
Next Step Fund Inc.
Expansion of year-round
$10,000.00
programming in Song.Studio
and the Media Lab for youth
with rare genetic disorders
Norton Healthcare
2015 Neuro Expo
$10,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
OhioHealth Corporation
OhioHealth Multiple Sclerosis
$20,000.00
Patient Education Program
Oligonucleotide
11th Annual Meeting of the
$2,500.00
Therapeutic Society
Oligonucleotide Therapeutics
Society
Operation Warm Inc.
Community support for Boston
$15,000.00
Warmth in Winter
Oregon Health & Science
At the Frontier & Beyond: MS
$8,850.00
University
2015
Oregon Health & Science
On the Horizon: Updates in
$8,700.00
University
Multiple Sclerosis
Our Space Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Partners Healthcare
World Medical Innovation
$50,000.00
System, Inc.
Forum--Neurosciences
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$260,000.00
Foundation
for Homozygous Familial
Hypercholesterolemia (HoFH)
Patients
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$125,000.00
Foundation
for Patients with Thyroid
Cancer
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$50,000.00
Foundation
for Homozygous Familial
Hypercholesterolemia (HoFH)
Patients
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$50,000.00
Foundation
for Homozygous Familial
Hypercholesterolemia (HoFH)
Patients
Patient Services Inc.
Fabry Financial Patient
$3,150,000.00
Assistance Program
Patient Services Inc.
Pompe Patient Assistance
$237,422.00
Program
Patient Services Inc.
Pompe Patient Assistance
$237,422.00
Program
Patient Services Inc.
MPS1 Patient Assistance
$212,778.00
Program
Patient Services Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$212,378.00
for Gauchers Disease
Peer Health Exchange
Peer Health Exchange:
$5,000.00
Inc.
Empowering Boston Youth to
Make Healthy Decisions
Perkins School for the
Perkins eLearning: Accessible
$20,000.00
Blind
Science Education
Pharmacy Quality
Development of Quality
$75,000.00
Alliance
Measurement Strategy for
Multiple Sclerosis Program
Phillips Brooks House
Put on a Helmet!
$5,755.76
Association
Incorporated
Portland VA Research
PDX Patient Workshop
$4,000.00
Foundation Inc.
Pro Player Foundation
Flavors of Austin hosted by
$5,000.00
Earl Campbell
Project Eden Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Race--Run Against
Super Sunday 5K Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Cancer Events
Race to Erase MS
22nd Annual Race to Erase MS
$60,000.00
Resolve Community
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Counseling Center,
Inc.
Rhode Island Rare
World Rare Disease Dar Art
$5,000.00
Disease Foundation
Exhibit 2015
Rhode Island Rare
Beyond the Diagnosis Art
$2,500.00
Disease Foundation
Exhibit
Rocky Mountain Multiple
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Annual Gala
Room to Grow
Clinical Community Support
$5,000.00
Program
S S Cosmas & Damian
88th Annual East Cambridge
$2,500.00
Society Inc.
Festival
Samaritans of Greater
Community Support for Youth
$25,000.00
Boston
Suicide Prevention Program
Science Club For Girls
Campus Chapters Supporting K-
$10,000.00
Inc.
12 Science Clubs
Science From Scientists
69th Annual Boston Citywide
$10,000.00
Inc.
Science Fair
Seattle Children's
MPS Family Day 2015
$6,000.00
Hospital Foundation
Special Olympics
Bio-Ball 2015
$2,000.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Stop Hunger Now, Inc.
Meal Packaging Event--Take
$3,044.08
Our Sons & Daughters to Work
Day
Student Clubs of HBS,
12th Annual Healthcare
$1,500.00
Inc.
Conference at Harvard
Business School
Temple University
Genzyme Allston/Brighton
$5,000.00
Biotechnology College
Scholarship
Terrapinn Inc.
World Orphan Drug Congress
$50,000.00
USA 2015
Texas Neurological
TNS 18th Annual Winter
$5,000.00
Society
Conference
THANC Foundation, Inc.
A Starry Night to benefit the
$5,000.00
THANC (Thyroid, Head and
Neck Cancer) Foundation
honoring R. Michael Tuttle,
MD
THANC Foundation, Inc.
A Starry Night to benefit the
$5,000.00
THANC (Thyroid, Head and
Neck Cancer) Foundation
honoring R. Michael Tuttle,
MD
The Boston Home, Inc.
B.Fit! Day Wellness Program
$18,000.00
The Boston Home, Inc.
iPads Communication System
$12,000.00
for Wheelchair Users--
Patient Assistance Program
The Boston Home, Inc.
The Boston Home Art Program
$10,000.00
The Boston Home, Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
The Community Art
Community Teen Media Program
$10,000.00
Center
The Familial
FH Patient Speakers Bureau
$25,000.00
Hypercholesterolemia
Program
Foundation
The Familial
Homozygous Familial
$20,000.00
Hypercholesterolemia
Hypercholesterolemia (HoFH)
Foundation
Community Program
The FH Foundation
2015 FH Global Summit
$25,000.00
The Forsyth Institute
The ForsythKids School Oral
$10,000.00
Health Program: Expansion to
serve Homeless Youth in
Cambridge
The Friends of the
Community Support of The
$4,000.00
Hopkinton Public
Friends of the Hopkinton
Library
Public Library
The Life Sciences
Leadership Mid-Term Funding
$50,000.00
Foundation
for Educational Programs
The McCourt Foundation
MS Educational Update Program
$20,000.00
The McCourt Foundation
McCourt Foundation Gala &
$15,000.00
Auction
The McCourt Foundation
Tour de South Shore Bike
$10,000.00
Event
The McCourt Foundation
The Immune System and The
$5,000.00
Brain With a Focus on MS
The National Cancer
Gaucher's Disease Relief
$5,000.00
Coalition, Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
The Oak Clinic
2015 Diamond Run for MS
$5,000.00
The Posse Foundation
Community Support for Posse
$20,000.00
Boston's Students Program
Thompson Island Outward
Connections--STEM learning to
$10,000.00
Bound Education Center
empower urban youth
Inc.
Thyca Thyroid Cancer
18th International Thyroid
$30,000.00
Survivors Association
Cancer Survivors' Conference
Inc.
Thyca Thyroid Cancer
Informational Resource
$7,875.00
Survivors Association
Support for ``After the
Inc.
Diagnosis, Medullary Thyroid
Cancer Memoirs'' to all
ThyCa Support Group
Tisch Multiple
18th Annual Patient Symposium
$30,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Center of New York,
Inc.
Tisch Multiple
Healing MS Patient Newsletter
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Center of New York,
Inc.
Trustees of Boston
Genzyme Youth Science &
$5,050.00
University
Engineering Workshop
Scholarships for U-Design
Program at Boston University
Trustees of Boston
Genzyme Allston/Brighton
$2,000.00
University
Biotechnology College
Scholarship
Trustees of Boston
Genzyme Allston/Brighton
$2,000.00
University
Biotechnology College
Scholarship
Trustees of Tufts
Genzyme Allston/Brighton
$5,000.00
College
Biotechnology College
Scholarship
Tutoring Plus of
Science & Math Enrichment
$5,000.00
Cambridge, Inc.
Programs
Tutoring Plus of
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Cambridge, Inc.
United Pompe Foundation
Pompe Community Support
$46,500.00
Programs
United Pompe Foundation
Duke Late Onset Pompe Patient
$20,000.00
Meeting
United Way of Tri
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
County Inc.
University of Florida
8th International Conference
$2,000.00
on Unstable Microsatellites
and Human Disease
University of
Massachusetts STEM Summit
$10,000.00
Massachusetts
2015: Promising Practices,
Proven Results
University of
Student Success Program for
$200,000.00
Massachusetts
UMass Boston, College of
Foundation Inc.
Science and Mathematics
University of Southern
Genzyme Allston/Brighton
$5,000.00
California
Biotechnology College
Scholarship
Urban Kidney Alliance,
Prescription Medication
$500.00
Inc.
Assistance Program (PMAP)
Veterans Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Visiting Nurse
Heroes in Health Care Gala
$10,000.00
Association of Boston
& Affiliates
Weill Medical College
Talk MS Program
$10,000.00
of Cornell University
West County MS Center
10th Annual Trivia and
$7,500.00
Auction
West End House Boys and
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Girls Club
WGBH
WGBH Pledge Night
$12,000.00
Whitehead Institute for
Whitehead Institute's 2015
$10,000.00
Biomedical Research
CampBio Program
Whitehead Institute for
Whitehead Institute's 2016
$10,000.00
Biomedical Research
CampBio Program
Women's Lunch Place
Community Support for Meals
$35,000.00
Program
Worcester County Food
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Bank Inc.
Worcester Polytechnic
Genzyme Allston/Brighton
$1,000.00
Institute
Biotechnology College
Scholarship
WriteBoston
STEM Teacher Excellence:
$10,000.00
Powered By Genzyme
Wylder Nation
2nd Annual Living Like a
$10,000.00
Foundation
Warrior Gala
YMCA of Greater Boston
Oak Square YMCA--Summer Day
$15,000.00
Camp Scholarship
Sponsorships and Charitable Donations
1st Jan 2016-31st Dec 2016
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to
supporting sponsorships for specific activities and initiatives of
healthcare organizations and institutions, independent medical or
professional societies, trade organizations and organized patient groups
to improve patient care and provide information to the medical and/or
patient communities. The goal of our charitable giving approach is to
fund general operational support for patient/disease organizations, or
program support for community-based organizations. Sanofi US and Genzyme
Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical
company.
Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a
group for a single activity; all applicants may be not be identified
above. ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during
2015 identified above. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that
may have been provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities
(e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
Recipient Name(s)
Activity Title
Funding Amount
Acid Maltase Deficiency
General Operating Support
$48,000.00
Association Inc.
ACTRIMS
Congress Sponsorships
$30,000.00
Allston Brighton
Feastworthy: Pilot Prepared
$15,000.00
Community Development
Meals Delivery Program
Corporation
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorships
$482,897.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Palatucci Advocacy Leadership
$50,000.00
Neurology Institute
Forum
American Academy of
Brain Health Fair
$7,500.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Fellows Scholarship Fund
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Residents Scholarship Fund
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Emerging Leaders Program
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Association of
Congress Sponsorships
$4,300.00
Clinical
Endocrinologists
American Association of
Fabry Family Member Testing
$164,970.00
Kidney Patients
and Education Project
American Autoimmune and
50 Cents for 50 Million
$5,000.00
Related Diseases
Laughs Campaign
Association
American Brain
Patient Advocacy Organization
$5,000.00
Coalition
Membership Sponsorship
American Cancer Society
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
American Cancer Society
Volunteer Match
$11,000.00
American Chemical
Recovery of Biological
$5,000.00
Society Merck and Co
Products XVII Conference
Inc.
American Chemical
Biochemical Technology ACS
$5,000.00
Society Merck and Co
National Meeting
Inc.
American College of
Congress Sponsorships
$50,875.00
Medical Genetics and
Genomics
American Red Cross of
American Red Cross Blood
$5,000.00
Massachusetts
Services
American Red Cross of
American Red Cross of
$5,000.00
Massachusetts
Massachusetts Women Who Care
Breakfast
American Thyroid
Congress Sponsorships
$3,000.00
Association
American Thyroid
Congress Sponsorships
$15,000.00
Association
ANERA (American Near
ANERA Annual Dinner
$5,000.00
East Refugee Aid)
Angel's Hands
Family Assistance Program
$5,000.00
Foundation
Ann & Robert H. Lurie
MPS Patient and Family
$2,000.00
Children's Hospital of
Conference
Chicago
Arthritis Foundation
Orange County & Inland Empire
$2,500.00
Jingle Bell Run
Assistance Fund Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$7,750,000.00
for MS
Association For
Annual Conference; Family
$6,000.00
Glycogen Storage
Assistance; The Ray
Disease
(newsletter)
Association For
Annual Conference; Family
$6,000.00
Glycogen Storage
Assistance; The Ray
Disease
(newsletter)
Barth Syndrome
Barth Syndrome Foundation
$2,000.00
Foundation
Conference
Batten Disease Support
NCL Congress Boston
$5,000.00
And Research
Association
Berkshire Resource
8th Annual GALA Fundraiser
$5,000.00
Project
Berkshire Resource
When IWalk - An MS Story
$8,000.00
Project
Big Brothers Big
MySTEM--Mentoring Youth in
$10,000.00
Sisters Of Central
Science, Technology,
Mass Metrowest Inc.
Engineering, and Mathematics
Biomedical Science
Hope Scholarship
$7,500.00
Careers Program
Biomedical Science
Evening of Hope
$75,000.00
Careers Program
Biotechnology
BIO Patient and Health
$10,000.00
Innovation
Advocacy Summit
Organization
Boston Area Rape Crisis
Community Program
$25,000.00
Center
Boston Area Rape Crisis
Advocacy Program
$25,000.00
Center
Boston College Trustees
Allston Brighton College
$2,000.00
Scholarship
Boston College Trustees
Allston Brighton College
$4,000.00
Scholarship
Boston Educational
Boston Public Schools Science
$10,000.00
Development
Fair
Foundation, Inc.
Boston Health Care For
Life Essentials for Homeless
$35,000.00
The Homeless Program
Patients
Inc.
Boston Health Care For
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
The Homeless Program
Inc.
Boston Health Care For
General Operating Support
$10,000.00
The Homeless Program
Inc.
Boston Partners in
Power Lunch Program
$6,000.00
Education, Inc.
Boston Private Industry
Corporate Contributions
$15,000.00
Council
Campaign
Boston Private Industry
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Council
Bottom Line
Boston STEM Success Program
$15,000.00
Bottom Line
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Staffing & Transportation for
$25,000.00
MetroWest
Membership at BGCMW's
Framingham Clubhouse
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Volunteer Match
$4,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Bids for Kids Auction & Gala
$10,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs Of
Great Pumpkin Glow
$6,000.00
Middlesex County Inc.
BPE
Boston Teacher Residency:
$15,000.00
Putting Students at the
Center of STEM Teacher
Training
Breakthrough Greater
Full STEAM Ahead Program With
$10,000.00
Boston
Low-Income Students
Brian J. Honan
Brian Honan 5K Road Race
$2,500.00
Charitable Fund
California Association
Congress Sponsorships
$1,500.00
of Physician Groups
(CAPG)
California Association
Congress Sponsorships
$1,000.00
of Physician Groups
(CAPG)
California District
Congress Sponsorships
$3,000.00
American Academy of
Pediatrics
California Pharmacists
Congress Sponsorships
$1,500.00
Association
Educational Foundation
Cambridge Chamber of
Women in Business Programming
$4,350.00
Commerce
Series Sponsor
Cambridge Health
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Alliance Foundation
Inc.
Cambridge School
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Cambridge School
Volunteer Match
$15,825.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Cambridge School
Volunteer Match
$13,755.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Cambridge School
Community Program
$11,000.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Cambridge School
Community Program
$11,000.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Camp Korey
Metabolic Disorders Family
$5,000.00
Weekend Camp
Can Do Multiple
JUMPSTART Programs
$60,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
Annual Autumn Benefit for Can
$5,000.00
Sclerosis
Do Multiple Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
Vertical Express for Can Do
$30,000.00
Sclerosis
MS
Can Do Multiple
Annual Autumn Benefit
$10,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
CAN DO Program
$60,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
TAKE CHARGETM Program
$37,500.00
Sclerosis
Case Management Society
CMSA 26th Annual Conference &
$4,650.00
of America
Expo
Case Management Society
Congress Sponsorships
$14,000.00
of America
Case Management Society
Congress Sponsorships
$5,500.00
of America
Case Management Society
New Frontiers of
$1,050.00
of New England
Technological Advancement
Program
Case Management Society
Corporate Sponsorship of
$1,250.00
of New England
CMSNE
Case Management Society
Creativity, Inspiration &
$1,000.00
of New England
Collaboration: Building
Blocks of Successful
Leadership
CASSS--An International
WCBP--20th Symposium
$7,500.00
Separation Science
Society
Charles River Community
Mom & Baby Program
$15,000.00
Health
Charles River
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Conservancy
Charles River
Volunteer Match
$4,000.00
Conservancy
Chelsea Jewish Nursing
ALS & MS Walk for Living
$2,500.00
Home Foundation, Inc.
Childrens Gaucher
Gaucher Related Research Fund
$75,000.00
Research Fund
Children's Hospital
La Gala de Milagros para
$5,000.00
Boston
Ninos
Children's Hospital
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Boston
Children's Hospital of
Lysosomal Day at The
$16,370.33
Philadelphia
Philadelphia Zoo
Foundation
Chronic Disease Fund,
Medullary Thyroid Cancer
$300,000.00
Inc DBA Good Days from
Patient Assistance Program
CDF
Chronic Disease Fund,
Medullary Thyroid Cancer
$150,000.00
Inc DBA Good Days from
Patient Assistance Program
CDF
Church Hillers Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Cincinnati Children's
Meeting for Patients with
$5,000.00
Hospital Medical
Fabry Disease
Center
Citizen Schools
Expanding STEM Learning at
$15,000.00
Boston Schools
Citizen Schools
Deepening the Impact of STEM
$15,000.00
Education
City Sprouts, Inc.
CitySprouts Middle School
$8,000.00
Program in Cambridge
City Sprouts, Inc.
CitySprouts Middle School
$8,000.00
Program
Cleveland Clinic
Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
$10,125.00
Foundation
Promoting Wellness and
Healthy Lifestyle
Community Boating, Inc.
Universal Access Program 2016
$15,000.00
Community Farms
Fresh Food Access Program
$15,000.00
Outreach
Community Living and
The Giving Tree Campaign
$6,500.00
Support Services, Inc.
Community Rowing, Inc.
Let's Row Boston
$10,000.00
Community Servings,
Pie in the Sky
$10,000.00
Inc.
Consortium of MS
Congress Sponsorships
$5,000.00
Centers
Courageous Parents
Patient Education and
$7,000.00
Network
Awareness Program
Cradles To Crayons Inc.
Ready for School
$20,000.00
Cradles To Crayons Inc.
General Operating Support
$10,000.00
Cradles To Crayons Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Cystic Fibrosis
Volunteer Match
$4,000.00
Foundation
Cystic Fibrosis
Uncork the Cure
$10,000.00
Foundation
Damon Runyon Cancer
General Operating Support
$5,000.00
Research Foundation
DEAF, Inc.--
Community Program
$10,000.00
Developmental
Evaluation and
Adjustment Facilities,
Inc.
Dimock Community Health
29th Annual Steppin' Out for
$25,000.00
Center
The Dimock Center
Dimock Realty
Building the Road to Recovery
$50,000.00
Corporation
Campaign
Direct Relief
Patient Assistance Fund for
$10,000.00
International
Rare Diseases
Direct Relief
Patient Assistance Fund for
$5,000.00
International
Rare Diseases
DPC Education Center
Fabry Disease Newsletter
$25,000.00
Support
Duke University
Patient Assistance Program
$400,000.00
Duke University
Hospitals Patient Assistance
$224,000.00
Program
East End House Inc.
Generating and Evaluating New
$20,000.00
Adventures in Science After
School (GENASAS)
East End House Inc.
Generating and Evaluating New
$20,000.00
Adventures in Science After
School (GENASAS)
Engineering Conferences
Cell Culture Engineering XV
$10,000.00
International
Conference
EveryLife Foundation
Community Congress
$15,000.00
for Rare Diseases
EveryLife Foundation
Rare Disease Advocacy Program
$20,000.00
for Rare Diseases
EveryLife Foundation
Rare Voice Awards
$15,000.00
for Rare Diseases
EveryLife Foundation
Patient Education and
$5,000.00
for Rare Diseases
Awareness Program
EveryLife Foundation
Community Congress
$5,000.00
for Rare Diseases
Fabry Support &
Fabry Support &Information
$30,000.00
Information Group
Group Patient Assistance
Fund Program
Fabry Support &
Fabry Support & Information
$100,000.00
Information Group
Group General Operating
Support
Fabry Support &
Fun Run/Walk St. Louis, MO
$1,500.00
Information Group
Fabry Support &
FSIG Expert Fabry Conference
$50,000.00
Information Group
Families of SMA
Annual SMA Conference
$10,000.00
Family Promise
Keep the Promise, Food
$2,500.00
Metrowest Inc.
Program for the Homeless
Florida Society of
Congress Sponsorships
$15,000.00
Rheumatology
Food For Free
Community Program
$1,000.00
Committee, Inc.
Foundation Fighting
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Blindness Inc.
Framingham Townwide Pto
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Council
Franciscan Hospital For
Adaptive Sports Program
$10,000.00
Children Inc.
Friends of Resiliency
Community Program
$10,000.00
for Life Inc.
Friends of Resiliency
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
for Life Inc.
Generation Citizen Inc.
Spring and Fall Civics Day
$5,000.00
Genetic Alliance Inc.
Industry Program
$20,000.00
Girl Scouts of Eastern
Girls Building Self-eSTeEM
$10,000.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Girl Scouts of Eastern
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Girl Scouts of Eastern
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Global Genes
RARE Tribute To Champions of
$25,000.00
Hope
Global Genes
RARE Webinars & RARE Toolkits
$30,000.00
Global Genes
Patient Assistance Program
$20,000.00
Global Genes
RARE Patient Advocacy Summit
$25,000.00
Gordon Research
Barriers of the Central
$2,000.00
Conferences
Nervous System Gordon
Research Conference
Greater Boston Chamber
Annual Meeting
$10,000.00
of Commerce
Habitat For Humanity
Home Build for Four Low-
$20,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Income Families Program
Worcester Inc.
Habitat For Humanity
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester Inc.
Habitat For Humanity
Volunteer Match
$1,500.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester Inc.
Habitat For Humanity
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester Inc.
Habitat For Humanity
High Heels and Hard Hats
$7,500.00
Metrowest - Greater
Auction and Gala
Worcester Inc.
Harvard College
Allston Brighton College
$2,000.00
Scholarship
Health Care For All
Public Education Campaign to
$15,000.00
Inc.
Improve Access to Health
Care in Framingham
Health Resources In
The Leaders through
$20,000.00
Action Inc.
Education, Action and Hope
(LEAH) Project
Health Resources in
The Leaders through
$20,000.00
Action Inc.
Education, Action, and Hope
(LEAH) Project
Hearts & Noses Hospital
Hospital Clown Visits to Ill
$15,000.00
Clown Troupe Inc.
and Disabled Children in
Greater Boston
Hereditary Disease
Milton Wexler Celebration of
$5,000.00
Foundation
Life Symposium
Holy Name Health Care
MS Awards Reception
$2,500.00
Foundation Inc.
Holy Name Health Care
19th Annual spring Fling to
$5,000.00
Foundation Inc.
benefit MS
Holy Name Health Care
MS Awards Reception
$5,000.00
Foundation Inc.
Horizons for Homeless
18th Annual Women's Breakfast
$5,000.00
Children
Huntington's Disease
Patient Education and
$5,000.00
Society of America
Awareness Program
Huntington's Disease
Huntington's Disease Society
$2,000.00
Society of America
of America 31st Annual
Convention
International Institute
Patient Navigation Services
$10,000.00
of New England
for Refugees in Boston
International Institute
Golden Door Award Gala
$10,000.00
of New England
International
Stress--You Can't Avoid It,
$10,000.00
Organization of
But You Can Manage It!
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International
Annual Meeting IOMSN Dinner
$30,000.00
Organization of
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International
MS Perspectives
$75,000.00
Organization of
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
Italian Home For
Annual Gala
$5,000.00
Children Inc.
Jewish Family Service
Patient Navigator Program
$15,000.00
of Metrowest Inc.
Jewish Family Service
Patient Navigator Program
$15,000.00
of Metrowest Inc.
Jewish Genetic Disease
Community and Rabbinic
$500.00
Consortium (JGDC)
Education for Jewish Genetic
Diseases
Just-A-Start
St. Patrick's Fund
$5,000.00
Corporation
Just-A-Start
Biomedical Careers Program
$22,950.00
Corporation
LGMD2D Foundation
Patient Assistance Program
$650,000.00
LGMD2D Foundation
Patient Assistance Program
$600,000.00
Light of Life
Light of Life Foundation
$40,000.00
Foundation
Program
Little Brothers/Friends
Community Program
$7,500.00
of the Elderly
Louisiana Association
Congress Sponsorships
$5,285.00
of Health Plans
MagellanRx Management
Congress Sponsorships
$5,000.00
Manchaug Pond
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Association
March of Dimes
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
March of Dimes
Black Ties for Babies
$10,000.00
March of Dimes
March for Babies
$15,000.00
Margaret Fuller
Please Help a Crumbling
$20,000.00
Neighborhood House
Community Resource
Margaret Fuller
Margaret Fuller Kids Summer
$15,000.00
Neighborhood House
Explorations Program
Mass Insight Education
Advanced Placement (AP)
$15,000.00
and Research Institute
Science, Technology,
Inc.
Engineering, and Math (STEM)
and English Program
Massachusetts Bay
STEM Mentor Program (SMP)
$37,000.00
Community College
Foundation
Massachusetts
Congress Sponsorships
$25,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Massachusetts
Patient Advocacy Summit
$10,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Massachusetts
MassBio Annual Meeting
$10,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Massachusetts
2016 MassBio Policy
$5,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Leadership Breakfast
Massachusetts
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Biotechnology
Education Foundation
Inc.
Massachusetts
BioTeach
$50,000.00
Biotechnology
Education Foundation
Inc.
Massachusetts
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Biotechnology
Education Foundation
Inc.
Massachusetts
Champions for Biotechnology
$2,500.00
Biotechnology
Education Program
Education Foundation
Inc.
Massachusetts Black
Massachusetts Black Women
$5,000.00
Women Attorneys
Attorneys 35th Anniversary
Foundation Inc.
Celebration
Massachusetts College
Next Generation of Women
$10,000.00
of Pharmacy and Health
Leaders in STEM
Sciences
Massachusetts Institute
Cambridge Science Festival
$5,000.00
of Technology
Massachusetts Outdoor
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Heritage Foundation
Inc.
Massachusetts State
Massachusetts State Science &
$50,000.00
Science and
Engineering Fair
Engineering Fair, Inc.
Mattel Children's
Educational Seminars for
$59,000.00
Hospital UCLA
Patients with Fabry Disease
Mercy Foundation
Multiple Sclerosis
$25,000.00
Achievement Center Wellness
Education Programs
Metrowest Free Medical
Expanding Access to Women's
$10,000.00
Program Inc.
Health Care and Health
Education in Framingham
Miami Childrens Health
Education and Outreach
$5,000.00
System Foundation Inc.
Activities of Jewish Genetic
and Pan-Ethnic Diseases
Mid America MS
The Race to Nowhere
$5,000.00
Achievement Center
Mid America MS
Your MS Depression Toolkit
$8,210.00
Achievement Center
Mint For Mounts Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
MITS Inc.
STEM Professional Development
$20,000.00
Institutes for teachers
MITS Inc.
Professional Development
$20,000.00
Institutes for teachers
MS Cure Fund
Women Thriving with MS--How
$125,000.00
to be a partner, a mother, a
woman--FIRST
MS Cure Fund
Lifestyle Management Programs
$13,500.00
Spring
MS Cure Fund
eNewsletter
$24,000.00
MS Cure Fund
Patient Education and
$22,580.00
Awareness Program
MS Hope for a Cure Inc.
MS Hope Day
$10,000.00
MS Views and News Inc.
Wheelchairs for Charity
$6,000.00
MS Views and News Inc.
Effective Communication
$19,775.00
Program
MS Views and News Inc.
Champions Tackling MS Awards
$5,000.00
Dinner Gala
MS Views and News Inc.
Congress Sponsorships
$7,900.00
MS Views and News Inc.
MS Views and News 6th Annual
$3,500.00
Bowlathon Fundraiser
MS Views and News Inc.
Patient Education and
$10,406.75
Awareness Program
MS Views and News Inc.
The Evolution of MS Care--
$14,200.00
Making Impacts on Health and
Wellness
MS Views And News Inc.
Patient Education and
$26,910.75
Awareness Program
MSWorld, Inc.
MSWorld Conference Coverage
$12,000.00
Multiple Sclerosis
Patient Assistance Program
$125,000.00
Association of America
Multiple Sclerosis
MSAA Cooling Equipment
$15,000.00
Association of America
Distribution Program
Multiple Sclerosis
Patient Assistance Program
$50,000.00
Association of America
Multiple Sclerosis
Navigating MS Program
$75,000.00
Association of America
Multiple Sclerosis
``MS Health and Wellness''
$20,000.00
Association of America
Program
Multiple Sclerosis
Patient Education and
$105,000.00
Association of America
Awareness Program
Multiple Sclerosis
MSAA's Improving Lives
$10,000.00
Association of America
Benefit
Multiple Sclerosis
MSAA Annual Healthcare
$24,887.00
Association of America
Advisory Council Summit
Multiple Sclerosis
Patient Education and
$17,409.50
Association of America
Awareness Program
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Fest
$10,000.00
Center of Georgia
Multiple Sclerosis
Health, Hope & Hops
$7,000.00
Center of Georgia
Multiple Sclerosis
Health, Hope & Hops
$7,000.00
Center of Georgia
Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple Sclerosis
$50,000.00
Foundation
Foundation's Assistive
Technology Program
Multiple Sclerosis
EmpowerSource Support Group
$28,000.00
Foundation
Newsletter
Multiple Sclerosis
Chapter Meetings Support
$7,000.00
Foundation
Multiple Sclerosis
National March MS Education
$40,000.00
Foundation
and Awareness Monthr 2016
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Dinner of Hope
$1,500.00
Resources of Central
New York, Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
Mission Steps Walk & MS
$8,000.00
Resources of Central
Awareness Day
New York, Inc.
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp
$3,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Care Services Program
$1,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Live Unlimited Program
$30,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Patient Assistance Program
$700,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Fresno
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$2,000.00
Association
Association, Second Quarter
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$2,000.00
Association
Association 2nd Quarter
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
Quarterly Newsletter
$5,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Kids Art Auction
$1,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Patient Assistance Program
$2,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Patient, Provider and Family
$2,000.00
Association
Healthcare Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$2,500.00
Association
Association of Montana
Summer Camp
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp
$2,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp
$2,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Newsletter
$2,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy
$2,000.00
Association
Association Quarter
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
Patient Education and
$1,000.00
Association
Awareness Program
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Black N Blue comedy event
$2,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Dayton
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Albany
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Wisconsin Muscle Summit
$8,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk MA
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Central Texas MuscleWalk
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Cincinnati
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk MN
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Green Bay
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Knoxville
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Omaha
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Jacksonville
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Hawaii
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Passport to a Cure Program
$1,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk St. George
$1,000.00
Association
Utah
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Miami
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Muscle Team
$3,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
3rd and 4th Quarter
$3,000.00
Association
Newsletter
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA of Maine MuscleWalk
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Kansas City
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Fourth Quarter Newsletter
$2,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Northwest
$1,000.00
Association
Indiana
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Tucson
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Houston
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Metro NY
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk NH
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Raleigh
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Northwest
$1,000.00
Association
Arkansas
Muscular Dystrophy
3rd Quarter Newsletter
$3,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Columbia
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
3rd Quarter Newsletter
$5,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Madison
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk FL
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Amarillo
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Manasota
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk MO
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Northern California Muscle
$8,000.00
Association
Summit
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Palm Beach
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk FL
$500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk WA
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
2nd Annual Nashville Muscle
$1,000.00
Association
Team Gala
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Hartford/New
$1,000.00
Association
Haven
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Colorado
$1,000.00
Association
Springs
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of San Diego
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Tri-Cities
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Chattanooga
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Greater Lehigh
$1,000.00
Association
Valley
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Midland
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Lubbock
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Orlando
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk South Alabama
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Peoria
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Baton Rouge
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater New
$1,000.00
Association
Orleans
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Central New
$1,000.00
Association
Jersey
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Central
$1,000.00
Association
Illinois
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Omaha
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Little Rock
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Baltimore
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Jackson
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Spokane
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk CA
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Rockford
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Newsletter
$1,500.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Tulsa
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Chicagoland
$1,000.00
Association
& Rockford
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Pittsburgh
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of San Antonio
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Tampa Bay
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Jacksonville
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Fort Wayne
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Salt Lake City
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Warwick RI
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Portland OR
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Eugene
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MuscleWalk: Portland
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of St. Louis
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Indianapolis
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Muscle Walk of Wichita
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Cleveland
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of
$1,000.00
Association
Springfield, MO
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Missoula
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Montana
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Twin Cities
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Charleston
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Greater
$1,000.00
Association
Milwaukee
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Los Angeles
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk LA
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Iowa City
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
Northeast PA Muscle Summit
$4,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Waterloo
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Des Moines
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of the Quad
$1,000.00
Association
Cities
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk of Denver
$1,000.00
Association
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk Western
$1,000.00
Association
Colorado
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA MuscleWalk VA
$1,000.00
Association
Museum of Science
Science Teacher Sabbatical
$66,980.00
Program
Museum of Science
Stars of STEM
$10,000.00
National Fabry Disease
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
Philadelphia Fabry Family
$2,200.00
Foundation
Meeting
National Fabry Disease
Family Assistance Program
$10,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
Conference and Camp Part 2
$70,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
NFDF 2016 Fabry Family
$15,000.00
Foundation
Educational Meetings
National Fabry Disease
Urgent and Unmet Needs
$40,000.00
Foundation
Program
National Fabry Disease
NFDF Core Program
$50,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
Fabry Conference and Camp
$50,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
NFDF Core Program
$50,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
Volunteer Match
$7,000.00
Foundation
National Gaucher
Patient Assistance CARE
$1,200,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Program
National Gaucher
Patient Assistance Program
$400,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
National Gaucher
Optimal Health Initiative &
$225,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Education/Awareness
National Kidney
South Bend Indiana Kidney
$2,500.00
Foundation
Program
National Kidney
Nutrition Program for Chronic
$1,000.00
Foundation
Kidney Disease, Diabetes and
Hypertension
National Kidney
Indianapolis Kidney Health
$1,500.00
Foundation
Awareness Program
National Kidney
Kidney Health Awareness
$1,500.00
Foundation
Program
National Kidney
Evansville Kidney Health
$1,500.00
Foundation
Awareness Program
National Kidney
Kidney Health Awareness
$1,500.00
Foundation
Program
National Kidney
Patient Education and
$77,000.00
Foundation
Awareness Program
National Kidney
NKF Clinical Bulletin on
$95,775.00
Foundation
Fabry Disease
National MPS Society
Family Support Programs
$30,000.00
National MPS Society
Symposium funding
$4,000.00
National MPS Society
National MPS Society
$24,000.00
Conferences
National MPS Society
National MPS Society
$24,000.00
Conferences
National MPS Society
Congress Sponsorships
$50,000.00
National MPS Society
National Run--National MPS
$10,000.00
Society
National Multiple
Volunteer Match
$4,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
National MS Society
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Nationwide Connection
Programs
National Multiple
Everyday Matters: Living Your
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Best Life with MS
National Multiple
Volunteer Match
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Information Resource Center
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
North American Education
$35,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Program
National Multiple
Knowledge is Power
$35,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Volunteer Match
$9,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Care Management Program
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Free From Falls
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Service Day
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Day at the Bay
$3,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Exercise/Wellness Program
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Scholarship Program
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
41st annual Dinner of
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
Champions
National Multiple
Bike MS: I Ride with MS
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Greater NW
National Multiple
Bike MS Cape Cod Getaway
$50,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
National MS Society E-
$75,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Communications Program
National Multiple
Muckfest MS Boston
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Dinner of Champions Seattle
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Bike MS Ride the Vineyard
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Walks MT
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Southern California &
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Nevada
National Multiple
MS Walks Pacific
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Boston
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Fast Forward Research
$75,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Showcase Meeting
National Multiple
Bike MS ``I Ride With MS'' NY
$350,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Phoenix
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
National MS Society Tykeson
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Fellows Conference
National Multiple
National MS Society
$50,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Leadership Conference
National Multiple
Bike MS Coastal Challenge Los
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Angeles
National Multiple
Dinner of Champions Las Vegas
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Are You What You Eat?:
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Studying Diet and
Supplements in Multiple
Sclerosis
National Multiple
National MS Society
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Leadership Conference
National Multiple
Live Fully, LiveWell:
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Discover Your Personal Path
to Living Your Best Life
with MS
National Multiple
Chicago Symposium
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Walks Greater Houston Area
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Moving Forward: Annual
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Meeting and Resource Fair
National Multiple
Bike MS NYC
$6,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Dallas On The Move Luncheon
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MuckFest MS
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Gala MS
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Bike MS: City to Shore Ride
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Crystal Boots & Silver Spurs
$2,400.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Bike MS--Northern California
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Auction Hawaii
$3,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Orange Country MS Research
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
Symposium
National Multiple
MS Walks Central Texas
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Ambassadors Ball
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Weekend Escape VA
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Cooling Shirts Gel Packs
$4,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Bike MS Willamette Valley
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Smarty Pants Trivia Night
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Spellbound on the Farm
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Bike MS
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS On the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Women Against MS (WAMS)
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Luncheon PA
National Multiple
Walk MS Jones Beach
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
On The Move Luncheon New
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Orleans
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon
$6,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS PA
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Women on the Move Program
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Greater Illinois
$50,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Knoxville
$750.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Michigan Chapter
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Rochester NY
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Denver
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Walks Minnesota, Dakotas
$15,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon MO
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Clarksville
$750.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Walk Indiana
$12,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Walks Iowa
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Wisconsin
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
20th Anniversary: Books for a
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Better Life Awards
National Multiple
MS Walks PA
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Chattanooga
$750.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS NJ
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS MO
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Northern California
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Walks Utah & Southern
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Idaho
National Multiple
Walk MS CT
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS OR
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Middle Tennessee
$750.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Kentucky
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS NY
$100,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS OH
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Jacksonville
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Arkansas
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS New Mexico
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Oklahoma
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Washington DC
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Cincinnati
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Memphis
$750.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Louisiana
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS San Diego
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Women on the Move Louisville
$1,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
On The Move Luncheon--Houston
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Atlanta
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS San Antonio
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
On the Move Luncheon
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Runway for MS--Fashion Show
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
Luncheon
National Multiple
Michigan Chapter's Annual
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
Meeting & Recognition
Breakfast
National Multiple
MS Walks Arizona
$24,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Alabama Mississippi
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
On The Move Luncheon--Baton
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
Rouge
National Multiple
Walk MS Ft. Lauderdale
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Women Against MS Luncheon TN
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Health Issues in Multiple
$9,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Sclerosis Hawaii
National Multiple
6th Annual Festival Hispano
$4,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MS Gala Luncheon
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
New Jersey Metro Chapter
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Volunteer Program
National Multiple
Annual Meeting and Education
$8,500.00
Sclerosis Society
Conferences
National Multiple
MuckFest MS Houston
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Women Against MS Luncheon
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society
(WAMS)
National Multiple
Fall Crush Nashville
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Walk MS Houston
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
FallCrush Nashville
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Symposium Educational
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society
Programs
National Multiple
MuckFest MS
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Team Finish MS at the
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Hartford Marathon
National Multiple
Bike MS Louisiana
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Bike MS: City to Shore Ride
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
PA
National Multiple
San Antonio Bike MS
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
New Hampshire Living Well
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society
with MS Conference
National Multiple
Chapter Annual Meeting and
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Education Program:
Contemporary Issues in MS
National Multiple
Moving Mountains for MS--
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Family Weekend Retreat
National Multiple
Relationship Matters
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
MOVING FORWARD
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Men with MS Elevation
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society
Conference
National Multiple
Children's Hope for
$3,800.00
Sclerosis Society
Understanding Multiple
Sclerosis
National Multiple
MS Research Nights
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society
National Multiple
Day of Discovery
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society
National Niemann-Pick
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Disease Foundation
National Niemann-Pick
Staying Strong as we
$50,000.00
Disease Foundation
Persevere in our Quest for a
Cure
National Organization
Volunteer Match
$9,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Organization
Volunteer Match
$6,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Organization
Running For Rare
$5,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Organization
NORD's Rare Diseases and
$50,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Orphan Products Breakthrough
Inc.
Summit
National Organization
Rare Impact Awards
$50,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Tay-Sachs &
Raising Awareness of
$1,100.00
Allied Diseases
Ashkenazi Jewish Genetic
Association, Inc.
Diseases
National Tay-Sachs &
Expand Family Support Through
$5,000.00
Allied Diseases
Technology
Association, Inc.
National Tay-Sachs &
Imagine & Believe
$10,000.00
Allied Diseases
Association, Inc.
National Tay-Sachs &
38th Annual Family Conference
$5,000.00
Allied Diseases
Association, Inc.
NCCN Foundation
NCCN Guidelines for Patients:
$25,000.00
Thyroid Cancer
NEHI
The Nick Littlefield Health
$25,000.00
Policy Fellowship
NEHI
Innovators in Health Awards
$25,000.00
Nephcure Foundation
11th International Podocyte
$3,000.00
Conference
Neurologic Disease
21st Fall MS Seminar--
$5,995.00
Foundation
Optimizing Management of MS
Neuropathy Action
General Patient Advocacy and
$2,500.00
Foundation
Organizational Support
Next Step Fund Inc.
FaceForward Campference and
$10,000.00
general operating support
North American Vascular
19th International Vascular
$10,000.00
Biology Organization
Biology Meeting
Inc.
North Shore Community
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Health Inc.
Northeast Business
Congress Sponsorships
$5,000.00
group on Health
Northeastern University
Allston Brighton College
$2,000.00
Scholarship
Northwest Animal Rights
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Network
Northwest Animal Rights
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Network
Norton Healthcare
Moonlight & Moonshine Gala
$5,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Norton Healthcare
Neuroscience Expo
$10,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Norton Healthcare
1-N-3 Gala
$5,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Operation Warm Inc.
Boston Warmth in Winter
$18,000.00
OptumHealth Education
Congress Sponsorships
$7,500.00
Oregon Health & Science
On the Horizon: Updates in
$9,930.00
University Foundation
Multiple Sclerosis
Pan Massachusetts
Volunteer Match
$11,000.00
Challenge
Pan Massachusetts
Volunteer Match
$11,000.00
Challenge
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$100,000.00
Foundation
for Thyroid Cancer
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$100,000.00
Foundation
for Thyroid Cancer
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Fund for
$100,000.00
Foundation
Thyroid Cancer
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$50,000.00
Foundation
for Thyroid Cancer
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$50,000.00
Foundation
for Homozygous Familial
Hypercholesterolemia
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$125,000.00
Foundation
for Homozygous Familial
Hypercholesterolemia
Patient Services Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$4,440,000.00
for Fabry, Pompe, MPS1, and
Gaucher Disease
Patient Services Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$2,000,000.00
Patient Services Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$6,500,000.00
Peer Health Exchange
Peer Health Exchange:
$5,000.00
Inc.
Empowering Boston Youth to
Make Healthy Decisions
Perkins School for the
Perkins eLearning: Enhancing
$20,000.00
Blind
Accessible Science Education
Phillips Brooks House
Community Program
$5,000.00
Association
Incorporated
Phoenix Children's
MPS patient meeting
$1,200.00
Hospital Foundation
Portland VA Research
PDX Patient Workshops
$3,150.00
Foundation Inc.
President and Fellows
Community Program
$20,000.00
of Harvard College
President and Fellows
Patient Assistance Program
$50,000.00
of Harvard College
Pro Player Foundation
Flavors of Austin
$5,000.00
Pro Player Foundation
Flavors of Austin
$5,000.00
Project Eden Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Project Just Because,
211 Domestic Abuse/Emergency
$10,000.00
Inc.
Program & Keep A Family Warm
Program
Race to Erase MS
Race to Erase MS--MS Forum
$10,000.00
Race to Erase MS
23rd Annual Race to Erase MS
$50,000.00
Read to a Child, Inc.
Community Program
$5,000.00
Read to a Child, Inc.
Community Program
$2,500.00
Resolve Community
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Counseling Center,
Inc.
Restore
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Rocky Mountain Multiple
KADEP (King Adult Day
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Enrichment Program) Annual
Winter Community Gathering
Rocky Mountain Multiple
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Annual Gala
Rocky Mountain Multiple
MS4MS Event
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Rocky Mountain Multiple
KADEP Annual Holiday
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Celebration
Rocky Mountain Multiple
Webinar Series
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Room to Grow
Community Program
$5,000.00
Runkle School Extended
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Day Program Inc.
S S Cosmas & Damian
Community Program
$2,500.00
Society Inc.
Saint Francis Hospital
International Symposium: The
$50,000.00
and Medical Center
Multiple Sclerosis Brain--
Foundation
Bridging the Gap
Salute the Ribbon
Meet, Greet n' Eat Luncheon
$1,000.00
Incorporated
``Opening Doors for Health
Care Access to Cancer Care''
Samaritans Inc.
Community Program
$25,000.00
Science Club For Girls
Community Program
$10,000.00
Inc.
Science Club For Girls
Catalyst Awards
$10,000.00
Inc.
Science From Scientists
STEM enrichment program for
$25,000.00
Inc.
Boston Public Schools
Science From Scientists
In-School Module-Based (ISMB)
$20,000.00
Inc.
STEM enrichment program
Science From Scientists
70th Annual Boston Citywide
$10,000.00
Inc.
Science Fair
Sharp Rees-Stealy
Congress Sponsorships
$5,000.00
Medical Group Sharp
Healthcare
Society for Inherited
North American Metabolic
$20,000.00
Metabolic Disorders
Academy
Society of Nuclear
SNMMI Patient Education Day
$5,000.00
Medicine and Molecular
Imaging
Special Olympics
Bio-Ball
$2,500.00
Massachusetts Inc.
St. Francis House
Community Program
$10,000.00
Stop Hunger Now, Inc.
Volunteer Match
$2,944.08
Strongwater Farm
Riding group for individuals
$7,500.00
Therapeutic Equestrian
living with MS
Center
Temple Beth Sholom [The
Patient Education and
$6,200.00
Tribe]
Awareness Program
Temple University
Allston Brighton College
$2,000.00
Scholarship
The Boston Home, Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
The Boston Home, Inc.
The Boston Home iPad InstaAid
$12,000.00
Program Expansion
The Boston Home, Inc.
The Boston Home Arts Program
$10,000.00
The Boston Home, Inc.
The Boston Home B.Fit
$18,000.00
Wellness Program
The Boston Home, Inc.
The Boston Home Resident
$10,000.00
Family Picnic
The Boston Home, Inc.
Finding Your Voice
$5,000.00
The Community Art
Teen Media Program
$15,000.00
Center
The Discovery Museums
Genzyme Discovery Science
$15,000.00
The Discovery Museums
Discovery Science Program
$15,000.00
The Forsyth Institute
Community Program
$10,000.00
The Greater Boston Food
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Bank Inc.
The Greater Boston Food
General Operating Support
$10,000.00
Bank Inc.
The Greater Boston Food
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Bank Inc.
The Jewish Community
Our Heritage and Our Health--
$1,250.00
Center of Greater
Ashkenazi Jewish Genetic
Kansas City
Disease and the Founder
Effect
The Jewish P.O.C.E.T.
Greater Chicago Jewish
$3,240.00
Festival
The Leukemia & Lymphoma
Light The Night Walk
$6,500.00
Society Inc.
The Life Sciences
Leadership Mid-Term Funding
$50,000.00
Foundation
for Educational Programs
The McCourt Foundation
Tour de South Shore
$10,000.00
The McCourt Foundation
McCourt Gala
$20,000.00
The McCourt Foundation
McCourt Foundation MS
$20,000.00
Educational Update
The Oak Clinic
Oak Clinic Acorn Run
$3,500.00
The Oak Clinic
Diamond Run
$5,000.00
The Posse Foundation
Community Program
$25,000.00
The Possible Project
The Possible Project's
$10,000.00
Powering Possibilities
Annual Gala
The Salvation Army
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Thompson Island Outward
Community Program
$10,000.00
Bound Education Center
Inc.
Thompson Island Outward
Islands Expedition Gala
$5,000.00
Bound Education Center
Inc.
Thompson Island Outward
Thompson Island 4K Trail Run
$5,000.00
Bound Education Center
Inc.
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer
Patient Education and
$15,000.00
Survivors'
Awareness Program
Association, Inc.
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer
19th International Thyroid
$35,000.00
Survivors'
Cancer Survivors' Conference
Association, Inc.
Tisch Multiple
Tisch MS Research Center
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Newsletter
Center of New York,
Inc.
Tisch Multiple
Future Without MS Gala
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Center of New York,
Inc.
Tisch Multiple
Future Without MS Gala
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Center of New York,
Inc.
Tisch Multiple
Tisch MS Research Center 19th
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Annual MS Patient Symposium
Center of New York,
Inc.
Triangle, Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Triangle, Inc.
Triangle's 45th Annual Spring
$5,000.00
Gala
Tri-State Multiple
Evansville Autumn Walk
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Association
Tri-State Multiple
Owensboro Autumn Walk
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Association
Tri-State Multiple
Evening of Excellence
$2,000.00
Sclerosis Association
Tri-State Multiple
Tri-State Multiple Sclerosis
$4,500.00
Sclerosis Association
Association Autumn Walks
Tutoring Plus of
STEAM Enrichment Programs
$7,500.00
Cambridge, Inc.
Tutoring Plus of
Community Program
$5,000.00
Cambridge, Inc.
U C San Diego
UCSD Regional MS Expositions
$50,000.00
Foundation
United Network for
Congress Sponsorship
$7,800.00
Organ Sharing
United Pompe Foundation
Duke Late Onset Pompe Patient
$19,000.00
Meeting
United Pompe Foundation
Pompe Patient Meeting
$19,000.00
United Pompe Foundation
General Operating Support
$50,000.00
United Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$60,000.00
United Way of Tri
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
County Inc.
United Way of Tri
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
County Inc.
United Way of Tri
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
County Inc.
United Way of Tri
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
County Inc.
University of
Student Success Program,
$200,000.00
Massachusetts
UMass Boston, College of
Foundation Inc.
Science and Mathematics
University of
Massachusetts STEM Summit
$5,000.00
Massachusetts
Foundation Inc.
University of Southern
Allston Brighton College
$4,000.00
California
Scholarship
Visiting Nurse
Heroes in Health Care Gala
$10,000.00
Association of Boston
& Affiliates
VNA Care Hospice Inc.
Community Program
$5,000.00
VNA Care Hospice Inc.
Community Program
$5,000.00
Wentworth Institute of
Allston Brighton College
$2,000.00
Technology
Scholarship
West End House Boys and
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Girls Club
West End House Boys and
Community Program
$25,000.00
Girls Club
West End House Boys and
Community Program
$25,000.00
Girls Club
WGBH
Pledge Night Sponsorship
$12,000.00
Whitehead Institute for
Whitehead Institute's CampBio
$10,000.00
Biomedical Research
Program
Women's Lunch Place
Meals Program
$35,000.00
Women's Lunch Place
General Operating Support
$10,000.00
Women's Lunch Place
Community Program
$10,000.00
World Unity Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
WriteBoston
Community Program
$10,000.00
Wylder Nation
Patient Education and
$15,000.00
Foundation
Awareness Program
Wylder Nation
3rd Annual Living Like a
$15,000.00
Foundation
Warrior Gala
YMCA of Greater Boston
Oak Square YMCA--Summer Day
$15,000.00
Camp Scholarships
ziMS Foundation
ziMS STRIKE DOWN MS Event
$5,000.00
Sponsorships and Charitable Donations
1st Jan 2017-31st Dec 2017
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to
supporting sponsorships for specific activities and initiatives of
healthcare organizations and institutions, independent medical or
professional societies, trade organizations and organized patient groups
to improve patient care and provide information to the medical and/or
patient communities. The goal of our charitable giving approach is to
fund general operational support for patient/disease organizations, or
program support for community-based organizations. Sanofi US and Genzyme
Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical
company.
Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a
group for a single activity; all applicants may be not be identified
above. ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during
2017 identified above. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that
may have been provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities
(e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
Recipient Name(s)
Activity Title
Funding Amount
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,317.50
Neurology
Academy of Managed Care
Congress Sponsorship
$1,000.00
Pharmacy A New Jersey
Nonprofit Corporation
Academy of Managed Care
Congress Sponsorship
$26,500.00
Pharmacy A New Jersey
Nonprofit Corporation
Accelerated Cure
2017 Leadership Summit
$15,000.00
Project
Acid Maltase Deficiency
Annual Fundraiser
$3,000.00
Association Inc.
Acid Maltase Deficiency
General Operating Support
$50,000.00
Association, Inc.
Alabama Kidney
Patient Education Conferences
$2,500.00
Foundation
Allergy & Asthma
Understanding Atopic
$75,000.00
Network Mothers of
Dermatitis Guide
Asthmatics, Inc.
Allergy & Asthma
Patient Activation
$200,000.00
Network Mothers of
Measurement Study
Asthmatics, Inc.
Allergy & Asthma
GlobalSkin Conference
$3,000.00
Network Mothers of
Asthmatics, Inc.
Allergy & Asthma
Severe Asthma Awareness
$150,000.00
Network Mothers of
Campaign
Asthmatics, Inc.
Allergy & Asthma
Project Access Initiative
$25,000.00
Network Mothers of
Asthmatics, Inc.
Allergy & Asthma
Allergy & Asthma Awareness
$25,000.00
Network Mothers of
Day
Asthmatics, Inc.
Allergy & Asthma
Allergy & Asthma Network
$25,000.00
Network Mothers of
Corporate Council 2017
Asthmatics, Inc.
Alliance for Patient
2018 Membership
$100,000.00
Access
Allston Village Main
Taste of Allston Event
$1,000.00
Streets, Inc.
American Academy of
Patient AccessDerm Program
$250,000.00
Dermatology
American Academy of
President's Summit on
$5,000.00
Dermatology
Diversity in Dermatology
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$17,800.00
Neurology
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$432,935.00
Neurology
American Academy of
Emerging Leaders Program
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Women Leading in Neurology
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
Program
American Academy of
Clinical Research Training
$50,000.00
Neurology Institute
Scholarship in Multiple
Sclerosis
American Academy of
Palatucci Advocacy Leadership
$50,000.00
Neurology Institute
Forum
American Academy of
Residents Scholarship Fund
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Fellows Scholarship Fund
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Brain Health Fair
$10,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Neurology Annual Meeting 2017
$208,632.90
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
Transforming Leaders Program
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
American Association
AAAS 2017 Annual Meeting--
$25,000.00
For The Advancement of
Family Science Days
Science
American Association of
Congress Sponsorship
$4,300.00
Clinical
Endocrinologists
American Association of
Congress Sponsorship
$18,500.00
Endocrine Surgeons
American Association of
Congress Sponsorship
$67,600.00
Neuromuscular &
Electrodiagnostic
Medicine
American Brain
Membership
$20,000.00
Coalition
American Cancer Society
25th Making Strides Against
$1,000.00
Breast Cancer Walk
American Cancer Society
Bicycles Battling Cancer 2017
$11,000.00
American Cancer Society
Bicycles Battling Cancer 2016
$11,000.00
American Cancer Society
10th Annual ACS CAN New
$10,000.00
Cancer Action Network
England Research Breakfast
American College of
Shared Decision Making
$125,000.00
Allergy, Asthma &
Toolkit for Severe Atopic
Immunology
Dermatitis
American College of
Severe Pediatric Asthma
$60,000.00
Allergy, Asthma &
Shared Decision Making
Immunology
Toolkit
American College of
Shared Decision Making
$125,000.00
Allergy, Asthma &
Toolkit for Severe Pediatric
Immunology
Asthma
American College of
Practice Management Center
$240,000.00
Allergy, Asthma &
Immunology
American College of
Patient Education Brochure
$31,000.00
Allergy, Asthma &
Immunology
American College of
Atopic Dermatitis Yardstick
$145,000.00
Allergy, Asthma &
Educational Manuscript
Immunology
American College of
Membership
$60,000.00
Chest Physicians
American College of
Congress Sponsorship
$2,000.00
Rheumatology
American Lung
Membership
$20,000.00
Association
American Lung
Asthma Care Coverage Project
$75,000.00
Association
American Optometric
Congress Sponsorship
$3,150.00
Association
American Red Cross of
Women Who Care Leadership
$5,000.00
Massachusetts
Breakfast
American Society of
ASCO Annual Meeting
$118,000.00
Clinical Oncology
American Society of
59th Annual ASH Convention
$224,300.00
Hematology
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$56,600.00
Hematology
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$3,300.00
Human Genetics
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
Nephrology
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$20,950.00
Nephrology
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$40,000.00
Nephrology
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
Transplant Surgeons
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$6,000.00
Transplant Surgeons
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
Transplantation
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
Transplantation
American Thoracic
Corporate Membership Program
$50,000.00
Society
American Thyroid
Congress Sponsorship
$11,950.00
Association
American Thyroid
Congress Sponsorship
$18,000.00
Association
American Transplant
Congress Sponsorship
$45,000.00
Congress
Americas Committee for
Congress Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Treatment and Research
in Multiple Sclerosis,
Inc.
ANERA (American Near
Annual Dinner
$5,000.00
East Refugee Aid)
Ann & Robert H. Lurie
MPS Patient and Family Day
$2,500.00
Children's Hospital of
Chicago
Arizona Myeloma Network
Cancer Patient & Caregivers
$3,250.00
Outreach & Seminar Series
Arthritis Foundation--
37th Annual Silver Ball Gala
$1,250.00
St. Louis, MO
Arthritis Foundation--
Arthritis Industry Forum
$25,000.00
Atlanta, GA
Arthritis Foundation--
Casino Night Gala
$2,500.00
St. Paul, MN
Arthritis Foundation--
Patient Engagement Program
$25,000.00
Atlanta, GA
Arthritis Foundation--
Taste of the Town Gala
$5,000.00
Hawaii Chapter
Arthritis Foundation--
Freedom of Movement Gala
$5,000.00
Chicago, IL
Arthritis Foundation--
Houston Bone Bash Gala
$10,000.00
Houston, TX
Arthritis Foundation--
PREOP Training and Engagement
$250,000.00
Atlanta, GA
Initiative
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis and
$250,000.00
Atlanta, GA
Jingle Bell Run
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$3,500.00
Green Bay, WI
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$5,000.00
Sacramento, CA
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$2,500.00
Irvine, CA
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$1,000.00
St. Paul, MN
Arthritis Foundation--
Ambassador Program
$125,000.00
Atlanta, GA
Arthritis Foundation--
Advocacy Summit
$25,000.00
Atlanta, GA
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$5,000.00
Boston, MA
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$5,000.00
Los Angeles, CA
Arthritis Foundation--
Patient Voice Accumulator
$50,000.00
Atlanta, GA
Project
Arthritis Foundation--
51st Annual Knowles Lecture
$7,500.00
Northern California
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$1,000.00
Hawaii Chapter
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$2,500.00
Chicago, IL
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$2,500.00
New England Chapter
Arthritis Foundation--
Walk to Cure Arthritis
$2,500.00
New England Chapter
Arthritis Foundation--
Evening of Honors Event
$5,000.00
New Jersey Chapter
ASCO
Congress Sponsorship
$5,495.00
Asembia Specialty
Asembia Specialty Pharmacy
$20,000.00
Pharmacy Summit LLC
Summit
Assistance Fund Inc
Patient Assistance Program
$10,000,000.00
for MS
Association For
Annual Conference
$7,000.00
Glycogen Storage
Disease
Association of
41st Annual APHON Conference
$6,850.00
Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology Nurses
Association of VA
13th Annual AVAHO Meeting
$10,000.00
Hematology/Oncology
Asthma and Allergy
Strengthening the Asthma
$200,000.00
Foundation of America
Community
Asthma and Allergy
Asthma Capitals Report
$125,000.00
Foundation of America
Asthma and Allergy
Supporting Patients and
$110,000.00
Foundation of America
Families Program
Asthma and Allergy
Research Project
$200,000.00
Foundation of America
Asthma and Allergy
Research Project
$120,000.00
Foundation of America
Barbara Ann Karmanos
Seventh Annual Prostate
$7,500.00
Cancer Institute
Cancer Advocacy Symposium
Bendcare
National Meeting
$10,310.00
Bendcare
Educational Conferences
$92,790.00
Berkshire Resource
People Living with MS that
$4,000.00
Project
have Impaired Vision Program
Berkshire Resource
Functional Ability Skills for
$3,500.00
Project
Everyday Living With
Multiple Sclerosis
Berkshire Resource
9th Annual Gala ``Let's Kiss
$5,000.00
Project
MS Goodbye''
Berkshire Resource
Coping With The Emotional
$4,000.00
Project
Aspects of MS Program
Big Brothers Big
MySTEM Program
$15,000.00
Sisters of Central
Mass Metrowest Inc.
Biomedical Science
Evening of Hope 2017
$100,000.00
Careers Program
Biomedical Science
Hope Scholarship 2017-2018
$7,500.00
Careers Program
Blue Cross Blue Shield
Blues National Summit
$15,975.00
Association
Boston Business
Boston Business Journal
$5,500.00
Journal, Inc.
Corporate Citizenship Awards
Boston Health Care For
Charitable Contribution--Life
$35,000.00
The Homeless Program,
Essentials for Homeless
Inc.
Patients
Boston Partners in
Power Lunch Program
$6,000.00
Education, Inc.
Boston Private Industry
2017 Corporate Contributions
$15,000.00
Council
Campaign
Boston Private Industry
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Council
Bottom Line
Boston STEM Success Program
$15,000.00
Boys & Girls Clubs of
Fall Flashback Festival
$5,000.00
Medford and Somerville
Inc.
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Bids for Kids Auction & Gala
$10,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Membership
$25,000.00
MetroWest
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
MetroWest
BPE
Boston Teacher Residency:
$15,000.00
Innovative STEM Educators
Program
Breakthrough Greater
Full STEAM Ahead Program
$15,000.00
Boston
Breakthrough Greater
Full STEAM Ahead Program
$10,000.00
Boston
California Life
CLSA Life Sciences Academy
$8,000.00
Sciences Association
California rheumatology
Annual Meeting
$50,000.00
Alliance
Cambridge Chamber of
Lead Sponsorship
$7,500.00
Commerce
Cambridge Health
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Alliance Foundation,
Inc.
Cambridge School
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Cambridgeport
2017 Summer Programs for
$5,000.00
Neighborhood
Magazine Beach Park Support
Association, Inc.
Can Do Multiple
2018 SKI for MS
$40,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
2017 MS Global
$10,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
2017 TAKE CHARGE Program
$40,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
8th Annual Can Do Day
$10,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
2017 CAN DO Programs
$50,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
Can Do On Demand Program
$60,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
2017 TAKE CHARGE and
$16,500.00
Sclerosis
JUMPSTART Programs
Can Do Multiple
2017 JUMPSTART Programs
$80,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
2017 Ski for MS
$30,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
2017 Online Programs
$45,000.00
Sclerosis
Can Do Multiple
Can Do MS eNews: Your Best
$5,000.00
Sclerosis
Life Update
Case Management Society
Annual Corporate Partnership
$5,500.00
of America
Case Management Society
CMSA 2017 Conference
$14,000.00
of America
Case Management Society
CMSA 27th Annual Conference &
$1,725.00
of America
Expo
Case Management Society
Focus on the Future--Keeping
$1,050.00
of New England
a Keen Eye on Tomorrow
Program
Case Management Society
Corporate Sponsorship
$1,250.00
of New England
Case Management Society
Case Management Society of
$1,000.00
of New England
New England Conference
Charles River Community
Mom and Baby Program
$15,000.00
Health
CheckOrphan
Rare Disease Page Sponsorship
$40,000.00
Chicago Rheumatism
Congress Sponsorship
$4,500.00
Society
Childrens Gaucher
Research Grant
$75,000.00
Research Fund
Children's Hospital
Milagros para Ninos 2017 Gala
$5,000.00
Corporation
Chronic Disease Fund,
Patient Assistance Program
$350,000.00
Inc. DBA Good Days
from CDF
Cincinnati Children's
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Hospital Medical
Center
Cleveland Clinic
Congress Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Educational Institute
Cleveland Clinic
5th Annual Basic & Clinical
$3,500.00
Educational Institute
Immunology for the Busy
Clinician
Clevleand Clinic
Scott Hamilton and Friends
$5,000.00
Ice Show and Gala
Coalition of State
CSRO State Society Key
$37,500.00
Rheumatology
Legislator Education Program
Organizations
Coalition of State
Coalition of State
$100,000.00
Rheumatology
Rheumatology Organizations
Organizations
Support
Community Boating, Inc.
Universal Access Program 2017
$15,000.00
Community Farms
Fresh Food Access
$15,000.00
Outreach
Community Farms
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Outreach
Community Oncology
Congress Sponsorship
$33,000.00
Alliance
Community Servings,
25th Anniversary Pie in the
$10,000.00
Inc.
Sky Fundraiser
Consortium of Multiple
North American Registry for
$200,000.00
Sclerosis Centers
Care and Research in
Multiple Sclerosis Support
Consortium of Multiple
2017 CMSC Annual Meeting
$100,000.00
Sclerosis Centers
Courageous Parents
Empowering parents and
$26,250.00
Network
caregivers of children with
MPS, Gaucher, Nieman-Pick
Cradles to Crayons
Ready for School Program
$20,000.00
Support
Cradles to Crayons
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Cure GM1 Incorporated
TORCH Award
$5,000.00
Cure Sanfilippo
TORCH Award
$5,000.00
Foundation
Cystic Fibrosis
Uncork the Cure
$15,000.00
Foundation
Cystic Fibrosis
Massachusetts CF Cycle for
$4,000.00
Foundation
Life Fundraiser
DEAF, Inc.--
Deaf-Accessible Medical Case
$10,000.00
Developmental
Management and Access to
Evaluation and
Health Program
Adjustment Facilities,
Inc.
Department of
Congress Sponsorship
$5,878.75
Pediatrics, Tufts
Medical Center
Dimock Community
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Foundation Inc.
Dimock Community
30th Anniversary Steppin' Out
$100,000.00
Foundation Inc.
for The Dimock Center
DPC Education Center
Fabry Disease Education
$27,500.00
Program
Eastern Allergy
Congress Sponsorship
$39,000.00
Conference
Emerald Necklace
14th Anniversary Party in the
$6,500.00
Conservancy, Inc.
Park
Emory University
JScreen Jewish Genetic
$216,089.00
Disease Education Initiative
Endocrine Society
Congress Sponsorship
$24,500.00
EveryLife Foundation
2017 RareVoice Awards
$30,000.00
for Rare Diseases
EveryLife Foundation
Emerging Technologies for
$15,000.00
for Rare Diseases
Rare Diseases: Clinical &
Regulatory Case Studies and
Approval Pathways
EveryLife Foundation
Rare on the Road Leadership
$30,000.00
for Rare Diseases
Tour
EveryLife Foundation
TORCH Award Donations
$5,000.00
for Rare Diseases
Fabry Support &
FSIG Fun Run/Walk
$1,500.00
Information Group
Fabry Support &
General Operating Support
$100,000.00
Information Group
Fabry Support &
FSIG Annual Family Conference
$1,000.00
Information Group
Fabry Support &
2017 FSIG Expert Fabry
$50,000.00
Information Group
Conference
Family Promise
Fundraising Event
$2,500.00
Metrowest, Inc.
Florida Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
Rheumatology
Food For Free
A Nutrition Program for
$5,000.00
Committee, Inc.
Seniors and People with
Disabilities
Foundation of the
Newsletter Support
$6,500.00
Consortium of MS
Centers
Foundation of the
Annual Meeting
$5,450.00
Consortium of MS
Centers
Foundation of the
Research Grant
$42,000.00
Consortium of MS
Centers
Foundation of the
Multiple Sclerosis Workforce
$32,000.00
Consortium of MS
of the Future 2018:Medical
Centers
Student Research
Scholarships
Foundation of the
NARCOMS NOW Patient Quarterly
$33,583.00
Consortium of MS
Magazine
Centers
Foundation of the
Congress Sponsorship
$432,000.00
Consortium of MS
Centers
Framingham Townwide Pto
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Council
Franciscan Hospital For
Adaptive Sports Program
$15,000.00
Children, Inc.
Friends of Children
Celebrating Fatherhood Brunch
$2,500.00
Trust Fund, Inc.
Friends of Resiliency
Resiliency's Academic Support
$10,000.00
For Life, Inc.
Fundacion de Esclerosis
Hurricane Relief
$3,334.00
Multiple de Puerto
Rico
Generation Citizen,
Massachusetts Spring 2017
$6,000.00
Inc.
Civics Day
Genetic Alliance, Inc.
30th Anniversary Conference
$30,000.00
and Celebration
Genetic Alliance, Inc.
30th Anniversary Conference
$30,000.00
and Celebration
Genetic Disease
Fabry disease (dbFGP) Support
$100,000.00
Foundation
Georgia Chapter of the
Georgia AAP: Pediatrics on
$5,000.00
American Academy of
the Parkway
Pediatrics
Georgia Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$2,000.00
Rheumatology
Georgia Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$8,000.00
Rheumatology
Girl Scouts of Eastern
Girls Building Self-eSTeEM
$15,000.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Program
Global Academy For
Congress Sponsorship
$55,000.00
Medical Education,
Inc.
Global Alliance for
Membership
$50,000.00
Patient Access
Global Genes
RARE Tribute to Champions of
$25,000.00
Hope
Global Genes
RARE Patient Advocacy Summit
$25,000.00
Global Genes
Membership
$25,000.00
Greater Boston Chamber
2017 Annual Meeting
$10,000.00
of Commerce
Habitat For Humanity
High Heels and Hard Hats
$10,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Auction and Gala
Worcester, Inc.
Habitat For Humanity
Home Renovation Build Support
$20,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester, Inc.
Hadassah Greater
Our Heritage and Our Health--
$900.00
Detroit
Jewish Genetic Disorders and
Founder Effect Program
Health Care For All,
Public Education Campaign
$15,000.00
Inc.
Health Literacy Media
MTC Educational Program
$50,000.00
Hearts & Noses Hospital
Ongoing Bedside Hospital
$15,000.00
Clown Troupe, Inc.
Clown Visits Program
Hematology Oncology
Congress Sponsorship
$7,500.00
Managers of New York,
Inc.
Holy Name Health Care
2017 MS Awards Reception
$2,500.00
MS Center
Holy Name Medical
20th Annual Spring Fling to
$2,500.00
Center
Benefit MS
Hope and Comfort, Inc.
Hope and Comfort Program
$5,000.00
Support
Horizons for Homeless
19th Annual Women's Breakfast
$5,000.00
Children
Houston Food Bank
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Imedex, LLC
Congress Sponsorship
$94,778.35
International Institute
Healthcare Navigation for
$15,000.00
of New England
Refugees Program
International Institute
2017 Golden Door Award Gala
$10,000.00
of New England
International Institute
Transport Costs for Bicycles
$100.00
of New England
for Refugee Families
International
20th Anniversary IOMSN Dinner
$30,000.00
Organization of
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International
2017 MS Perspectives Digital
$40,000.00
Organization of
Magazine
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International Society
5th Glycoproteinoses
$16,650.00
For Mannosidosis &
International Conference
Related Disease Inc.
Jewish Genetic Disease
General Operating Support
$5,000.00
Consortium
Knect365 US, Inc.
Battle of the Biotech Bands
$5,000.00
Fundraiser
Kometa Serbian
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Childrens Program Inc.
Life Science Cares,
Life Science Cares Impact
$10,000.00
Inc.
Breakfast
Light of Life
Light of Life Foundation 2017
$40,000.00
Foundation
Activities
Little Brothers/Friends
Medical Escort/Transportation
$7,500.00
of the Elderly
Program
Little Miss Hannah
Vegas Cares About Rare Kids
$5,000.00
Foundation
5K
Little Miss Hannah
Vegas Cares About Rare Kids
$2,500.00
Foundation
5K
LUGPA
LUGPA Annual Meeting
$10,000.00
Lycee International De
ISB Benefit Gala
$8,000.00
Boston International
School of Boston Inc.
MagellanRx Management
Congress Sponsorship
$7,500.00
March of Dimes
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Foundation
March of Dimes
Boston March for Babies
$25,000.00
Foundation
Fundraiser
March of Dimes
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Foundation
Margaret Fuller
Youth Development Programs
$15,000.00
Neighborhood House
Mass Insight Education
STEM and English Program
$15,000.00
and Research Institute
Inc.
Massachusetts Bay
STEM Mentor Program
$40,000.00
Community College
Foundation
Massachusetts
Patient Advocacy Summit
$10,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Massachusetts
Congress Sponsorship
$25,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Massachusetts
MassBio Annual Meeting
$10,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Massachusetts
Rare Disease Day 2017
$1,000.00
Biotechnology Council
Massachusetts
2017 Champions for
$3,500.00
Biotechnology
Biotechnology Awards
Education Foundation,
Inc.
Massachusetts
BioTeach Program
$50,000.00
Biotechnology
Education Foundation,
Inc.
Massachusetts
Life Sciences Workforce 2017,
$3,500.00
Biotechnology
2nd Annual Conference
Education Foundation,
Inc.
Massachusetts College
Sanofi Genzyme Biotchnology
$7,000.00
of Pharmacy and Health
College Scholarship
Sciences
Massachusetts State
Advancing Science & Health
$50,000.00
Science and
Education Programs
Engineering Fair, Inc.
Mayo Clinic
Congress Sponsorship
$2,000.00
MedImpact Healthcare
Congress Sponsorship
$8,000.00
Systems, Inc.
MetroWest Chamber of
Board of Directors Luncheon
$250.00
Commerce
Metrowest Free Medical
Access to Women's Health Care
$15,000.00
Program Inc.
for the Uninsured
Mid America MS
Eat Bid Laugh 6 Event
$10,000.00
Achievement Center
Mid America MS
Race to Nowhere 19
$5,000.00
Achievement Center
Milwaukee Synagogue for
Education Program
$5,000.00
Russian Jews:
Congregation Moshiach
Now Inc.
Milwaukee Synagogue for
Education Program
$5,000.00
Russian Jews:
Congregation Moshiach
Now Inc.
MS Bright Spots of Hope
MS Evening of Hope
$2,500.00
MS Cure Fund
Patient Education Programs
$25,000.00
MS Cure Fund
Late Summer Education
$25,000.00
Programs
MS Cure Fund
Lifestyle Management Programs
$15,000.00
Spring 2017
MS Cure Fund
2017 Spring MS Health Fair
$1,500.00
MS HOPE FOR A CURE INC.
2017 MS Hope Day
$10,000.00
MS Views And News Inc.
MS Neuro TV
$35,000.00
MS Views And News Inc.
Living Beyond MS--Effective
$20,000.00
Communication with Your
Healthcare Team
MS Views And News Inc.
The Compass To Care Program
$73,550.00
MS Views And News Inc.
2017 Display Sponsorship
$10,000.00
request
MS Views And News Inc.
Educational Programs
$23,825.00
MS Views And News Inc.
Educational Programs
$25,000.00
MS Views And News Inc.
2nd Annual Champions Tackling
$10,000.00
MS Awards Dinner Gala
MS Views And News Inc.
MS Views and News 2017
$1,000.00
Bowlathon
Multiple Myeloma Cure
Defeat Multiple Myeloma run/
$5,000.00
Seeker Society
walk
Multiple Sclerosis
Navigating MS: Optimizing
$73,125.00
Association of America
Multiple Sclerosis
MSAA MRI Access Fund
$125,000.00
Association of America
Multiple Sclerosis
MSAA Improving Lives Benefit
$2,500.00
Association of America
2017
Multiple Sclerosis
Educational Programs
$60,000.00
Association of America
Multiple Sclerosis
Understanding MS Progression
$39,000.00
Association of America
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Fest
$10,000.00
Center of Georgia
Multiple Sclerosis
Health, Hope & Hops
$7,000.00
Center of Georgia
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Focus' EmpowerSource
$35,000.00
Foundation
Newsleter
Multiple Sclerosis
Mind & Mobility
$5,000.00
Foundation
Multiple Sclerosis
Homecare Assistance Grant
$20,000.00
Foundation
Program
Multiple Sclerosis
Assistive Technology Program
$30,000.00
Foundation
Multiple Sclerosis
2017 National MS Education
$30,000.00
Foundation
and Awareness Month
Multiple Sclerosis
30th Anniversary Gala
$5,000.00
Foundation
``Bourbon & Blues''
Multiple Sclerosis
2017 Mission Steps Walks & MS
$8,000.00
Resources of Central
Awareness Days
New York, Inc.
Multiple Sclerosis
MS Awareness Expo
$1,000.00
Society of Colorado
Springs, Inc.
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Pittsburg
h, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Denver,
CO
Muscular Dystrophy
5th Annual Muscle Summit
$6,000.00
Association--Harrisbur
g, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Muscle Summit
$8,000.00
Association--Broomall,
PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Shrevepor
t, LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Deerfield
Beach, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Tallahass
ee, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Grand
Rapids, MI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Fort
Wayne, IN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Metairie,
LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Deerfield
Beach, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Los
Angeles, CA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Shrevepor
t, LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Harrisbur
g, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Allentown
, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$2,000.00
Association--Urbana,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Billings,
MT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--San
Diego, CA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Cincinnat
i, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Portland,
MA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Spokane,
WA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Salt Lake
City, UT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Louisvill
e, KY
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Wilmingto
n, NC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Worthingt
on, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Dallas,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Albany,
NY
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Greensbor
o, NC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Columbus,
OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Albany,
NY
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Cincinnat
i, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Portland,
OR
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscular Dystrophy Summer
$2,000.00
Association--North
Camp Program
Haven, CT
Muscular Dystrophy
Montana Muscular Dystrophy
$2,000.00
Association--Billings,
Association Summer Camp 2017
MT
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Limb Girdle Muscular
$900,000.00
Association--Chicago,
Dystrophy (LGMD) Genetic
IL
Testing Program
Muscular Dystrophy
2017 Summer Camp
$2,500.00
Association--Spokane,
WA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Okemos,
MI
Muscular Dystrophy
2017 MDA Summer Camp of
$2,500.00
Association--Tulsa, OK
Oklahoma
Muscular Dystrophy
National Education and Impact
$400,000.00
Association - Chicago,
Partner
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Newsletter
$2,000.00
Association--Columbia,
SC
Muscular Dystrophy
2017 MDA Summer Camp
$2,500.00
Association--Cincinnat
i, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp
$5,000.00
Association--Mountlake
Terrace, WA
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp
$5,000.00
Association--Denver,
CO
Muscular Dystrophy
2017 MDA Summer Camp
$2,500.00
Association--Shrevepor
t, LA
Muscular Dystrophy
2017 MDA Summer Camp
$8,000.00
Association--Dallas,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
MDA Summer Camp
$2,500.00
Association--Bolingbro
ok, IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Denver,
CO
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Denver,
CO
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--North
Haven, CT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Maywood,
NJ
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Indianapo
lis, IN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Urbana,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Louisvill
e, KY
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Edina, MN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Metairie,
LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Reston,
VA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Little
Rock, AR
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Springfie
ld, MO
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Fort
Myers, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Bolingbro
ok, IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Green
Bay, WI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Edina, MN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Dallas,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Quarterly Newsletter
$3,000.00
Association--Westbrook
, ME
Muscular Dystrophy
TORCH Award
$5,000.00
Association--Midland,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--St.
Petersburg, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
2017 MDA Muscle Walk of
$1,000.00
Association--Jacksonvi
Jacksonville
lle, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Charlotte
, NC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Towson,
MD
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,500.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk & Fire Truck Pull
$1,000.00
Association--Austin,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,500.00
Association--Sacrament
o, CA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Fort
Wayne, IN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Birmingha
m, AL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Edina, MN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Salt Lake
City, UT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Lafayette
, LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Spring Newsletter
$1,500.00
Association--Columbia,
SC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Memphis,
TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Allentown
, PA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Cedar
Rapids, IA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Lafayette
, LA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Maryland
Heights, MO
Muscular Dystrophy
1st Quarter Newsletter
$1,000.00
Association--North
Haven, CT
Muscular Dystrophy
Second Quarter Newsletter
$1,500.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Cleveland
, OH
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Oklahoma
City, OK
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Wilmingto
n, NC
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--San
Antonio, TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Scottsdal
e, AZ
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Montgomer
y, AL
Muscular Dystrophy
First Quarter Newsletter
$2,500.00
Association--Chicago,
IL
Muscular Dystrophy
4th Quarter Newsletter
$1,500.00
Association--North
Haven, CT
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--El Paso,
TX
Muscular Dystrophy
Summer Camp 2017
$8,000.00
Association--Cypress,
CA
Muscular Dystrophy
1st Quarter Newsletter
$3,000.00
Association--North
Haven, CT
Muscular Dystrophy
Kids Art Auction
$2,000.00
Association--Lake
Mary, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$2,000.00
Association--Westborou
gh, MA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Westborou
gh, MA
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Brentwood
, TN
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Lake
Mary, FL
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Brookfiel
d, WI
Muscular Dystrophy
Muscle Walk
$1,000.00
Association--Wichita,
KS
Muscular Dystrophy
MA and RI Newsletters
$10,000.00
Association--Westborou
gh, MA
Museum of Fine Arts
Membership
$20,000.00
Museum of Science
Sanofi Genzyme Teacher
$66,980.00
Sabbatical Program 2017-2018
Museum of Science
Stars of STEM 2017
$10,000.00
National Bone Marrow
Caregiver Webinar Series
$2,500.00
Transplant Link
National Comprehensive
Membership
$210,000.00
Cancer Network
National Eczema
Be Well, Mind + Body, Eczema
$100,000.00
Association
Awareness Month Campaign
National Eczema
NEA Educational Webcast for
$15,000.00
Association
Patients & Caregivers
National Eczema
Leaders in Eczema Forum
$100,000.00
Association
Series
National Eczema
Health Care Provider
$85,000.00
Association
Engagement Program
National Eczema
Patient Engagement Program
$150,000.00
Association
National Eczema
Ambassadors Program
$100,000.00
Association
National Fabry Disease
Fabry Family Conference
$6,500.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
2017 Urgent and Unmet Needs
$40,000.00
Foundation
Program
National Fabry Disease
2017 Annual Educational
$50,000.00
Foundation
Conference and Fabry Family
Camp
National Fabry Disease
Annual Conference
$70,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
2018 NFDF Core Program Grant
$100,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
Fabry Family Meeting
$3,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
Family Meeting
$5,000.00
Foundation
National Fabry Disease
2017 Family Assistance
$10,000.00
Foundation
Program
National Gaucher
CARE Programs
$800,000.00
Foundation
National Gaucher
Optimal Health Initiative &
$900,000.00
Foundation
Education and Awareness
National Gaucher
CARE Programs
$1,500,000.00
Foundation
National Gaucher
Optimal Health Initiative &
$400,000.00
Foundation
Education and Awareness
National Kidney
Kidney Walk
$25,000.00
Foundation
National Kidney
Spring Clinical Meeting
$3,500.00
Foundation
National Kidney
Kidney Health Risk Assessment
$1,500.00
Foundation of Indiana
Program
National Kidney
Kidney Health Risk Assessment
$1,500.00
Foundation of Indiana
Program
National Kidney
Kidney Health Risk Assessment
$1,500.00
Foundation of Indiana
Program
National Kidney
Kidney Health Risk Assessment
$1,500.00
Foundation of Indiana
Program
National Kidney
Kidney Walk
$1,000.00
Foundation of Michigan
National Kidney
31st Annual Gift of Life Gala
$2,500.00
Foundation of Eastern
Missouri, Metro East
National MPS Society
2018 International MPS
$100,000.00
Symposium
National MPS Society
National MPS Society Gala
$134.00
Silent Auction
National MPS Society
National MPS Society Family
$7,500.00
Conference Scholarships
National MPS Society
31st Annual Family Conference
$35,000.00
National MPS Society
National MPS Society 2017 Run/
$20,000.00
Walk Program
National Multiple
Free From Falls
$1,150.00
Sclerosis Society--
Southern California &
Nevada Chapter
National Multiple
Champions on the Move
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Upstate New York
Chapter
National Multiple
Spellbound In the Vineyard
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Upstate New York
Chapter
National Multiple
2016 Annual Meeting
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Greater Delaware
Valley Chapter
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Greater Illinois
Chapter
National Multiple
Life-Changing Breakthroughs:
$65,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
MS Society Impact Series
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
Leadership Conference 2017
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
The Tykeson Fellows
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Conference
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
Moving Mountains for MS:
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Family Weekend Retreat
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Crystal Boots and Silver
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Spurs
Kentucky-Southeast
Indiana Chapter
National Multiple
Nationwide MS Navigator
$50,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Services
Colorado-Wyoming
Chapter
National Multiple
On the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Gateway Area Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS--Lanyard Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Jersey Metro Chapter
National Multiple
On the Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
South Central Chapter
National Multiple
Annual Meeting & Day of
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society--Mid
Discovery
Florida Chapter
National Multiple
Volunteer Program
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Jersey Metro Chapter
National Multiple
Fall Crush Knoxville
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--Mid
South Chapter
National Multiple
Fall Crush Knoxville
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--Mid
South Chapter
National Multiple
Women Against MS Luncheon
$3,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
Challenge Walk MS
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
On the Move Baltimore
$3,500.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
Ambassadors Ball
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
Hispanic Outreach Initiative
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
MS Scholarship Program
$15,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
2017 Weekend Escape
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
2017 Dinner of Champions
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Reno Chapter
National Multiple
Everyday Matters: Living Your
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Best Life with MS
York City Chapter
National Multiple
International Progressive MS
$122,249.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Alliance Industry Forum
York City Chapter
National Multiple
2017 On The Move Luncheon
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
Books for a Better Life
$20,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Awards
York City Chapter
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon
$6,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
York City Chapter
National Multiple
National ``Living with MS''
$600,000.00
Sclerosis Society--New
Event
York City Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS 2017
$25,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
Festival Hispano
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
MS Gala Luncheon 2017
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
South Florida Chapter
National Multiple
MS Walk West Virginia
$7,500.00
Sclerosis Society--
Central Virginia
Chapter
National Multiple
Patient Assistance Program
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Indiana State Chapter
National Multiple
Walk MS
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Society--
Long Island Chapter
National Multiple
Women on the Move Luncheon &
$1,250.00
Sclerosis Society--
Fashion Show
Ohio Valley Chapter
National Multiple
2017 MS Neurology Dinner
$5,000.00
Slcerosis Society--
Pacific South Coast
Chapter
National Multiple
Challenge Walk MS
$2,500.00
Slcerosis Society--
Pacific South Coast
Chapter
National Niemann-Pick
Reinvention of The National
$75,000.00
Disease Foundation
Niemann Pick Disease
Foundation (NNPDF)
National Organization
Rare Disease Day Fundraiser
$10,000.00
for Rare Disorders
National Organization
2017 Rare Diseases and Orphan
$50,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Product Breakthrough Summit
Inc.
National Organization
Running for Rare
$5,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Organization
2017 Corporate Council
$25,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Organization
2017 Rare Impact Awards
$50,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Organization
Undiagnosed Diseases Network
$5,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Fund
Inc.
National Organization
Orphan Drug Act Advocacy
$75,000.00
for Rare Disorders,
Inc.
National Parkinson
Moving Day--Boston 2016
$1,000.00
Foundation
National Society of
36th Annual Education
$2,800.00
Genetic Counselors
Conference
National Tay-Sachs &
Imagine & Believe
$20,000.00
Allied Diseases
Association, Inc.
National Tay-Sachs &
Raising Awareness of
$1,100.00
Allied Diseases
Ashkenazi Jewish Genetic
Association, Inc.
Diseases
National Tay-Sachs &
39th Annual Family Conference
$10,000.00
Allied Diseases
Association, Inc.
National Tay-Sachs &
Family Support Resource Video
$5,000.00
Allied Diseases
Series and Podcasts
Association, Inc.
NEHI
NEHI's Innovators in Health
$25,000.00
Awards
NEHI
The Nick Littlefield Health
$25,000.00
Policy Fellowship
Neuroscience Centers of
How to Improve Physical and
$6,640.00
Florida Foundation,
Psychological Health Program
Inc.
Neuroscience Centers of
Maintaining Intimacy with
$3,895.72
Florida Foundation,
Multiple Sclerosis
Inc.
Next Step Fund, Inc.
Summer Campference Program
$10,000.00
Northeastern University
Biotchnology College
$1,000.00
Scholarship
Northern California
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Rheumatology Society
Northern New England
Congress Sponsorship
$2,000.00
Clinical Oncology
Society
Operation Warm, Inc.
Boston Coat Program
$20,000.00
Operation Warrior
Wounded Military Event
$798.00
Wishes
Pan Massachusetts
Pan Mass Challenge
$11,000.00
Challenge
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$460,000.00
Foundation
Patient Access Network
Patient Assistance Program
$200,000.00
Foundation
Patient Services, Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$481,250.00
Patient Services, Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$2,902,500.00
Patient Services, Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$237,500.00
Patient Services, Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$818,750.00
Patient Services, Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$650,000.00
Patient Services, Inc.
Patient Assistance Program
$5,960,000.00
PCMA Pharmaceutical
Congress Sponsorship
$60,000.00
Care Management
Association
Pediatric Endocinology
Congress Sponsorship
$6,200.00
Nursey Society
Pediatric Endocrine
Congress Sponsorship
$27,500.00
Society
Peer Health Exchange,
Peer Health Exchange Program
$5,000.00
Inc.
Pennsylvania
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Rheumatology Society
Perkins School for the
Enhancing Accessible Science
$20,000.00
Blind
and Technology Education
eLearning Program
Philadelphia Rheumatism
5th Annual Ralph Schumacher
$2,250.00
Society
Lecture
Phillips Brooks House
Bridges Workshop
$3,000.00
Association
Incorporated
President and Fellows
The Family Van Health Clinic
$50,000.00
of Harvard College
Pro Player Foundation
Flavors of Austin Fundraiser
$5,000.00
Project HOPE
Project Hope Gala
$10,000.00
Project Just Because,
211 Domestic Abuse/Emergency
$10,000.00
Inc.
Program & Keep A Family Warm
Program
Prostate Cancer Academy
Proscate Cancer Academy 2017
$7,500.00
Race to Erase MS
24th Annual Race to Erase MS
$15,000.00
Race to Erase MS
Race to Erase MS
$10,000.00
Radiological Society of
103rd Scientific Assembly and
$3,500.00
North America
Annual Meeting
Rare Disease United
14th Annual World Symposium--
$20,000.00
Foundation
Lysosomal Diseases
Rare Genomics Institute
Patient Advoacy Leadership
$25,000.00
Awards and Rare Disease
Patient Advocate Teaching
Modules
Rare New England, Inc.
Improving Health Care
$3,000.00
Experiences in the Rare
Disease Community
Read to a Child, Inc.
Read to a Child's Lunchtime
$5,000.00
Reading Program
Resolve Community
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Counseling Center,
Inc.
Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$2,000.00
Association of IOWA
Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Association of
Minnesota and the
Dakotas
Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Association of Nevada
Rheumatology Nurses
Immunology Webinar
$50,000.00
Society
Rheumatology Nurses
10th Rheumatology Nurses
$3,443.91
Society
Society Annual Conference
Rise Against Hunger
Volunteer Match
$2,944.08
Rise Against Hunger
Volunteer Match
$2,944.08
Rocky Mountain Multiple
MS4MS Fundraising Program
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Rocky Mountain Multiple
2017 Webinar Program Series
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Rocky Mountain Multiple
2016 Fall Education Summit
$5,000.00
Sclerosis Center
Samaritans, Inc.
Youth Suicide Prevention
$25,000.00
Services
Saunders Health
2017 Night of Lights
$2,500.00
Services Foundation
Saunders Health
2016 Night of Lights
$1,000.00
Services Foundation
Save One Life, Inc.
Panel Discussion Donation
$250.00
Scholarship America,
TORCH Awards Program
$11,600.00
Inc.
Scholarship America,
Scholarship Program
$39,900.00
Inc.
Science Club For Girls,
10th Annual Catalyst Awards
$10,000.00
Inc.
Science Club For Girls,
STEMinistas Program Expansion
$10,000.00
Inc.
Society of Nuclear
Congress Sponsorship
$1,250.00
Medicine and Molecular
Imaging
Society of Nuclear
Congress Sponsorship
$2,200.00
Medicine and Molecular
Imaging
Society of Nuclear
Congress Sponsorship
$7,790.00
Medicine and Molecular
Imaging
Society of Nuclear
Congress Sponsorship
$1,800.00
Medicine and Molecular
Imaging
Special Olympics
Bio-Ball 2017
$2,500.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Sportsmen's Tennis &
Academic Enrichment Program
$12,500.00
Enrichment Center
St. Francis House
Triage and Coordinated Care
$10,000.00
for the Poor and Homeless
Population
St. Mary's Center for
[emailprotected] Plus Program
$15,000.00
Women and Children
State of Texas
Congress Sponsorships
$20,000.00
Association of
Rheumatologists
Temple Beth Sholom [The
Jewish Genetic Disease
$7,000.00
Tribe]
Awareness Screening
The American
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Association of
Clinical
Endocrinologists
(AACE)
The American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Hematology
The Boston Home, Inc.
The Boston Home Arts Program
$5,000.00
The Boston Home, Inc.
Socialization & Wellness
$9,000.00
Program
The Boston Home, Inc.
Resident & Family 2017 Event
$10,000.00
Series
The Boston Home, Inc.
135 Anniversary Event
$10,000.00
The Community Art
Teen Media Program
$15,000.00
Center
The Community Art
General Operating Support
$10,000.00
Center
The Forsyth Institute
Mobile Dental Program Service
$10,000.00
The Greater Boston Food
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Bank, Inc.
The Leukemia & Lymphoma
Light The Night Event
$10,000.00
Society Eastern PA
Chapter
The Leukemia & Lymphoma
Light The Night Event
$20,000.00
Society, Inc.
The MAGIC Foundation
23rd Annual Convention
$5,000.00
The McCourt Foundation
Tour de South Shore--Bike/
$7,500.00
Walk
The McCourt Foundation
MS Educational Program Update
$20,000.00
The Menkes Foundation
The Rare Disease Film
$3,000.00
Festival
The MS Center of St
12th Annual Trivia and
$15,000.00
Louis
Auction Benefit
The Oak Clinic
Wellness Thursday Nutrition
$21,000.00
for MS Seminars
The Oak Clinic
2017 Oak Clinic Acorn Run
$3,500.00
The Oak Clinic
2017 Diamond Run for MS
$5,000.00
The Oak Clinic
Wellness Wednesday Nutrition
$14,000.00
for MS Seminars
The Posse Foundation
STEM Posse Program
$25,000.00
The Possible Project
Powering Possibilities Gala
$10,000.00
The Regents of the
Rare Disease Symposium
$10,000.00
University of
California, San
Francisco
The University of Texas
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
MD Anderson Cancer
Center
Thompson Island Outward
Connections--Science
$15,000.00
Bound Education
Education for Boston Public
Center, Inc.
School Students
Thompson Island Outward
Thompson Island 4K Trail Run
$5,000.00
Bound Education
Center, Inc.
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer
Production and Distribution
$15,000.00
Survivors'
of Educational Handbooks and
Association, Inc.
Materials
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer
20th International Thyroid
$35,000.00
Survivors'
Cancer Survivors' Conference
Association, Inc.
Tisch Multiple
2017 Future Without MS Gala
$10,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Center of New York,
Inc.
Tisch Multiple
Healing MS: Online Newsletter
$8,000.00
Sclerosis Research
Center of New York,
Inc.
Tri-State Multiple
Owensboro Autumn Walk
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Association
Tri-State Multiple
Evansville Autumn Walk
$2,500.00
Sclerosis Association
Tutoring Plus of
STEAM Enrichment Programs
$7,500.00
Cambridge, Inc.
UMASS Dartmouth
Allston Brighton College
$2,000.00
Scholarship
United Arizona
Congress Sponsorship
$45,000.00
Rheumatology Alliance
United Network For
Congress Sponsorship
$8,400.00
Organ Sharing
United Pompe Foundation
Reception and Early Onset
$30,000.00
Pompe Patient Meeting
United Pompe Foundation
Reception and Early Onset
$45,000.00
Pompe Patient Meeting
United Pompe Foundation
General Operating Support
$50,000.00
United Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$130,000.00
United Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$140,000.00
United States Bone and
General Program Support
$46,250.00
Joint Initiative, NFP
United States Bone and
The Burden of Musculoskeletal
$25,000.00
Joint Initiative, NFP
Diseases in the United
States
United States Bone and
Membership
$20,000.00
Joint Initiative, NFP
United States Bone and
Patient Education Programs
$80,000.00
Joint Initiative, NFP
University Hospitals
40th Anniversary Bone Marrow
$5,000.00
Health System, Inc.
Transplant Celebration
University Neurology,
2017 NYSMSC Annual Meeting
$5,000.00
Inc.
University of
Sanofi Genzyme Biotchnology
$3,000.00
Connecticut Foundation
College Scholarship
University of
Student Success Program
$200,000.00
Massachusetts
Foundation, Inc.
University of
Sanofi Genzyme Biotchnology
$4,000.00
Massachusetts: Lowell
College Scholarship
University of Miami
Sanofi Genzyme Biotchnology
$1,000.00
College Scholarship
University of
Congress Sponsorship
$23,500.00
Minnesota--Department
of Surgery
University of New
Sanofi Genzyme Biotchnology
$4,000.00
Hampshire
College Scholarship
University of
Congress Sponsorship
$2,500.00
Pennsylvania
Us TOO International
13th Annual SEA Blue Prostate
$5,000.00
Cancer Walk & Run
VCU Hume-Lee Transplant
Congress Sponsorship
$1,000.00
Center
Visiting Nurse
Heroes in Health Care Gala
$10,000.00
Association of Boston
& Affiliates
VZW Sint-Aloysius Oud
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
Scouts Geel
Washington University
Washington University Fellows
$1,500.00
in St. Louis; Siteman
Program
Cancer Center
Wentworth Institute of
Sanofi Genzyme Biotchnology
$500.00
Technology
College Scholarship
West End House Boys and
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Girls Club
WGBH Educational
WGBH Pledge Night Event
$12,000.00
Foundation
Whitehead Institute for
Expedition: Bio 2018 Program
$10,000.00
Biomedical Research
Wisconsin Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Association
Women's Lunch Place
2017 Spaghetti Dinner
$10,000.00
Women's Lunch Place
Healthy Meals Program
$35,000.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$40,000.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$600.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$1,200.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$25,000.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$63,000.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$210,000.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$160,000.00
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$5,000.00
WriteBoston
Chelsea and WriteBoston
$18,000.00
Educational Programs
Wylder Nation
4th Annual Living Like a
$15,000.00
Foundation
Warrior Gala
YMCA of Greater Boston
Summer Day Camp Scholarships
$15,000.00
for Low-Income Youth
Young Men's Christian
MS One Step Program
$15,000.00
Association of
Montclair, NJ
ziMS Foundation
8th Annual UVA MS Event
$5,000.00
ziMS Foundation
7th Annual UVA MS Event
$5,000.00
Sponsorships, Charitable Donations, Memberships and Fellowships
1st Jan 2018-31st Dec 2018
Sanofi US and its affiliate Genzyme Corporation are committed to
supporting sponsorships for specific activities and initiatives of
healthcare organizations and institutions, independent medical or
professional societies, trade organizations and organized patient groups
to improve patient care and provide information to the medical and/or
patient communities. The goal of our charitable giving approach is to
fund general operational support for patient/disease organizations, or
program support for community-based organizations. Sanofi US and Genzyme
Corporation are part of the Sanofi Group, a global pharmaceutical
company.
Applicant names are provided by the requestor. If applicants apply as a
group for a single activity; all applicants may be not be identified
above. ``Funding Amount'' is the amount that the Company funded during
2018 identified above. ``Funding Amount'' does not include funds that
may have been provided by other affiliated Sanofi Company Entities
(e.g., Sanofi Pasteur).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recipient Name(s)
Activity Title
Funding Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
495 MetroWest
Membership
$10,000.00
Partnership
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACMG
Congress Sponsorship
$33,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACMG
Congress Sponsorship
$7,600.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACMG
Congress Sponsorship
$500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACMG
Congress Sponsorship
$4,500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACTRIMS
Congress Sponsorship
$42,500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama Cancer Congress
Membership
$4,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alliance for
Membership
$100,000.00
Regenerative Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Allston Village Main
Community Event
$1,000.00
Streets Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
DataDerm Program
$350,000.00
Dermatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Quality Innovation Center
$50,000.00
Dermatology
(QIC) Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
AccessDerm Program
$250,000.00
Dermatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
2019 President's Fundraiser
$275,000.00
Dermatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Practice Management Center
$100,000.00
Dermatology
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
2018 President's Fundraiser
$275,000.00
Dermatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$1,000.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$500.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$500.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$81,000.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Congress Sponsorship
$598,935.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Women Leading in Neurology
$20,000.00
Neurology Institute
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Transforming Leaders Program
$25,000.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Palatucci Advocacy Leadership
$30,000.00
Neurology Institute
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
2018 Industry Roundtable
$50,000.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of
Diversity Leadership Program
$30,000.00
Neurology Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association
Congress Sponsorship
$26,500.00
for Pediatric
Ophthalmology &
Strabismus
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association of
Congress Sponsorship
$100.00
Clinical
Endocrinologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association of
Congress Sponsorship
$50,000.00
Neuromuscular &
Electrodiagnostic
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association of
Congress Sponsorship
$2,100.00
Neuromuscular &
Electrodiagnostic
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association of
Congress Sponsorship
$990.00
Neuromuscular &
Electrodiagnostic
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American City Business
Corporate Citizenship Awards
$5,500.00
Journals, Inc.
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Industry Advisory Council
$60,000.00
Chest Physicians
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Congress Sponsorship
$7,600.00
Medical Genetics and
Genomics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Congress Sponsorship
$17,500.00
Medical Genetics and
Genomics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Medical Genetics and
Genomics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Medical Genetics
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Medical Genetics
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American College of
Congress Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
Conference Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Blood and Marrow
Transplant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
Sarah Cannon Blood Cancer
$10,000.00
Blood and Marrow
Network Event
Transplant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society for
ASBMT Website Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Blood and Marrow
Transplant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$118,000.00
Clinical Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$358,750.00
Clinical Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$285,500.00
Hematology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$75,000.00
Hematology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$3,000.00
Human Genetics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$5,000.00
Nephrology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$3,600.00
Nephrology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$25,000.00
Transplant Surgeons
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$36,750.00
Transplant Surgeons
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Thoracic
ATS 2018 Corporate Member
$50,000.00
Society
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Thyroid
Congress Sponsorship
$5,000.00
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Transplant
Congress Sponsorship
$153,000.00
Congress
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americas Committee for
Congress Sponsorship
$42,500.00
Treatment and Research
in Multiple Sclerosis,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americas Committee for
Congress Sponsorship
$12,480.00
Treatment and Research
in Multiple Sclerosis,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americas Committee for
Congress Sponsorship
$19,000.00
Treatment and Research
in Multiple Sclerosis,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
America's Physician
Congress Sponsorship
$4,500.00
Groups
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANERA (American Near
Anera 50th Anniversary
$10,000.00
East Refugee Aid)
Fundraiser
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ann & Robert H. Lurie
MPS Patient and Family Day
$2,500.00
Children's Hospital of
Chicago
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Children's Hospital of
Chicago
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Children's Hospital of
Chicago
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arthritis Foundation
Congress Sponsorship
$7,500.00
Northern California
Office
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arts & Business Council
Battle of the Biotech Bands
$5,250.00
of Greater Boston,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASCO Exhibits
Congress Sponsorship
$5,495.00
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASCO Exhibits
Congress Sponsorship
$18,990.00
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asembia Specialty
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Pharmacy Summit LLC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asembia Specialty
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Pharmacy Summit LLC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asembia Specialty
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Pharmacy Summit LLC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASN
Congress Sponsorship
$7,200.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASN
Congress Sponsorship
$72,500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASPHO
Congress Sponsorship
$3,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of Managed
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Care Pharmacy (AMCP)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of Northern
Membership
$1,200.00
California Oncologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of VA
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Hematology/Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of Women in
AWIR 2018 Corporate Program
$75,000.00
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bendcare
Congress Sponsorship
$180,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bendcare
Congress Sponsorship
$165,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Big Brothers Big
Mentoring Youth in Science
$15,000.00
Sisters of Central
Technology Engineering and
Mass Metrowest Inc.
Math (MySTEM)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biomedical Science
Evening of Hope 2018
$75,000.00
Careers Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biomedical Science
Hope Scholarship 2018-2019
$7,500.00
Careers Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bleeding Disorders
Patient Education Program
$7,000.00
Alliance Illinois
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blue Cross Blue Shield
Congress Sponsorship
$17,500.00
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Area Rape Crisis
Medical Advocacy Program
$30,000.00
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Area Rape Crisis
Medical Advocacy (MedAd)
$30,000.00
Center
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Children's
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Hospital Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston College
Membership
$10,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Educational
Boston Public Schools Science
$10,000.00
Development
Fair
Foundation, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Health Care For
Life Essentials Fund
$35,000.00
The Homeless Program
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Partners in
Power Lunch, 2017-2018
$6,000.00
Education, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Plan for
Boston Teacher Residency:
$15,000.00
Excellence in The
Building a Diverse Pipeline
Public Schools
of STEM Educators for BPS
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Private Industry
2018 Corporate Contributions
$15,000.00
Council
Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston University
Congress Sponsorship
$1,500.00
Continuing Medical
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bottom Line
Boston STEM Success Program
$15,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boys and Girls Clubs of
2018 Bids for Kids Auction &
$10,000.00
MetroWest
fundraising event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boys and Girls Clubs of
Operating Support
$25,000.00
MetroWest
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Breakthrough Greater
Full STEAM Ahead Support
$15,000.00
Boston
------------------------------------------------------------------------
California Dermatology
Congress Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Physician Assistant
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
California Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$50,000.00
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge Chamber of
Membership
$7,250.00
Commerce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge Chamber of
2018 Visionary Awards
$3,250.00
Commerce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge Chamber of
Community support program
$7,500.00
Commerce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge School
Fundraiser for Cambridge
$10,000.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Schools
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge School
Fundraiser for Cambridge
$10,000.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Schools
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge School
Reading Buddies--Fletcher
$16,818.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Maynard Academy Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cambridge School
Reading Buddies--Fletcher
$16,423.00
Volunteers, Inc.
Maynard Academy Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cancer Research
CRI's Webinar Series: Cancer
$25,000.00
Institute
Immunotherapy and You
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case Management Society
CMSA's 28th Annual Conference
$1,725.00
of America
& Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case Management Society
CMSA's 28th Annual Conference
$14,000.00
of America
& Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case Management Society
CMSA's 28th Annual Conference
$5,500.00
of America
& Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case Management Society
Corporate Sponsorship of
$1,250.00
of New England
CMSNE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case Management Society
Patient Education and
$1,550.00
of New England
Awareness Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case Management Society
Patient Education and
$1,000.00
of New England
Awareness Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Center for
Congress Sponsorship
$133,900.00
International Blood
and Marrow Transplant
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEO Roundtable on
Membership
$40,000.00
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charles River Community
Mom and Baby Program
$15,000.00
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CheckOrphan
Rare Disease Page Sponsorship
$11,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Child Neurology Society
Congress Sponsorship
$4,250.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children Health and
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Research Foundation,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Childrens Gaucher
Research: A novel iPSC-based
$75,000.00
Research Fund
system to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms leading
to neuronopathic Gaucher
disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Hospital
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Hospital of
2019-2020 UCLA Intercampus
$75,000.00
Orange County
Medical Biochemical Genetics
Training Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Children's Hospital of
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Philadelphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Citizen Schools
STEM Learning at Somerville's
$15,000.00
East Somerville Community
School
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Citizen Schools
STEM Learning for High-Need
$15,000.00
Middle School Students in
Somerville
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CitySprouts, Inc.
Middle School Program
$8,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CitySprouts, Inc.
Middle School Program
$8,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland Clinic
Congress Sponsorship
$3,500.00
Educational Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coalition of Hematology
Membership
$6,000.00
Oncology Practices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Collegium
32nd Symposium of the
$25,000.00
Internationale
Collegium Internationale
Allergologicum
Allergologicum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Boating, Inc.
Operating Support
$15,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Farms
Community Food Access
$15,000.00
Outreach
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Servings,
Pie in the Sky
$10,000.00
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Servings,
General Operating Support
$30,000.00
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Servings,
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Servings,
Nutrition Program for
$30,000.00
Inc.
Individuals & Families
Affected by Multiple
Sclerosis and Other Acute
Life-Threatening Illnesses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consortium of Multiple
Congress Sponsorship
$8,000.00
Sclerosis Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consortium of Multiple
Congress Sponsorship
$21,000.00
Sclerosis Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consortium of Multiple
Congress Sponsorship
$22,200.00
Sclerosis Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consortium of Multiple
Congress Sponsorship
$1,200.00
Sclerosis Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consortium of Multiple
Congress Sponsorship
$6,000.00
Sclerosis Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consortium of Multiple
Congress Sponsorship
$1,500.00
Sclerosis Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consortium of Multiple
North American Registry for
$200,000.00
Sclerosis Centers
Care and Research in
Multiple Sclerosis (NARCRMS)
2018 Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cradles To Crayons Inc.
Ready for School Program
$20,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Critical Path Institute
Transplant Therapeutics
$55,000.00
Consortium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DEAF, Inc.--
Deaf-Accessible Medical Case
$10,000.00
Developmental
Management Program
Evaluation and
Adjustment Facilities,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deep South Cancer
2018 Magic City Cycliad
$5,000.00
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dermatology Nurses
DNA 2018 Corporate Membership
$3,000.00
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dimock Community
4th Annual Road to Wellness
$1,000.00
Foundation Inc.
5K Walk/Run
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dimock Community
31st Annual Fundraiser
$100,000.00
Foundation Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Duke University
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
East End House Inc.
Generating and Evaluating New
$20,000.00
Adventures in Science After
School (GENASAS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
East End House Inc.
Generating and Evaluating New
$20,000.00
Adventures in Science After
School (GENASAS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory University
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory University
JScreen Jewish Genetic
$100,000.00
Disease Education Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Family Promise
Capital Campaign: A Place to
$25,000.00
Metrowest Inc.
Call Home
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Society of
Membership
$25,000.00
Clinical Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Society of
Living with Prostate Cancer
$3,750.00
Clinical Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,600.00
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food For Free
Home Delivery--A Nutrition
$15,000.00
Committee, Inc.
Program for Seniors and
People with Disabilities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation of the
Multiple Sclerosis Workforce
$31,225.00
Consortium of MS
of the Future: Medical
Centers
Student Research
Scholarships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation of the
2018 FCMSC Neurology Resident
$10,000.00
Consortium of MS
Annual Meeting Scientific
Centers
Scholarships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation of the
NARCOMS NOW 2018
$15,000.00
Consortium of MS
Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foundation of the
Foundation of the Consortium
$10,000.00
Consortium of MS
of Multiple Sclerosis
Centers
Centers 2018 Mission Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Framingham Townwide Pto
Barbieri school holiday gift
$1,000.00
Council
drive
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Franciscan Hospital For
Adaptive Sports Program
$15,000.00
Children Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Friends of Resiliency
Dropout Prevention Academic
$10,000.00
for Life Inc.
Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Generation Citizen Inc.
Generation Citizen
$10,000.00
Massachusetts Civics Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Generation Citizen Inc.
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgia Dermatology of
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
Physician Assistants
(GDPA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgia Society of
Membership
$6,000.00
Clinical Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgia Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgia Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Georgia Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$2,100.00
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Girl Scouts of Eastern
Girls Building Self-eSTeEM
$15,000.00
Massachusetts Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Academy for
Congress Sponsorship
$65,000.00
Medical Education,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Academy for
Congress Sponsorship
$40,037.50
Medical Education,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Alliance for
Membership
$50,000.00
Patient Access
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
In-kind donation
$11,128.38
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
Access Program
$25,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
2018 Patient Advocacy Summit:
$2,500.00
Advocacy Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
2018 RARE Corporate Alliance
$25,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
2018 Patient Advocacy Summit
$50,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
RARE Global Advocacy
$10,000.00
Leadership Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
2018 RARE Education Programs
$25,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
2018 Rare Disease Hub
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Genes
2019 Corporate Alliance
$25,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Research
Lysosomal storage diseases
$10,000.00
Conferences
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greater Boston Chamber
Membership
$4,000.00
of Commerce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greenwood Genetic
Fellowship Program
$74,764.00
Center Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greenwood Genetic
Fellowship Program
$74,991.00
Center Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Habitat For Humanity
Fundraiser Event
$10,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Habitat For Humanity
Affordable Home Build Program
$20,000.00
Metrowest--Greater
Worcester Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Habitat For Humanity of
Corporate Build Day
$1,500.00
North Central
Massachusetts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harvard Medical School
Congress Sponsorship
$2,500.00
Global and Continuing
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Care For All
Framingham Area Health Care
$15,000.00
Inc.
Access Education and
Outreach Campaign
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Resources in
The Leaders through
$25,000.00
Action Inc.
Education, Action and Hope
(LEAH) Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Resources in
The Leaders through
$866.75
Action Inc.
Education, Action and Hope
(LEAH) Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hearts & Noses Hospital
Ongoing Bedside Hospital
$15,000.00
Clown Troupe Inc.
Clown Visits to Ill and
Disabled Children in Greater
Boston
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hemostasis and
Membership
$10,000.00
Thrombosis Research
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hope and Comfort Inc.
Hope and Comfort: Personal
$10,000.00
Hygiene Products to Low-
Income Individuals and
Families
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Horizons for Homeless
STEAM Education for Young
$10,000.00
Children
Homeless Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Illinois Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$25,000.00
Dermatology Physicians
Assistants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Imedex, LLC
Congress Sponsorship
$99,900.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Institute for Cancer
2018 In Vino Vita Fundraising
$10,000.00
Research dba The
Event
Research Institute of
Fox Chase Cancer
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Eczema
Congress Sponsorship
$200,000.00
Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Institute
2018 Golden Door Award
$10,000.00
of New England
Fundraiser
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Institute
Healthcare Navigation for
$15,000.00
of New England
Refugees in Boston
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Myeloma
Congress Sponsorship
$450,000.00
Workshop, c/o SPARGO,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International
2018 MS Perspectives Program
$40,000.00
Organization of
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International
2018 IOMSN Mission Support
$10,000.00
Organization of
Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
International Society
Congress Sponsorship
$11,799.99
on Thrombosis and
Haemostasis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Italian Home For
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Children Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Italian Home For
Comprehensive Care for
$12,500.00
Children Inc.
Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jewish Family Service
Patient Navigator/Enhanced
$20,000.00
of Metrowest Inc.
Medical Escort Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jewish Genetic Disease
JGDC Website and Social Media
$5,000.00
Consortium (JGDC)
Rebuild Phase Two and
Brochure Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jewish Genetic Diseases
Our Heritage and our Health--
$975.00
Center of Greater
Ashkenazi Jewish Genetic
Phoenix
Disease and the Founder
Effect
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Just-A-Start
Just-A-Start Biomedical
$25,000.00
Corporation
Careers Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Just-A-Start
Biomedical Careers Program (&
$25,000.00
Corporation
Mass Bio Membership)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kansas University
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Endowment Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Knect365 US, Inc.
Selections from DISORDER the
$15,000.00
Rare Disease Film Festival
at Biotech Week Boston
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kometa Serbian
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Childrens Program Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Life Science Cares Inc.
2018 Impact Breakfast
$10,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Little Brothers/Friends
Medical Escort Program
$5,000.00
of the Elderly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Louisiana Association
Congress Sponsorship
$5,285.00
of Health Plans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lycee International De
Fundraiser Event
$10,000.00
Boston International
School of Boston Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lysosomal and Rare
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Disorders Research and
Treatment Center Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lysosomal and Rare
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Disorders Research and
Treatment Center Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Magellan Rx Management
Congress Sponsorship
$7,500.00
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Margaret Fuller
Margaret Fuller Neighborhood
$15,000.00
Neighborhood House
House Youth Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mass Insight Education
Mass Insight's Advanced
$15,000.00
and Research Institute
Placement (AP) STEM &
Inc
English Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts Bay
STEM Mentor Program (SMP)
$43,000.00
Community College
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
Congress Sponsorship
$100,000.00
Biotechnology Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
Membership
$30,800.00
Biotechnology Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
Patient Advocacy Summit
$10,000.00
Biotechnology Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
Conference Sponsorship
$5,000.00
Biotechnology
Education Foundation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
2018 Champions for
$5,000.00
Biotechnology
Biotechnology Education
Education Foundation
Program
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
Life Sciences Workforce 2018
$5,000.00
Biotechnology
Education Foundation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
MassBioEd Mission
$50,000.00
Biotechnology
Education Foundation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts Black
2018 Ida B. Wells Annual
$5,000.00
Women Attorneys
Awards Event
Foundation Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts College
Next Generation of Women
$10,000.00
of Pharmacy and Health
Leaders in STEM
Sciences
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts Life
Massachusetts Next Generation
$50,000.00
Sciences Center
Initiative (MassNextGen)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts State
2018 Fair Operations & Sanofi
$50,000.00
Science and
Genzyme Science Award
Engineering Fair, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medical Oncology
Membership
$10,000.00
Association of
Southern California,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MedStar Health
Congress Sponsorship
$2,500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Metrowest Free Medical
Access to Women's Health Care
$15,000.00
Program Inc.
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Michigan Society of
Membership
$12,000.00
Hematology & Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Museum of Fine Arts
Membership
$20,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Museum of Science
Sanofi Genzyme Teacher
$71,520.00
Sabbatical at the Museum of
Science Cohort Year 2018/19
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Comprehensive
2019 NCCN Global Corporate
$15,000.00
Cancer Network
Council Membership
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Comprehensive
NCCN 13th Annual Congress:
$10,000.00
Cancer Network
Hematologic MalignanciesTM:
Patient Advocacy Pavilion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Organization
Congress Sponsorship
$3,000.00
of Rheumatology
Managers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Organization
Corporate Membership
$30,000.00
of Rheumatology
Managers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$2,500.00
Genetic Counselors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$2,500.00
Genetic Counselors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$375.00
Genetic Counselors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEHI
NEHI's 2018 Innovators in
$10,000.00
Health Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York University--
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Langone School of
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NJ Sharing Network
Congress Sponsorship
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NJ Society of Oncology
Membership
$5,000.00
Managers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nora's Home
Congress Sponsorship
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
North Carolina Oncology
Membership
$5,000.00
Management Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Northeastern University
Community Student Scholarship
$4,000.00
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Northern California
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Rheumatology Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Norton Healthcare
2018 Neuroscience Expo
$5,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Norton Healthcare
2018 Celebrating MS
$5,000.00
Foundation, Inc.
Innovations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NSGC
Congress Sponsorship
$6,600.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ohio Hematology
Membership
$5,000.00
Oncology Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Operation Warm Inc.
2018 Boston Coat Program
$20,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Organ Donation &
2018 Corporate Sponsorship
$5,000.00
Transplantation
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pan American League of
Congress Sponsorship
$131,750.00
Associations for
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA Pharmaceutical
Congress Sponsorship
$56,000.00
Care Management
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA Pharmaceutical
Congress Sponsorship
$50,000.00
Care Management
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA Pharmaceutical
Congress Sponsorship
$36,000.00
Care Management
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCMA Pharmaceutical
Congress Sponsorship
$50,000.00
Care Management
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Peer Health Exchange
Peer Health Exchange:
$5,000.00
Inc.
Empowering Boston's Young
People to Make Healthy
Decisions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pennsylvania
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Rheumatology Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Perkins School for the
Technology for Success in
$20,000.00
Blind
STEM Learning
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Philadelphia Rheumatism
Membership
$1,000.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phillips Brooks House
Bridges Food Science and
$3,000.00
Association
Physical Fitness Workshop
Incorporated
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phoenix Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phoenix Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$30,000.00
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phoenix Rheumatology
Membership
$10,000.00
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Premier Oncology
Membership
$5,000.00
Hematology Management
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Premier Oncology
Membership
$5,000.00
Hematology Management
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Premier Specialty
Congress Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
President and Fellows
The Family Van: Culturally-
$50,000.00
of Harvard College
Competent Care for All
------------------------------------------------------------------------
President and Fellows
The Family Van: Increasing
$50,000.00
of Harvard College
Healthcare Access to
Everyone
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pri-Med Institute
Congress Sponsorship
$66,750.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pro Player Foundation
Patient Education and
$5,000.00
Awareness Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pro Player Foundation
Patient Education and
$5,000.00
Awareness Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project Just Because,
211 Domestic Abuse/Emergency
$10,000.00
Inc.
Program & Keep A Family Warm
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prostate Cancer Academy
Congress Sponsorship
$7,500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Read to a Child, Inc.
Read to a Child's Lunchtime
$5,000.00
Reading Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regents of the
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
University of
California
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regents of the
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
$57,059.40
University of
Patient and Family
California
Educational Grant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regents of the
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
University of Michigan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regents of the
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
University of
Minnesota
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$7,500.00
Association of Iowa
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Association of Iowa
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Association of
Minnesota and the
Dakotas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Association of Nevada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
Congress Sponsorship
$2,000.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
Congress Sponsorship
$45,000.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
Congress Sponsorship
$3,655.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
Congress Sponsorship
$33,575.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
Congress Sponsorship
$1,700.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
National Advocacy Sponsorship
$50,000.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
Speed Advocacy Session of the
$7,500.00
Society
RNS Advocacy Experience Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rheumatology Nurses
Corporate Sponsorship
$50,000.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rhode Island Diabetes &
Congress Sponsorship
$750.00
Endocrine Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Run for Dad American
Run for Dad
$3,000.00
Cancer Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
S S Cosmas & Damian
92nd Annual Feast of S.S.
$2,500.00
Society Inc.
Cosmas and Damian
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Samaritans, Inc.
Youth Suicide Prevention
$25,000.00
Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scholarship America,
Chart Your Own Course
$32,250.00
Inc.
Scholarship Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scholarship America,
Sanofi Genzyme TORCH Awards
$11,600.00
Inc.
program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Science Club For Girls
Science Clubs and Junior
$10,000.00
Inc.
Mentors Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Science From Scientists
In-School Module-Based (ISMB)
$30,000.00
Inc.
STEM Enrichment Program for
Boston Public Schools 2017-
18
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Science From Scientists
In-School Module-Based (ISMB)
$30,000.00
Inc.
STEM Enrichment Program for
Boston Public Schools 2018-
19
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Society for
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Investigative
Dermatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Southern Oncology
Membership
$5,000.00
Association of
Practices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Southern Regional
Congress Sponsorship
$2,000.00
Genetics Group (SERGG)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Special Olympics
2018 Bio-Ball
$2,500.00
Massachusetts Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Special Olympics
Special Olympics
$7,500.00
Massachusetts Inc.
Massachusetts Shrewsbury
Basketball Team to Compete
at Special Olympics World
Games in Abu Dhabi
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sportsmen's Tennis &
School to Sportsmen's Program
$15,000.00
Enrichment Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
St. Francis House
Triage Program
$10,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
St. Mary's Center for
[emailprotected] Plus
$15,000.00
Women and Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State of Texas
Congress Sponsorship
$40,000.00
Association of
Rheumatologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State of Texas
Congress Sponsorship
$40,000.00
Association of
Rheumatologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Administrators of
NOLA Bluedoo Run/Walk/
$7,500.00
the Tulane Education
Celebration for Prostate
Fund on behalf of
Cancer Research
Tulane University
Health Sciences
Center, CCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Hematology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Society of
Congress Sponsorship
$3,150.00
Hematology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Boston Home, Inc.
B.Fit! Socialization and
$18,000.00
Wellness Day Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Community Art
Community Art Center Youth
$15,000.00
Center
Programming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Community Art
Community Art Center School
$15,000.00
Center
Age Child Care and Teen
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Discovery Museums
Sanofi Genzyme Discovery
$15,000.00
Science 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Discovery Museums
Fundraiser Event
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Discovery Museums
Discovery Science: Framingham
$15,000.00
and Waltham
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Endocrine Society
Congress Sponsorship
$3,995.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Forsyth Institute
Mobile Dental Program Service
$10,000.00
to the Youth on Fire Shelter
in Cambridge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Greater Boston Food
General Operating Support
$30,000.00
Bank Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Greater Boston Food
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Bank Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Greater Boston Food
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Bank Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Greater Boston Food
Emergency Food Distribution
$30,000.00
Bank Inc.
Across Eastern Massachusetts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Jewish P.O.C.E.T.
Congress Sponsorship
$2,500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Massachusetts
Everyday Amazing Race
$5,000.00
General Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The McCourt Foundation
Educational Update
$20,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The McCourt Foundation
Tour de South Shore Athletic
$5,000.00
Festival
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The McCourt Foundation
MS Educational Update for
$20,000.00
Patients, Caregivers and
Family Members
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Oak Clinic
2018 Oak Clinic Acorn Run
$4,500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Oak Clinic
Oak Clinic's Marvelous
$15,000.00
Monday's Wellness Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Oak Clinic
2018 Oak Clinic Diamond Run
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Posse Foundation
Posse Boston
$25,000.00
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Possible Project
The Possible Project 2018
$10,000.00
Event Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Regents of the
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
University of
California, Irvine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Regents of the
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
University of
California, Los
Angeles
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Salvation Army
Volunteer Match
$2,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Salvation Army
Volunteer Match
$6,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The UCLA Foundation
The UCLA Fabry Disease
$2,500.00
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thompson Island Outward
Connections Program
$15,000.00
Bound Education Center
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thompson Island Outward
2018 Thompson Island 4k Trail
$5,000.00
Bound Education Center
Run
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of Boston
Community Student Scholarship
$4,000.00
University
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of Boston
Community Student Scholarship
$825.00
University
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trustees of the
The 19th International
$50,000.00
University of
Vasculitis & ANCA Workshop
Pennsylvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tutoring Plus of
STEAM Programming
$5,000.00
Cambridge, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tutoring Plus of
Elementary and Middle School
$12,500.00
Cambridge, Inc.
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UAB Division of
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Nephrology Attn:
Jennifer Clendenin
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UConn Health
Congress Sponsorship
$500.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Arizona
Congress Sponsorship
$25,000.00
Rheumatology Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Network For
Congress Sponsorship
$9,100.00
Organ Sharing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Network For
Congress Sponsorship
$6,000.00
Organ Sharing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Network For
Congress Sponsorship
$8,000.00
Organ Sharing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Rheumatology LLC
Congress Sponsorship
$135,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Way of Tri-
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Alabama
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
at Birmingham
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Chicago
Congress Sponsorship
$15,000.00
Hospitals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Colorado
Congress Sponsorship
$20,000.00
Anschutz Medical
Campus
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Florida
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
Foundation Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Florida
Fellowship Program
$74,900.00
Foundation Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of Illinois
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
at Chicago
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Louisville
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
Student Success Program,
$200,000.00
Massachusetts
UMass Boston, College of
Foundation Inc.
Science and Mathematics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
TORCH award donations
$5,000.00
Mississippi Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uplifting Athletes Inc.
Leadership Development
$38,000.00
Conference/Organizational
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uplifting Athletes Inc.
2019 Uplifting Athletes Young
$20,000.00
Investigator Draft
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uplifting Athletes Inc.
Young Investigator Draft
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vanderbilt University
Fellowship Program
$75,000.00
School of Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VNA Care Hospice Inc.
Elizabeth Evarts de Rham
$5,000.00
Hospice Home at Chilton
Street
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wade Institute for
Summer Professional
$20,000.00
Science Education
Development STEM Institutes
for teachers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wade Institute for
Summer Professional
$20,000.00
Science Education
Development Institutes for
Science Teachers 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington State
Membership
$5,000.00
Medical Oncology
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wentworth Institute of
Community Student Scholarship
$4,000.00
Technology
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
West End House Boys and
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Girls Club
------------------------------------------------------------------------
West End House Boys and
Volunteer Match
$1,000.00
Girls Club
------------------------------------------------------------------------
West End House Boys and
West End House Expect More
$24,609.00
Girls Club
Campaign: MakerZone
------------------------------------------------------------------------
West End House Boys and
West End House Annual
$25,000.00
Girls Club
Celebration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
West End House Boys and
West End House Annual
$50,000.00
Girls Club
Celebration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Western States Regional
Congress Sponsorship
$18,000.00
Hemophilia Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wheelchairs 4 Kids
Let's Roll Program
$10,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Whitehead Institute for
Expedition: Bio 2019
$10,000.00
Biomedical Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wisconsin Rheumatology
Congress Sponsorship
$10,000.00
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Dermatologic
Congress Sponsorship
$2,500.00
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Lunch Place
Healthy Meals Program
$45,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$1,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$1,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$1,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$67,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$110,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$50,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$60,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$35,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$50,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD Symposium
Congress Sponsorship
$50,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLDSymposia
Congress Sponsorship
$5,250.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLDSymposia
Congress Sponsorship
$45,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WriteBoston
Aligning and Elevating
$18,000.00
Literacy Instruction across
the Chelsea Public Schools
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YMCA of Greater Boston
Scholarships for Low-Income
$15,000.00
Allston-Brighton Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ziMS Foundation
2018 ZIMS Strike Down MS Bowl-
$5,000.00
A-Thon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposal Type
Project Name
Legal Name
Amount
Corporate
Transplantation
Critical Path
$55,000.00
Membership
Therapeutics
Institute
Membership
Corporate
Corporate
Endocrine Society
$11,000.00
Membership
Membership
Corporate
Corporate
Colorado Business
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
Group on Health
Corporate
Corporate
Rheumatology
$200,000.00
Membership
Membership
Research
Foundation
Corporate
Corporate
National
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership
Governors
Association
Corporate
Corporate
National
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
Conference of
Insurance
Legislato
Corporate
CEVR Membership
Tufts Medical
$35,000.00
Membership
Center
Corporate
Corporate
American
$20,000.00
Membership
Membership
Association for
Cancer Research
Corporate
Corporate
American
$20,000.00
Membership
Membership
Association for
Cancer Research
Corporate
Corporate
American
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership
Association of
Diabetes
Educator
Corporate
Corporate
AMGA Foundation
$15,000.00
Membership
Membership
Inc.
Corporate
2018 NEHI
NEHI
$75,000.00
Membership
Membership
Corporate
2018 Corporate
National Kidney
$10,000.00
Membership
Membership
Foundation, Inc.
Corporate
Corporate
The Partnership
$19,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
for Quality
2018
Medical Donati
Corporate
STOP Obesity
George Washington
$25,000.00
Membership
Alliance
University's
STOP Obes
Corporate
Premium
Texas Business
$15,000.00
Membership
Membership
Group on Health
Corporate
Health
University of
$50,000.00
Membership
Organization
Louisville
Corporate
School of Public
Membership
Health
Corporate
Corporate
American
$20,000.00
Membership
Membership
Association of
Nurse
Practitioner
Corporate
Corporate
Georgia Chamber
$750.00
Membership
Membership
of Commerce
Corporate
Corporate
American
$20,000.00
Membership
Membership
Association of
Clinical
Endocrinol
Corporate
Corporate
National Business
$16,500.00
Membership
Membership
Group on Health
Corporate
PBSM Corporate
National Business
$15,000.00
Membership
Membership
Group on Health
Corporate
Membership Dues
Florida Chamber
$2,000.00
Membership
of Commerce,
Inc.
Corporate
2018 Membership
Buyers Health
$10,000.00
Membership
Care Action
Group
Corporate
Chamber of
Montana Chamber
$280.00
Membership
Commerce Dues
of Commerce
Corporate
Corporate
Business for
$33,000.00
Membership
Membership
Social
Responsibility
Corporate
2018 ACCP Annual
Association of
$6,250.00
Membership
Membership
Corporate
Contributions
Pro
Corporate
Corporate
Society of
$2,500.00
Membership
Membership
Toxicologic
Pathology
Corporate
Corporate
Healthcare
$45,000.00
Membership
Membership
Distribution
Alliance HDA
Corporate
Tufts CSDD
Tufts Center for
$15,000.00
Membership
the Study of
Drug Developm
Corporate
Affiliate
Massachusetts
$2,500.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Association of
Health Plans
Corporate
Corporate
National Health
$32,000.00
Membership
Membership
Council
Corporate
Corporate
Illinois
$2,500.00
Membership
Membership
Manufacturers'
Association
Corporate
NASPA 2018
NASPA
$5,000.00
Membership
Associate Member
Dues
Corporate
Corporate
National LGBT
$7,500.00
Membership
Membership 2018
Chamber of
Commerce
Corporate
Corporate
National LGBT
$7,500.00
Membership
Membership 2018
Chamber of
Commerce
Corporate
Corporate
International
$20,000.00
Membership
Membership
Society for
Medical
Publicatio
Corporate
ACPA Corporate
American Chronic
$10,000.00
Membership
Membership
Pain Association
Corporate
Corporate
Pharmaceutical
$397,832.00
Membership
Membership
Research and
Manufacture
Corporate
Corporate
Pharmaceutical
-
Membership
Memberhsip
Research and
Manufacture
Corporate
Women's Heart
Tides Center
$75,000.00
Membership
Alliance
Mebership
Corporate
Corporate
College Diabetes
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership
Network Inc.
Corporate
Corp.
AIM--Associated
$10,000.00
Membership
Industries of
Massachuset
Corporate
NLGA Corporate
National Lt.
$10,000.00
Membership
Membership
Governors
Association
Corporate
Corporate
Ohio Chamber of
$1,700.00
Membership
Membership
Commerce
Corporate
Corporate
Somerset Health
$2,500.00
Membership
Membership
Care Foundation
Corporate
Corporate
Academy of
$10,000.00
Membership
Membership
Managed Care
Pharmacy
Corporate
Corporate
HealthCare
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
Institute of NJ
Corporate
DA4S Corporate
Diversity
$700.00
Membership
Membership
Alliance for
Science, Inc.
Corporate
Corporate
Healthcare
$23,500.00
Membership
Membership
Businesswomen's
Association
Corporate
National Quality
National Quality
$39,400.00
Membership
Forum Membership
Forum
Corporate
WPEO Corporate
Women President
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
Educational
Organization
Corporate
Corporate
Minnesota Society
$6,000.00
Membership
Membership
of Health-System
Pharm
Corporate
Corporate
The Medical Alley
$2,000.00
Membership
Membership
Association
Corporate
2018 Membership
New York & New
$6,500.00
Membership
Jersey Minority
Supplier D
Corporate
Corporate
Pittsburgh
$3,450.00
Membership
Membership
Business Group
on Health
Corporate
GDAHC Corporate
Greater Detroit
$7,000.00
Membership
Membership
Area Health
Council, Inc.
Corporate
Ruby Annual
US Business
$7,500.00
Membership
Membership
Leadership
Network
Corporate
Ruby Annual
US Business
$7,500.00
Membership
Membership
Leadership
Network
Corporate
2018 Corporate
Physician
$20,000.00
Membership
Dues
Assistant
Foundation of
the Americas
Corporate
2018 Somerset
Somerset County
$15,000.00
Membership
County Business
Business
Partnership dues
Partnership
Corporate
Annual Membership
Women in
$20,000.00
Membership
Government
Foundation, Inc.
Corporate
CLSA Sustaining
California Life
$76,000.00
Membership
Membership
Sciences
Association
Corporate
NaVOBA corporate
NaVOBA--National
$15,000.00
Membership
membership
Veteran Owned
Busines
Corporate
Corporate
Intellectual
$26,800.00
Membership
Membership
Property Owners
Association
Corporate
Annual Membership
Michigan Primary
$5,000.00
Membership
Care Consortium
Corporate
Annual Membership
National Alliance
$15,000.00
Membership
of Healthcare
Purchaser
Corporate
Annual Membership
ISPOR
$15,000.00
Membership
Corporate
Corporate
The Antibody
$10,000.00
Membership
Membership
Society
Corporate
Corporate
Michigan
$2,500.00
Membership
Membership
Association of
Health
Corporate
Corporate
Life Science
$1,500.00
Membership
Membership
Tennessee
Corporate
2018 Corporate
Association of
$75,000.00
Membership
Membership
Community Cancer
Centers
Corporate
Corporate
Texas Association
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
of Manufacturers
Corporate
Annual Membership
JDRF
$30,000.00
Membership
International
Corporate
Corporate
AMDA--The Sociery
$2,584.00
Membership
Membership
for Post-Acute
and Long
Corporate
Corporate
Texas Healthcare
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
and Bioscience
Institute
Corporate
Corporate
BioForward
$3,000.00
Membership
Membership
Corporate
Annual Membership
National
$224,000.00
Membership
Association of
Manufacturers
Corporate
2018 Business
The Health
$450.00
Membership
Partner
Collaborative
Membership
Corporate
OFII 2018
Organization for
$17,500.00
Membership
Membership Dues
International
Investment
Corporate
AMA Foundation
American Medical
$20,000.00
Membership
dues
Association
Foundation
Corporate
Corporate
National
$200,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Pharmaceutical
Council
Corporate
Corporate
National
$200,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Pharmaceutical
Council
Corporate
Corporate
National
$50,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Pharmaceutical
Council
Corporate
Biocom Membership
Biocom
$15,000.00
Membership
Dues
Corporate
2018 Preferred
BIONJ Inc.
$30,000.00
Membership
Membership
Corporate
2018 Membership
Healthcare
$200,000.00
Membership
Dues
Leadership
Council
Corporate
Corporate
Oregon Business &
$1,500.00
Membership
Membership
Industry
Association
Corporate
Membership Dues
American Society
$30,000.00
Membership
of
Transplantation
Corporate
Patients Count
Milken Institute
$50,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Corporate
Membership Dues
Rheumatology
$200,000.00
Membership
Research
Foundation
Corporate
Membership Dues
The Kansas
$993.00
Membership
Chamber
Corporate
Membership Dues
Lehigh Valley
$1,500.00
Membership
Business
Coalition on
Healthcare
Corporate
2018 BIO
Biotechnology
$718,851.00
Membership
Membership
Innovation
Organization
Corporate
2018 Membership
Northeast
$10,500.00
Membership
Dues
Business Group
on Health
Corporate
Corporate
Indiana Chamber
$650.00
Membership
Membership
of Commerce
Corporate
Corporate
American Society
$35,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
of Hematology
Corporate
Corporate
HealthCare 21
$2,750.00
Membership
Membership
Business
Coalition
Corporate
MichiBio
Michigan
$1,500.00
Membership
Membership
Biosciences
Industry
Association
Corporate
Membership Dues
Virginia Bio
$2,300.00
Membership
Corporate
Corporate
American
$50,000.00
Membership
Membership
Foundation for
Women's Health
Corporate
PSTC Corporate
Critical Path
$35,000.00
Membership
Membership
Institute
Corporate
Corporate
Research!America
$15,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Corporate
Membership Dues
ILSI Health and
$15,000.00
Membership
Environmental
Health Instit
Corporate
Membership Dues
ILSI Health and
$82,971.00
Membership
Environmental
Health Instit
Corporate
Membership Dues
Washington Health
$6,930.00
Membership
Alliance
Corporate
Membership Dues
Employers Health
$1,000.00
Membership
Coalition, Inc.
Corporate
Membership Dues
State Legislative
$35,000.00
Membership
Leaders
Foundation, Inc.
Corporate
Associate
Alliance for
$50,000.00
Membership
Sustaining
Patient Access
Membership Dues
Corporate
2018 NewYorkBIO
NewYorkBIO
$2,500.00
Membership
Membership
Corporate
Membership
Michigan Chamber
$1,950.00
Membership
Renewal
of Commerce
Corporate
CAHF Associate
CA Assn of Health
$1,200.00
Membership
Membership
Facilities
Renewal
Corporate
2018 Memebership
Alliance for a
$20,000.00
Membership
Stronger FDA
Corporate
Industry Advisory
The Foundation
$25,000.00
Membership
Board
for Post-Acute &
Long-Term
Corporate
DTA Membership
Digital
$75,000.00
Membership
Therapeutics
Alliance
Corporate
Corporate
Public Affairs
$12,900.00
Membership
Membership
Council
Renewal
Corporate
2018 IPAC
Diabetes
$15,000.00
Membership
membership
Education and
Camping
Associatio
Corporate
Annual Membership
Evidence for
$100,000.00
Membership
Health Care
Improvement d/b
Corporate
Consortium for
National Academy
$100,000.00
Membership
Value and
of Sciences
Science
Membership
Corporate
HRPA Membership
HR Policy
$15,000.00
Membership
Association
Corporate
CPR Membership
International
$10,000.00
Membership
Institute for
Conflict
Preventio
Corporate
Corporate
American
$100,000.00
Membership
Membership
Enterprise
Institute for
Public Policy
Corporate
Annual Membership
Louisiana
$1,765.00
Membership
Association of
Health Plans
Corporate
Corporate
U.S. Capitol
$10,000.00
Membership
Committee
Historical
Membership 2018
Society
Corporate
2018 Memebership
Well-Being
$1,000.00
Membership
Collaborative of
Ohio
Corporate
2018 Council
Virginia Center
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
for Health
Innovation
Corporate
Corporate
Arkansas State
$1,000.00
Membership
Membership
Chamber of
Commerce/AIA
Corporate
Corporate
International
$8,000.00
Membership
Membership
Society for
Pharmacoepidemi
Corporate
AWB Membership
Association of
$2,500.00
Membership
Washington
Business
Corporate
Membership dues
Pharmaceutical
-
Membership
Research and
Manufacture
Corporate
Annual Membership
Medical
$5,000.00
Membership
Association of
Georgia
Corporate
Annual Membership
New Jersey
$5,000.00
Membership
Association of
Health Plans
Corporate
Annual Membership
CECP
$15,000.00
Membership
Corporate
Corporate
Kentuckiana
$1,500.00
Membership
Membership
Health
Collaborative
Corporate
2018 PQA
PQA, Inc.
$34,375.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Corporate
2018 CIBMTR
The Medical
$30,000.00
Membership
Corporate
College of
Membership
Wisconsin, Inc.
Corporate
Annual Membership
American
$75,000.00
Membership
Thrombosis and
Hemostasis
Network
Corporate
Annual Membership
Missouri Chamber
$1,500.00
Membership
of Commerce and
Indust
Corporate
Annual membership
Center Forward
$20,000.00
Membership
Corporate
PACH Associate
Partnership for
$125,000.00
Membership
Membership
the Advancement
of Cardio
Corporate
HUBZone
HUBZone
$2,495.00
Membership
Contractors
Contractors
National Council
National
Council, Inc.
Corporate
Annual Membership
Greater Las Vegas
$1,499.50
Membership
Chamber of
Commerce
Corporate
GlobalWIN Annual
Global Women's
$20,000.00
Membership
Support
Innovation
Network
Corporate
FDLI Membership
Food and Drug Law
$13,750.00
Membership
Institute
Corporate
Annual Membership
Wisconsin
$714.00
Membership
Manufacturers
and Commerce
Corporate
Annual Membership
Midwest Business
$8,000.00
Membership
Group on Health
Corporate
Corporate
National
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership
Committee for
Quality
Assurance
Corporate
Affiliate Partner
Central Florida
$1,800.00
Membership
dues
Health Care
Coalition
Corporate
MRCT Clinical
Multi Regional
$50,000.00
Membership
Trials
Clinical Trial
Membership
Center of Brigha
Corporate
MRCT Bioethics
Multi Regional
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership
Clinical Trial
Center of Brigha
Corporate
MOBIO Membership
Missouri
$1,500.00
Membership
2018
Biotechnology
Association
Corporate
Corporate
National Hispanic
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership
Health
Foundation
Corporate
Annual Membership
West Virginia
$1,320.00
Membership
Chamber of
Commerce, Inc.
Corporate
Annual Membership
New Jersey
$3,000.00
Membership
Alliance for
Action
Corporate
Corporate
American College
$1,500.00
Membership
Membership
of Toxicology
Corporate
2018 Memebership
National
$9,960.00
Membership
Association of
Chain Drug
Stores
Corporate
Annual Membership
Business Council
$3,000.00
Membership
of Alabama
Corporate
Corporate
US Pain
$20,000.00
Membership
Membership
Foundation Inc.
Corporate
Corporate
South Carolina
$3,000.00
Membership
Membership
Alliance of
Health Plans
Corporate
Corporate
The Oklahoma
$2,400.00
Membership
Membership
State Chamber of
Commerc
Corporate
Corporate
American
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
Legislative
Exchange Council
Corporate
Corporate
American
$12,000.00
Membership
Membership
Legislative
Exchange Council
Corporate
Corporate
American Society
$20,000.00
Membership
Membership
of Nephrology
Corporate
Corporate
American Society
$10,000.00
Membership
Membership
of Nephrology
Corporate
Annual Membership
Iowa
$2,000.00
Membership
Dues
Biotechnology
Association
Corporate
CHOT Annual
University of
$50,000.00
Membership
Membership
Louisville
School of Public
Health
Corporate
Corporate
Maryland Health
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
Care Coalition
DBA MidAtlantic
Corporate
Corporate
NCSL Foundation
$12,500.00
Membership
Membership
for State
Legislatures
Corporate
Corporate
Associated
$3,865.00
Membership
Membership
Industries of
Missouri
Corporate
Annual Associate
Derma Care Access
$100,000.00
Membership
Membership
Network
Corporate
Corporate
Wisconsin
$3,750.00
Membership
Membership
Collaborative
for Healthcare
Quality
Corporate
Corporate
Academy of
$15,000.00
Membership
Membership
Integrative Pain
Management
Corporate
Corporate
Association of
$3,000.00
Membership
Membership
Military
Surgeons of the
Unit
Corporate
DPAC Corporate
Diabetes Patient
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership
Advocacy
Coalition
Corporate
HISCI Membership
Health Industry
$5,300.00
Membership
Distributors
Association
Corporate
CCCC Corporate
California
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership
Chronic Care
Coalition
Corporate
Corporate
America's
$25,000.00
Membership
Membership 2018-
Physician Groups
2019
Corporate
Corporate
Integrated
$33,450.00
Membership
Membership
Benefits
Institute, Inc.
Corporate
Corporate
Integrated
$7,814.00
Membership
Membership
Benefits
Institute, Inc.
Corporate
Corporate
Integrated
$8,736.00
Membership
Membership
Benefits
Institute, Inc.
Corporate
2019 Affiliate
Greater
$5,000.00
Membership
Membership Dues
Philadelphia
Business
Coalition on
Health
Corporate
Maryland Tech
Maryland Tech
$1,800.00
Membership
Council
Council
Membership
Corporate
Gender Parity
Healthcare
$30,000.00
Membership
Collaborative
Businesswomen's
Membership
Association
Donations
Adult Day Center
Visiting Nurse
$10,000.00
Expanded
Association of
Therapeutic
Somerset Hills
Programing
Request
Donations
SARP Program
The Pennsylvania
$150,000.00
Support
State University
Donations
Katy's Place
The Center For
$5,000.00
Child
Great
Development
Expectations
Center
Inc.
Donations
Community
Operation Jersey
$600.00
Outreach to
Cares
Veterans
Donations
Sanofi US
Seattle
$5,000.00
Empowering Life
Children's
Photo Contest
Hospital
Foundation
Donations
Student Support
Drexel University
$5,000.00
for Drexel
Chemical and
Biological
Engineering
Donations
XTL Youth
Affirmations
$2,500.00
Programming--Emp
owering Life
Winner
Donations
COTA for CJ T--
COTA Children's
$2,500.00
Empowering Life
Organ Transplant
Winner
Associati
Donations
General Mission
The Partnership
$10,000.00
Support
for Quality
Medical Donati
Donations
Research Training
Trustees of The
$20,000.00
in
University of
Pharmacoepidemio
Pennsylvania
logy
Donations
Friends of Cancer
Friends of Cancer
$50,000.00
Research Mission
Research
Support
Donations
Cooley Landing
Grassroots
$25,000.00
Community-Based
Ecology
Baylands
Restoration
Project
Donations
Green Printing
Arbor Day
$4,944.00
Initiative
Foundation
Donations
Veterans and
U.S. Naval
$1,000.00
Careers
Academy Alumni
Association
Donations
Fellowship
Pharmaceutical
$270,000.00
Support
Research and
Manufacture
Donations
General Mission
United Way of
$55.00
Support
Northern New
Jersey
Donations
2018 Warrior
Operation Warrior
$10,000.00
Wishes Program
Wishes
Foundation
Donations
General Mission
ASTS Foundation
$50,000.00
Support
Donations
General Operating
American College
$2,500.00
Support
of Laboratory
Animal Medicine
Donations
Meals on Wheels
Midland Adult
$5,000.00
Services Inc.
Donations
General Operating
Washington Legal
$30,000.00
Support
Foundation
Donations
Empowering young
Junior
$50,000.00
people for
Achievement of
success in STEM
New Jersey, Inc.
careers
Donations
Get Active and
College Diabetes
$12,000.00
Make a
Network Inc.
Difference
Challenge
Donations
Get Active and
Junior
$2,500.00
Make a
Achievement USA
Difference
Challenge
Donations
Get Active & Make
Boys & Girls
$2,500.00
a Difference
Clubs of America
Challenge
Donations
Residential
Safe + Sound
$10,000.00
Children's
Somerset
Program
Donations
Get Active and
March of Dimes
$8,000.00
Make a
Foundation
Difference
Challenge
Donations
Healthy Food
The Salvation
$10,000.00
Pantry Program
Army
Donations
Responding to
Direct Relief
$25,000.00
California
Wildfires
Donations
Vets4Warrios
Rutgers
$2,000.00
University
Foundation
Donations
MAP's Domestic
Map International
$10,000.00
Disaster Relief
Prepardness
Donations
Midland Explores
Midland Adult
$5,000.00
Community
Services Inc.
Program
Donations
MAS Employment
Midland Adult
$5,000.00
Program
Services Inc.
Donations
Get Active and
Wounded Warrior
$40,000.00
Make a
Project, Inc.
Difference
Challenge
Donations
Advancing
Students 2
$250,000.00
Authentic STEM
Science
Education
Donations
Success By 6 with
United Way of
$37,000.00
Scholarship
Northern New
Support and STEM
Jersey
Enhancement
Donations
Get Active and
National Alliance
$2,500.00
Make A
for Caregiving
Difference
Challenge
Donations
General Operating
Food Bank of
$25,000.00
Support
Somerset County
Inc.
Donations
Corporate Work-
Cristo Rey Newark
$60,000.00
Study Program
High School
Corp.
Donations
U.S. Disaster
Americares
$25,000.00
Assitance
Donations
LGBT Staff
Somerset Health
$7,000.00
Sensitivity
Care Foundation
Training
Donations
US Disaster
Heart To Heart
$25,000.00
Readiness &
International
Response
Inc.
Donations
U.S. Emergency
Direct Relief
$25,000.00
Preparedness and
Response
Donations
Empowering Inner
Sheltered Yoga
$5,000.00
City Kids
Through Yoga &
Meditation
Donations
Comprehensive
NJ Sharing
$5,000.00
Family Support
Network
Foundation
Donations
NCCN Foundation
NCCN Foundation
$25,000.00
Patient Advocacy
Collaboration
Donations
Advocacy and
Deirdre O'Brien
$5,000.00
Forensic
Child Advocacy
Interviewing of
Center Inc.
Child Victims of
Abuse
Donations
Genearl Operating
Camp Quality USA
$10,000.00
Support
dba Camp Quality
NJ
Donations
General Operating
Jersey Battered
$5,000.00
Women's Service,
Inc.
Donations
Trainee
Society for
$25,000.00
Professional
Neuroscience
Development
Awards
Donations
Project Self
Family Promise of
$10,000.00
Sufficiency--San
Monroe County
ofi in our
Communities
Donations
Americares
Americares
$5,000.00
Airlift Benefit
Donations
Get Active and
Dress for Success
$2,500.00
Make a
Northern New
Difference
Jersey--10
Challenge
Donations
Young Scholars
NJ SEEDS
$10,000.00
Program
Donations
Vets4Warriors
Rutgers
$10,000.00
University
Foundation
Donations
Foundations of
Dress for Success
$10,000.00
Success
Northern New
Jersey--10
Donations
US Disaster
Heart To Heart
$25,000.00
Relief--Hurrican
International
e Michael
Inc.
Donations
Hurricane Michael
Direct Relief
$50,000.00
Response
Donations
Hunterdon County
Hunterdon
$10,000.00
Food Back Pack
Healthcare
Program
Foundation
Donations
General Operating
Hyacinth
$10,000.00
Support
Foundation: A
New Jersey
Nonprofit
Donations
HSF General
Hispanic
$5,000.00
Operating
Scholarship Fund
Support
Donations
Hurricane Michael
Americares
$25,000.00
Response
Donations
General Operating
Good Grief Inc.
$5,000.00
Support
Donations
General Operating
Deirdre O'Brien
$5,000.00
Support
Child Advocacy
Center Inc.
Donations
Valhalla's Hope
Valhalla Veterans
$10,000.00
Services
Donations
Residential
Community Hope,
$25,000.00
Recovery
Inc.
Programs for
Homeless
Veterans and Dis
Donations
Sanofi Corporate
Raritan Valley
$10,000.00
Mentor Program
Community
at RVCC
College Foundat
Donations
PRIDE Connect
Hyacinth
$3,500.00
Project Support
Foundation: A
New Jersey
Nonprofit
Donations
Trevor's Life-
Trevor Project
$3,500.00
Saving Programs
Inc.
for LGBTQ Youth
Donations
General Operating
Junior
$5,000.00
Support
Achievement of
Northeastern
Pennsylvania
Donations
Camp Nejeda:
Camp Nejeda
$10,000.00
Helping Kids
Foundation
with type 1
diabetes live
happier
Donations
Advocacy Program
Deirdre O'Brien
$5,000.00
for Child
Child Advocacy
Victims of Abuse
Center Inc.
and or Neglect
Donations
California
Direct Relief
$100,000.00
Wildfires
Donations
SP 2018 UW
United Way of
$86,982.00
Campaign Match
Monroe County
Donations
Vets4Warrios
Rutgers
$4,000.00
University
Foundation
Donations
Support4Families:
Cancer Support
$15,000.00
Teens Connect
Community
School-Based
Central
Support Group
Donations
Supporting
Students 2
$25,000.00
Environmental
Science
Science for High
School Students
Donations
Health for
Covenant House
$25,000.00
Homeless Youth
New Jersey Inc.
Donations
Medical Home
Children's Health
$198,000.00
Initiative 2019
Fund
Donations
Serving Local
Matheny School
$10,000.00
Patients With
and Hospital
Disabilities
Inc.
Donations
Matheny School
Matheny School
$10,000.00
STEM program
and Hospital
Inc.
Donations
Support4Families:
Cancer Support
$5,000.00
Strengthening
Community
Our Schools
Central
Donations
Food, Health and
The Community
$25,000.00
Hope: An Answer
Food Bank of New
to Diabetes (FHH
Jersey
Diabetes)
Donations
Camp Quality USA
Camp Quality USA
$10,000.00
dba Camp Quality
dba Camp Quality
NJ
NJ
Donations
General Operating
Visiting Nurse
$10,000.00
Support
Association of
Somerset Hills
Donations
Steeple Chase
Somerset Health
$100,000.00
Cancer Center
Care Foundation
Patient
Assistance Fund
Donations
General
Hyacinth
$10,000.00
Operational
Foundation: A
Support
New Jersey
Nonprofit
Donations
Healthier
Somerset Health
$10,000.00
Somerset
Care Foundation
Donations
HSF STEM Summit
Hispanic
$50,000.00
Scholarship Fund
Donations
Nights of Support
Good Grief Inc.
$10,000.00
Program
Donations
General Operating
Dress for Success
$10,000.00
Support
Northern New
Jersey--10
Donations
Trevor's Life-
Boys & Girls
$10,000.00
Saving Programs
Clubs of Union
for LGBTQ Youth
County
Donations
Camp Nejeda:
Camp Nejeda
$10,000.00
Education and
Foundation
Empowerment for
Children
Donations
Vets4Warriors
Rutgers
$10,000.00
University
Foundation
Donations
HSF Scholarship
Hispanic
$50,000.00
Fund
Scholarship Fund
Donations
General Operating
NJ SEEDS
$10,000.00
Support for NJ
SEEDS
Donations
Banco de
Banco de
$25,000.00
ALimentos de
Alimentos de
Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico
LOR
BCCNS Patient
BCCNS Alliance
$25,000.00
Project
LOR
Patient
Patients Rising,
$10,000.00
Engagement
Inc.
Sponsorship
LOR
Patient Education
Taking Control of
$40,000.00
Diabetes
Your Diabetes
Conferences and
Health Fairs
LOR
Biological
California
$15,000.00
Research
Institute of
Symposium
Technology
LOR
Patient Skin
American Cancer
$200,000.00
Cancer Education
Society
and Awareness
LOR
Populatoin Health
Thomas Jefferson
$60,000.00
Leadership
University
Series
LOR
nPOD Annual
University of
$15,000.00
Meeting
Florida
LOR
Diabetes Scholars
Diabetes Scholars
$10,000.00
Foundation
Foundation
College
Scholarships
LOR
2018 Annual
Health Action
$4,700.00
Symposium and
Council
Conference
LOR
Western Atrial
University of
$50,000.00
Fibrillation
Utah
Symposium 2018
LOR
Gordon Research
Gordon Research
$5,000.00
Conference on
Conferences
Myelin
LOR
Cell Culture
Engineering
$5,000.00
Engineering XVI
Conferences
Conference
International
LOR
2018 Alliance
Alliance for
$20,000.00
Industry Summitt
Continuing
Education in the
Health Sciences
LOR
Symposium on Drug
Massachusetts
$8,000.00
Delivery Systems
Institute of
Technology
LOR
2nd Annual EPIC
Children's
$10,000.00
Diabetes
Diabetes
Conference
Foundation
LOR
ASN 48th Annual
American Society
$2,500.00
Meeting
for
Neurochemistry
LOR
2018 BIO
Biotechnology
$334,500.00
International
Innovation
Convention
Organization
LOR
FOCIS 2018 Annual
Federation of
$25,000.00
Meeting
Clinical
Immunology
Societies
LOR
2018 BIO Europe
Biotechnology
$22,500.00
Spring
Innovation
Organization
LOR
2018 BIO Europe
Biotechnology
$22,500.00
Fall
Innovation
Organization
LOR
Annual Healthcare
MIT Sloan
$5,000.00
Conference
Healthcare
Conference and
Club
LOR
SOT 2018 Annual
Society of
$10,000.00
Meeting
Toxicology
LOR
2018 Public
American
$20,000.00
Policy Forum
Association of
Diabetes
Educator
LOR
Annual Gala
Asian American
$20,000.00
Dinner
Legal Defense
and Educatio
LOR
JDRF Imagine Gala
JDRF
$10,000.00
LOR
2018 Advocacy
Research!America
$25,000.00
Awards Dinner
LOR
JDRF Government
JDRF
$50,000.00
Day
International
LOR
Immune Tolerance
Parker Institute
$10,000.00
Symposium
for Cancer
Immunotherapy
LOR
Annual Forum on
National Academy
$85,000.00
Drug Discovery
of Sciences
and Development
LOR
Biomedical
Foundation for
$25,000.00
Research Program
Biomedical
Research
LOR
Annual Symposium
CASSS
$2,500.00
of Regulatory
and Analytical
Science
LOR
Analytical
CASSS
$2,500.00
Technologies
Symposium
LOR
2018 Gordon
Gordon Research
$3,000.00
Research
Conferences
Conference on
Medicinal
Chemistry
LOR
2018 AMSSM
American Medical
$50,000.00
Foundation
Society for
Research Grant
Sports Medicine
Award Program
LOR
Patient
National Health
$130,000.00
Perspective
Council
Program
LOR
Annual Business
Waltham Chamber
$6,000.00
Meeting
of Commerce
LOR
Barriers of the
Gordon Research
$5,000.00
CNS Conference
Conferences
LOR
FARE Patient
Food Allergy
$50,000.00
Registry
Research &
Education, Inc.
LOR
Wonder Women:
Center for Talent
$40,000.00
Flourishing and
Innovation
Thriving on the
Frontiers
LOR
Early
American
$55,000.00
Osteoarthritis
Orthopaedic
and Prevention
Society for
of OA
Sports Medicine
Progression
LOR
Pharmacy
Iowa Pharmacy
$10,000.00
Leadership
Association
Training Program
Foundation
LOR
FIU Global Health
Florida
$95,000.00
Conference
International
University Board
of Trustees
LOR
2018 Statewide
Florida Health
$15,000.00
Cardiac
Care Coalition
Collaborative
LOR
36 Annual JDRF
JDRF
$2,500.00
Boston Gala
International
LOR
Innovative
Preventive
$150,000.00
Medicine
Cardiovascular
Campaign
Nurses
Association
LOR
Women and Heart
WomenHeart: The
$50,000.00
Disease Program
National
Coalition for
Women With Heart
Disease
LOR
Off to College
College Diabetes
$50,000.00
Sponsorship 2018
Network Inc.
LOR
Patient Education
Diabetes
$2,000.00
Diabetes
Foundation of
Conference
Mississippi
LOR
Division of
ACS Division of
$3,000.00
Medicinal
Medicinal
Chemistry
Chemistry
Program ACS
National Meeting
LOR
Patient Centered
National Lipid
$16,060.00
Management of
Association
Dyslipidemia
LOR
2018 Annual SMA
Families of SMA
$5,000.00
Conference
DBA Cure SMA
LOR
2018 ZERO
ZERO--The End of
$2,000.00
Prostate Cancer
Prostate Cancer
Summit
LOR
DA4S West Coast
Diversity
$3,000.00
2018
Alliance for
Science, Inc.
LOR
Economic
Greater New
$4,000.00
Development =
England Minority
Corporate
Supplier
Sponsorship
Development
Renewal
LOR
2018 V-BID
Regents of the
$50,000.00
Summit: V-BID at
University of
the Big House
Michigan
LOR
AUTM 2018 Annual
Association of
$5,000.00
Meeting
University
Technology Mana
LOR
2018 Annual
BIONJ Inc.
$10,000.00
Dinner Meeting
LOR
SOT Annual
Society of
$2,500.00
meeting
Toxicology
LOR
Forum Group on
George Washington
$70,000.00
Arbovirus
University
Infections
LOR
World Vitiligo
The Umass
$2,500.00
Day 2018
Memorial
Conference
Foundation Inc.
LOR
Men's Health
Men's Health
$30,000.00
Month
Network
Sponsorship
LOR
OSU Pharmacy
Oregon State
$7,500.00
Partners Program
University
Foundation
LOR
2018 Global
International
$5,000.00
Doctoral
Biomedical
Partnerships
Research
Annual Workshop
Alliance
LOR
2018 AAAS Annual
American
$25,000.00
Meeting
Association for
Sponsorship
the Advancement
LOR
Cold Spring
Cold Spring
$15,000.00
Harbor Meetings
Harbor
and Courses
Laboratory
Program
LOR
2018 Annual Event
New York & New
$10,000.00
Sponsorship
Jersey Minority
Supplier
Development
LOR
2018 Greater New
American Diabetes
$10,000.00
York Tour de
Association
Cure & Wellness
Expo
LOR
National Minority
Make Well Known
$25,000.00
Cardiovascular
Foundation
Alliance
LOR
OASC Annual
Ohio Association
$1,000.00
Conference
of Senior
Centers
LOR
2018 Flu Podcast
Women In
$5,000.00
Campaign
Government
Foundation, Inc.
LOR
25th Annual
Florida Health
$5,000.00
National
Care Coalition
Conference
LOR
State Lung Health
Respiratory
$500.00
Education
Health
Program
Association
LOR
CWAG 2018 Annual
Conference of
$5,000.00
Meeting
Western
Attorneys
General
LOR
2018 Town Hall
American Society
$203,900.00
Meeting Support
for Preventive
Cardiology
LOR
Get in Rhythm
American
$25,000.00
Stay in Rhythm--
Foundation for
Afib Patient
Women's Health
Conference
LOR
PRISMS 10th Smith- PRISMS, Inc.
$2,500.00
Magenis Syndrome
Conference
LOR
Guidelines for
Florida
$50,000.00
Antimicrobial
International
Stewardship
University
Foundation
LOR
Latin American
Florida
$70,000.00
and Caribbean
International
Diabetes
University
Network: A
Foundation
framework
LOR
Assesment of
Florida
$60,000.00
acellular
International
vaccination
University
programs in
Foundation
Mexico, Costa
LOR
Bioorganic
Gordon Research
$1,000.00
Research
Conferences
Conference
LOR
National
Trustees of
$150,000.00
Community Health
Boston
Workers Project
University
LOR
Health Innovation
Springboard 2000
$25,000.00
Hub 2018
Enterprises,
Inc.
LOR
Bill Foege Event
Map International
$10,000.00
Sponsorship
LOR
SDHB Pheo-Para
SDHB Pheo-Para
$10,000.00
Coalition Gala
Coalition, Inc.
LOR
9th International
University of
$2,000.00
Conference on
Florida
Unstable
Foundation, Inc.
Microsatellites
and Human
Disease
LOR
21st Annual
HealthCare 21
$3,000.00
Health &
Business
Productivity
Coalition
Forum
LOR
2018 Celebrating
Blood and Marrow
$25,000.00
a Second Chance
Transplant
at Life
Information
Survivorship
Sympos
LOR
Patient Education
Taking Control of
$40,000.00
Diabetes
Your Diabetes
Conferences and
Health Fairs
LOR
Patient Education
Taking Control of
$60,000.00
Diabetes
Your Diabetes
Conferences and
Health Fairs
LOR
2018 FH Global
The FH Foundation
$75,000.00
Summit
LOR
Chemical Biology
Northeastern
$1,000.00
in the Hub
Section of the
Symposium
American
Chemical Society
LOR
2018 Champion of
National Kidney
$1,000.00
Hope Tribute
Foundation of
Dinner
Michigan
LOR
7th International
CASSS
$2,500.00
Symposium on
Higher Order
Structure of
Protein
Therapeutics
LOR
Bioassays 2018:
CASSS
$2,500.00
Scientific
Approaches &
Regulatory
Strategies
LOR
A Taste of Ginger
Joslin Diabetes
$10,000.00
Gala
Center, Inc.
LOR
2018 Annual
Western
$10,000.00
Meeting
Governors'
Sponsorship
Foundation
LOR
Community Hope
Community Hope,
$10,000.00
Annual Dinner
Inc.
LOR
8th International
Florida
$150,000.00
Conference on
International
Global Health
University
Foundation
LOR
8th International
Florida
$14,000.00
Conference on
International
Global Health
University
Foundation
LOR
2018 Machestic
Machestic Dragons
$5,500.00
Dragons ``Paddle
for Pink''
Community Dragon
LOR
``Visions of
Diabetes
$2,500.00
Hope'' Awards
Foundation Inc.
Dinner
LOR
Stick It to
Mercy Health
$2,000.00
Diabetes
Foundation
Joplin
LOR
2018
FSH Society
$2,000.00
International
Research
Conference
LOR
Teratology
Teratology
$1,500.00
Society 58th
Society
Annual Meeting
LOR
255th ACS
ACS Division of
$5,000.00
National Meeting
Biochemical
and Exposition
Technology
(BIOT Division)
LOR
Forum on
National Academy
$50,000.00
Neuroscience and
of Sciences
Nervous System
Disorders
LOR
2018 National
ACS Division of
$3,000.00
Medicinal
Medicinal
Chemistry
Chemistry
Symposium
LOR
Giving Diabetes
The Diabetes
$2,500.00
the Blues
Coalition of
Conference
Mississippi
LOR
Diabetes Care and
Academy of
$10,000.00
Dietetic
Nutrition and
Education
Dietetics
Program
LOR
2018 Heart &
The American
$25,000.00
Stroke Ball
Heart
Association
LOR
RNA Therapeutics:
The Umass
$10,000.00
From Base Pairs
Memorial
to Bedsides
Foundation Inc.
LOR
2nd Annual Heart
Metabolic
$100,000.00
in Diabetes--HiD
Endocrine
Education
Foundation
LOR
Immuno-Therapy
The University of
$50,000.00
Scientific
Texas Foundation
Workshop
LOR
Cell Culture
Engineering
$2,500.00
Engineering XVI
Conferences
Conference
International
LOR
2018 LVBCH Annual
Lehigh Valley
$1,000.00
Conference
Business
Coalition on
Healthcare
LOR
Bowhay Institute
The Council of
$5,000.00
State
Government, Ltd.
LOR
2018 Lysosomes
Gordon Research
$2,000.00
and Endocytosis
Conferences
Gordon Research
Conference
LOR
South Sound JDRF
JDRF
$1,000.00
One Walk
International--N
orthwest Chapter
LOR
36th Annual
JDRF
$2,500.00
Nordstrom Beat
the Bridge
LOR
Diabetes Under
American Diabetes
$1,000.00
the Dome Event
Association
LOR
2018 Wenger
WomenHeart: The
$25,000.00
Awards Dinner
National
Coalition for
Women With Heart
Disease
LOR
CRI's
Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Immunotherapy
Institute Inc.
Patient Summit
Series
LOR
2018 HBA Woman of
Healthcare
$15,000.00
the Year Event
Businesswomen's
Association
LOR
Transforming
Dress for Success
$15,000.00
Lives 20th year
Northern New
Celebration
Jersey--10
LOR
Recovery of
American Chemical
$10,000.00
Biological
Society,
Products XVIII
Division of
Conference
Biochemistry
LOR
Friends for Life
Children with
$25,000.00
Orlando 2018
Diabetes
Patient
Conference
LOR
2018 Orlando
Children with
$10,000.00
Fellows Program
Diabetes
LOR
Hypoglycemia
Endocrine Society
$150,000.00
Quality
Improvement/
Prevention
Project
LOR
2018 Annual Henry
The Henry Kunkel
$2,000.00
Kunkel Society
Society c/o The
Meeting
Rockefeller
LOR
GPEN 2018
Globalization of
$1,500.00
Scientific
Pharmaceutics
Meeting
Education
LOR
2018 Conference
Employers Health
$7,500.00
Sponsorship
Coalition, Inc.
LOR
RVCC's 50th
Raritan Valley
$25,000.00
Anniversary
Community
Golden Harvest
College Foundat
Gala
LOR
2018 PQA Annual
Healthcare
$6,100.00
Meeting
Businesswomen's
Association
LOR
2018 PQA Annual
PQA, Inc.
$12,500.00
Meeting
LOR
eValue8 Project
Northeast
$2,500.00
Business Group
on Health
LOR
Annual Good Grief
Good Grief Inc.
$3,500.00
Gala
LOR
8th Annual
Center for
$10,000.00
Diversity,
Healthcare
Inclusion, &
Innovation
Health Equity
Symposium
LOR
Real World
American Diabetes
$210,000.00
Evidence
Association
Generation and
Analysis
Research
Symposium
LOR
From Rare to
Keystone Symposia
$3,000.00
Care: Discovery,
on Molecular and
Modeling and
Cellular
Translation of
Rare Diseases
LOR
6th Annual
International
$15,000.00
Meeting of the
Cytokine and
International
Interferon
Cytokine &
Society
Interferon
LOR
Diabetes and CV
Icahn School of
$30,000.00
Risk Factors
Medicine at
Program
Mount Sinai
LOR
Prix Galien USA
The Galien
$15,000.00
Forum
Foundation
LOR
Learning Sessions
The Health
$5,000.00
Program
Collaborative
LOR
Horton's Kids
Horton's Kids,
$15,000.00
Comprehensive
Inc.
Programming for
At-Risk Children
LOR
Children's Health
Children's Health
$30,000.00
Fund 2018 Annual
Fund
Benefit
LOR
60th Anniversary
Project Hope The
$10,000.00
Project HOPE
People To People
Gala
Health
LOR
Structural
Harvard Medical
$2,500.00
Biology Meeting
School
LOR
PROMIS: Global
Harvard Medical
$2,500.00
Advances in
School
Methodology and
Clinical Science
LOR
68th Annual
Somerset County
$2,500.00
Outstanding
Business
Citizen of the
Partnership
Year Awards
Dinner
LOR
Annual Meeting
Somerset County
$2,500.00
Awards Luncheon
Business
2018
Partnership
LOR
Illinois Diabetes
Illinois Diabetes
$250.00
Caucus
Caucus
Fundraiser
Foundation
LOR
18th annual
The Virginia
$700.00
luncheon
Public Access
Project
LOR
Grand Tastings
Jersey Battered
$15,000.00
XXIV
Women's Service,
Inc.
LOR
d18 Executive
The diaTribe
$250,000.00
Innovation Lab
Foundation
on Diabetes and
Prediabetes
LOR
2018 Scientific
Children's
$10,000.00
Program in
Hospital
Cellular and
Corporation
Molecular
Medicine
LOR
JDRF One Walk,
JDRF
$2,500.00
Washington, DC
LOR
WOCIP 2018-2019
Women of Color in
$20,000.00
Annual Meeting
Pharma
LOR
WOCIP 2018-2019
Women of Color in
$20,000.00
Annual Meeting
Pharma
LOR
Koch Institute
Massachusetts
$5,000.00
2018 Summer
Institute of
Symposium
Technology
LOR
Koch Institute
Massachusetts
$5,000.00
2018 Summer
Institute of
Symposium
Technology
LOR
Event Sponsorship- Discovering
$10,000.00
Discovering
Justice
Justice 20th
Anniversary Gala
LOR
Boston
Children's
$3,000.00
Postdoctoral
Hospital
Association
Corporation
Symposium on
Careers and
Collaboration in
Science
LOR
ONE: The Ultimate
Taking Control of
$20,000.00
Conference for
Your Diabetes
Adult Type 1
LOR
2018 Gordon
Gordon Research
$3,000.00
Research
Conferences
Conference on
Heterocycles
LOR
PDAF Fundraiser
Prescription Drug
$1,250.00
Sponsorship
Assistance
Foundation
LOR
Generations Gala
Adult Day Center
$3,000.00
Event
of Somerset
County
LOR
12th Annual
The diaTribe
$10,000.00
Diabetes Forum
Foundation
LOR
2018 Triangle
JDRF
$10,000.00
Hope Glala
LOR
Lecture Series
The New York
$25,000.00
Program
Academy of
Sciences
LOR
Division of
ACS Division of
$3,000.00
Medicinal
Medicinal
Chemistry
Chemistry
Program ACS
National Meeting
LOR
11th Annual
Brigham and
$2,000.00
Polycystic
Women's Hospital
Kidney Disease
Symposium
LOR
DA4S East Coast
Diversity
$7,500.00
2018
Alliance for
Science, Inc.
LOR
The Jessica
Dana Farber
$5,000.00
Ingram Lecture
Cancer Institute
Series
LOR
The Jessica
Dana Farber
$5,000.00
Ingram Lecture
Cancer Institute
Series
LOR
Key Initiatives
Prostate Cancer
$30,000.00
Program
Education
Council
LOR
NEQCA Annual
New England
$5,000.00
Forum
Quality Care
Alliance
LOR
MMRF 2018 Myeloma
Multiple Myeloma
$100,000.00
Patient and
Research
Caregiver
Foundation
Education
Program
LOR
National Forum
National Forum
$200,000.00
for Heart
for Heart
Disease
Disease and
Stroke
LOR
TB Survivors for
National TB
$5,000.00
Patient
Controllers
Education
Association
LOR
9th Annual Spirit
Association of
$50,000.00
of the Heart
Black
Awards Dinner
Cardiologists
LOR
Change for Women
Catalyst Inc.
$15,000.00
in the Workplace
Program
LOR
2018 Annual
Washington Policy
$3,500.00
Dinner
Center
LOR
National
The Mended
$25,000.00
Education &
Hearts, Inc.
Training
Conference 2018
LOR
2018 ICSA
International
$3,000.00
Symposium
Chinese
Statistical
Association
LOR
BMT InfoNet
Blood and Marrow
$10,000.00
Patient Guide
Transplant
Reprint
Information
LOR
Research on
Harvard T.H. Chan
$200,000.00
Health
School of Public
Technology
Health
Assessment
LOR
DIA Inspires
Drug Information
$4,500.00
Award Dinner
Asssociation
(DIA)
LOR
Diabetes
Fundacion Centro
$7,000.00
Education
Pediatrico de
Program for
Diabetes
School Personnel
and T1D Students
LOR
NCCN Guidelines
NCCN Foundation
$25,000.00
for Patients
guide
LOR
Fall Meeting
Middle Atlantic
$1,000.00
Sponsorship
Reproduction and
Teratolog
LOR
PROMIS: Global
PROMIS Health
$15,000.00
Advances in
Organization
Methodology and
(PHO)
Clinical Science
LOR
Immunization
Idaho
$2,500.00
Summit 2018
Immunization
Coalition
LOR
Bob Langer 70th
Rutgers
$20,000.00
Birthday Gala
University
and Symposium
Foundation
LOR
TMA Group Annual
Texas Medical
$1,200.00
Meeting
Association
LOR
Clinical Inertia
American Diabetes
$300,000.00
Campaign
Association
LOR
Life Sciences
Life Sciences PA
$250.00
Event June 2018
LOR
CE in the
CASSS
$2,500.00
Biotechnology &
Pharmaceutical
Industries: 20th
Symposium
LOR
15th Symposium on
CASSS
$2,500.00
the Practical
Applications of
Mass
Spectrometry
LOR
NCQA's Quality
National
$10,000.00
Talks 2018
Committee for
Quality
Assurance
LOR
Gala of Giving
Operation Jersey
$3,000.00
Country Style
Cares
2018
LOR
Cell & Gene
CASSS
$5,000.00
Therapy Products
(CGTP):
Manufacturing,
Quality
LOR
Newletter Funding
Skin Cancer
$100,000.00
Foundation
LOR
Advocating for
Lupus Foundation
$5,000.00
Chronic Disease
of America Inc.
Patients
LOR
Inspiring Hope
Cancer Support
$2,500.00
Gala
Community
Central
LOR
2018 National
Lung Cancer
$10,000.00
Advocacy Summit
Alliance
LOR
Bastille Day
Resources USA
$5,000.00
Boston 2018
Inc.
LOR
Bastille Day
Resources USA
$10,000.00
Washington DC
Inc.
2018
LOR
The Lancet Women
Icahn School of
$100,000.00
and
Medicine at
Cardiovascular
Mount Sinai
Disease
Commission
LOR
Northeast
CASSS
$2,500.00
Regional Forum
October 2018
LOR
2018 National
Research!America
$25,000.00
Health Research
Forum
LOR
Promoting Nurses
Preventive
$25,000.00
as Leaders in
Cardiovascular
Prevention
Nurses
Program
Association
LOR
ACCC educational
Association of
$144,000.00
program funding
Community Cancer
Centers
LOR
Patient Access
Alliance for
$75,000.00
Collaborative
Patient Access
LOR
NJMLA 2018 Annual
New Jersey Muslim
$1,250.00
Eid Gala
Lawyer
Association
LOR
2018 Biomarkers
Foundation for
$2,500.00
Consortium
the National
meeting
Institutes of
Health
LOR
Pro Bono
Pro Bono
$25,000.00
Partnership 2018
Partnership
Gala
LOR
Tour de Cure
American Diabetes
$2,500.00
Hawaii
Association
LOR
19th Annual
Patient Advocate
$10,000.00
Patient Congress
Foundation
LOR
Patient Education
ZERO--The End of
$8,000.00
Webinar Funding
Prostate Cancer
LOR
2018 Diabetes
Joslin Diabetes
$5,000.00
Coalition
Center, Inc.
Conference
LOR
Mary's Center
Mary's Center
$30,000.00
2018 Symposium
LOR
2018 Safety
Safety
$2,500.00
Pharmacology
Pharmacology
Society Annual
Society
meeting
LOR
Drugs for
Drugs for
$50,000.00
Neglected
Neglected
Diseases
Diseases
initiative
Initiative,
(DNDi)'s Making
North American
Medical History
Inc.
LOR
Drugs for
Drugs for
$25,000.00
Neglected
Neglected
Diseases
Diseases
initiative
Initiative North
(DNDi)'s Making
American Inc.
Medical History
LOR
Drugs for
Drugs for
$25,000.00
Neglected
Neglected
Diseases
Diseases
initiative
Initiative North
(DNDi)'s Making
American Inc.
Medical History
LOR
Pharmacy Alumni
The Ohio State
$1,000.00
Society
University
Pharmathon 5k
Foundation
Sponsorship
LOR
Diabetes Policy
Alliance for
$150,000.00
Advocacy
Patient Access
Initiatives
LOR
Yale
Yale University
$2,000.00
Immunobiology
Student
Symposium 2018
LOR
ConnecT1D Family
ConnecT1D
$5,000.00
Camp 2018
LOR
2018 Alumni Hall
Hispanic
$25,000.00
of Fame Gala
Scholarship Fund
Dinner
LOR
JDRF One Walk
JDRF
$5,000.00
LOR
ACS CAN National
American Cancer
$35,000.00
Advocacy
Society Cancer
Activities
Action Network
LOR
American College
American College
$2,500.00
of Toxicology
of Toxicology
39th Annual
Meeting
LOR
Fall Advocacy Day
ASTS Foundation
$15,000.00
LOR
2018 OFII Annual
Organization for
$15,000.00
Dinner
International
Investment
LOR
2018 Patient &
Biotechnology
$10,000.00
Health Advocacy
Innovation
Summit
Organization
LOR
2018 Indiana Tour
American Diabetes
$2,500.00
de Cure
Association,
Indiana
LOR
2018 JDRF One
JDRF
$5,000.00
Walk Syracuse
International
LOR
12th Annual Gala
International
$10,000.00
Celebration
Myeloma
Foundation
LOR
14th Annual
National Alliance
$2,500.00
Meeting of
of State
NASPCC
Prostate Cancer
LOR
Translational
American
$25,000.00
Cancer Research
Association for
for Basic
Cancer Research
Scientists
Workshop
LOR
Boston Heart Walk
American Heart
$5,000.00
Association
LOR
JDRF One Walk
JDRF
$5,000.00
2018
International
LOR
Airline Benefit
Americares
$12,000.00
Gala
LOR
Improving
National Minority
$125,000.00
Diabetes and
Quality Forum
Cardiovasular
Disease
Management
LOR
Digital Health
MassChallenge,
$100,000.00
Accellerator
Inc.
Program
LOR
Multiple Myeloma
Blood and Marrow
$3,750.00
Patient Survival
Transplant
Guide
Information
LOR
2018 ACS CAN
American Cancer
$25,000.00
State Events
Society Cancer
Program
Action Network
LOR
Healthcare
American College
$1,000.00
Leaders
of Healthcare
Educational
Executives
Events
LOR
36th Annual
President and
$10,000.00
Retreat for the
Fellows of
Harvard/MIT MD-
Harvard College
PhD Program
LOR
Moving the Needle
Healthcare
$1,000.00
on Gender Parity
Businesswomen's
Association
LOR
Employer's Guide
Northeast
$17,500.00
to Digital
Business Group
Diabetes
on Health
Prevention and
Management
LOR
10th Annual
Prevent Cancer
$5,000.00
Health Fair and
Foundation
5k Walk/Run
LOR
16th Annual Gala
Fundacion Centro
$3,500.00
Dinner
Pediatrico de
Diabetes
LOR
Advancement and
Cross-Company
$2,500.00
Challenges
Abuse Liability
Meeting
Council
LOR
Respiraory
Alliance for
$50,000.00
Therapy Access
Patient Access
Working Group
LOR
The Champions For
Skin Cancer
$25,000.00
Change Gala
Foundation
LOR
High Hopes Gala
Joslin Diabetes
$25,000.00
Center, Inc.
LOR
Friends Annual
Friends of Cancer
$10,000.00
Cancer Research
Research
Leadership
Awards
LOR
Women Building
Virginia Bio
$3,000.00
Bio Sponsorship
LOR
NACHW
Trustees of
$20,000.00
Organizational
Boston
Launch
University
Announcement
Event
LOR
2018 PQA
PQA, Inc.
$7,500.00
Leadership
Summit
LOR
High Level
Speak Up Africa d/
$25,000.00
Conference and
b/a The Access
Awards Event
Challenge
LOR
International
International
$90,000.00
Myeloma
Myeloma
Foundation
Foundation
Patient
Initiative
Programs
LOR
NCCN Innovation
National
$40,000.00
Pilot Program
Comprehensive
Cancer Network
LOR
Annual AMCP
Academy of
$18,000.00
meeting
Managed Care
Pharmacy
LOR
Solvable Problems
The diaTribe
$48,000.00
in Diabetes
Foundation
Program
LOR
NESOT Annual
Society of
$1,500.00
Meeting
Toxicology
LOR
Patient Advocacy
Cancer Support
$75,000.00
Kit for Multiple
Community
Myeloma
LOR
Patient Education
National Kidney
$7,500.00
Brochure Big Ask
Foundation, Inc.
Big Give
LOR
Patient Awareness
National Hispanic
$25,000.00
and Education
Medical
Program for
Association
Hispanic Patient
LOR
Diabetes Family
Fundacion Centro
$5,000.00
Day Sponsorship
Pediatrico de
Diabetes
LOR
Annual Promise
JDRF
$20,000.00
Ball
International
LOR
Congress
American Society
$10,000.00
Sponsorship
of Hematology
LOR
Scientific Annual
Lupus Research
$10,000.00
Conference
Alliance
LOR
R3 Annual Forum
Multi Regional
$7,500.00
Clinical Trial
Center of
Brigham
LOR
Diabetes
Public Health
$10,000.00
Prevention on
Advocates
the Ground in
California
Sponsorship
LOR
Northcrest Annual
NorthCrest
$2,500.00
Gala
Medical Center
Foundation
LOR
19th Annual
GLBTQ Legal
$3,000.00
Spirit of
Advocates &
Justice Award
Defenders (GLAD)
Dinner
LOR
AUTM Annual
Association of
$5,000.00
Meeting
University
Technology Mana
LOR
TCYOD Patient
Taking Control of
$75,000.00
Conferences and
Your Diabetes
Health Fairs
LOR
New Jersey Smart
RideWise, Inc.
$1,000.00
Workplace Annual
recognition
event
LOR
Breakfast
Women In
$7,500.00
Sponsorship
Government
Foundation, Inc.
LOR
Patient Education
Malecare
$20,000.00
African American
Men with
Prostate Cancer
LOR
Patient Education
Malecare
$15,000.00
Brochure: Simple
Cancer
LOR
ONE: The
Taking Control of
$75,000.00
Ultimaite
Your Diabetes
Conference and
Retreate for
Adults with Type
I
LOR
Women in
All in Together
$40,000.00
Healthcare
Campaign Inc.
Policy Forum
LOR
Innovation Labs
The diaTribe
$100,000.00
on Diabetes and
Foundation
Prediabetes
LOR
Annual Joe
Joe Andruzzi
$5,000.00
Andruzzi
Foundation Inc.
Foundation Gala
LOR
Corporate
AMGA
$25,000.00
Sponsorship for
Institute for
Quality
Leadership
LOR
Patient Awareness
ZERO--The End of
$10,000.00
and Education
Prostate Cancer
Program
LOR
Congress
Metabolic
$50,000.00
Sponsorship
Endocrine
Education
Foundation
LOR
2018 Annual
PCMA
$95,000.00
Meeting
Sponsorship
LOR
PCMA Business
PCMA
$80,000.00
Forum
Sponsorship
LOR
Cardiovascular
Association of
$30,000.00
Risk Reduction
Black
Project
Cardiologists
LOR
Corporate
California Life
$8,500.00
Sponsorship for
Sciences
Institute for
Association
Life Sciences
Academy
LOR
Friends
Friends of Cancer
$50,000.00
ImmunoOncology
Research
Programs
LOR
Patient Education
Prostate Cancer
$20,000.00
Brochure:
Education
Chemotherary in
Council
Prosate Cancer
LOR
2018 Patient
BIONJ Inc.
$1,000.00
Advocacy Summit
Sponsorship
LOR
Patient Guide
Arizona Myeloma
$10,000.00
Living with
Network (AZMN)
Myeloma
LOR
Yellow Fever
Fondation Merieux
$10,000.00
Symposium
USA, Inc.
LOR
Patient Education
Blood and Marrow
$40,000.00
Brochure on
Transplant
Transplantation
Information
LOR
MBGH Sponsorship
Midwest Business
$20,000.00
Request
Group on Health
LOR
Patient Education
American Academy
$30,000.00
Brochure on SCC
of Dermatology
Inc.
LOR
HBA Woman of the
Healthcare
$22,250.00
Year Luncheon
Businesswomen's
Association
LOR
Corporate
Midwest Business
$30,000.00
Sponsorship
Group on Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of
Primary
Primary
Physician/Teaching
Payment
Amount
Purpose
Nature
Hospital Name (NPI)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/10/2015
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Vanderbilt
Equivalent
University
Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/15/2015
$74,987.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Childrens Hospital
Equivalent
Medical Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/24/2015
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Langley Porter
Equivalent
Psychiatric
Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/01/2015
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Emory University
Equivalent
Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/01/2015
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Uci Medical Center
Equivalent
(.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/26/2015
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Uci Medical Center
Equivalent
(.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/07/2015
$43,494.57
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
University of
Equivalent
Alabama Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/17/2016
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Vanderbilt
Equivalent
University
Hospitals & Cl (.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/21/2016
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Emory University
Equivalent
Hospital (.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/09/2016
$77,537.90
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Emory University
Equivalent
Hospital (.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/07/2016
$77,317.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Ann & Robert H.
Equivalent
Lurie Childrens
Hos (.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/01/2016
$63,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Resnick
Equivalent
Neuropsychiatric
Hospital At (.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/07/2016
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
University Of
Equivalent
Alabama Hospital
(.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/27/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Ann & Robert H.
Equivalent
Lurie Childrens
Hos (1497018154)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/02/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Hospital Of The
Equivalent
Univ Of Penna
(1003946153)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/01/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Cooper University
Equivalent
Hospital
(1053654749)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/01/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Childrens Hospital
Equivalent
Medical Center
(1083665137)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/01/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Uci Medical Center
Equivalent
(.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/01/2017
$63,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Resnick
Equivalent
Neuropsychiatric
Hospital At
(1124327853)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/12/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Emory University
Equivalent
Hospital (.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/12/2017
$63,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Resnick
Equivalent
Neuropsychiatric
Hospital At
(1124327853)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/17/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Uci Medical Center
Equivalent
(.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/06/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Vanderbilt
Equivalent
University Medical
Center
(1104202761)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/02/2017
$75,000.00
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
Emory University
Equivalent
Hospital (.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/14/2017
$73,714.12
Fellowship
Cash or Cash
University Of
Equivalent
Alabama Hospital
(.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Payment Report
Recipient Type
Address Line 1
City
State
ZIP
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1211 MEDICAL
NASHVILLE
TN
37232
CENTER DRIVE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
3333 BURNET
CINCINNATI
OH
45229
AVENUE MLC
#4900
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
405 PARNASUS
SAN
CA
94143
FRANCISCO
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1364 CLIFTON
ATLANTA
GA
30302
ROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
101 CITY DRIVE
ORANGE
CA
92868
SOUTH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
101 CITY DRIVE
ORANGE
CA
92868
SOUTH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
619 SOUTH 19TH
BIRMINGHAM
AL
35233
STREET
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1211 MEDICAL
NASHVILLE
TN
37232
CENTER DRIVE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1364 CLIFTON
ATLANTA
GA
30302
ROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1364 CLIFTON
ATLANTA
GA
30302
ROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
225 EAST CHICAGO
CHICAGO
IL
60611
AVENUE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
150 UCLA MEDICAL
LOS ANGELES
CA
90095
PLAZA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
619 SOUTH 19TH
BIRMINGHAM
AL
35233
STREET
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
225 EAST CHICAGO
CHICAGO
IL
60611
AVENUE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
3400 SPRUCE
PHILADELPHIA
PA
19104
STREET
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
ONE COOPER PLAZA
CAMDEN
NJ
08103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
3333 BURNET
CINCINNATI
OH
45229
AVENUE MLC
#4900
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
101 CITY DRIVE
ORANGE
CA
92868
SOUTH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
150 UCLA MEDICAL
LOS ANGELES
CA
90095
PLAZA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1364 CLIFTON
ATLANTA
GA
30302
ROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
150 UCLA MEDICAL
LOS ANGELES
CA
90095
PLAZA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
101 CITY DRIVE
ORANGE
CA
92868
SOUTH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1211 MEDICAL
NASHVILLE
TN
37232
CENTER DRIVE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
1364 CLIFTON
ATLANTA
GA
30302
ROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teaching hospital
619 SOUTH 19TH
BIRMINGHAM
AL
35233
STREET
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of
Payment
Amount
Primary Purpose
Primary Nature
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/11/2015
$124,572.50
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/15/2015
$74,327.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/20/2015
$174,088.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$5,648.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$7,060.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$7,060.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$5,648.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$4,236.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$350.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$1,250.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$1,086.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$5,648.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$2,824.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$2,824.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$9,775.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$750.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/27/2015
$7,234.45
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/08/2015
$11,074.80
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$6,698.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$1,551.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/06/2015
$127,160.70
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/06/2015
$385,403.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/27/2015
$137,506.80
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/24/2015
$35,672.06
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/17/2015
$36,130.95
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/15/2015
$7,226.19
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/10/2015
$325,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/20/2015
$5,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/21/2015
$5,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/07/2015
$49,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/21/2015
$16,089.68
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/02/2015
$14,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/10/2015
$5,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/06/2015
$20,100.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$1,412.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$1,412.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$1,412.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/14/2015
$8,363.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/08/2015
$7,760.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/03/2015
$4,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/27/2015
$28,585.85
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/14/2015
$85,757.55
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/20/2015
$28,585.85
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/03/2015
$61,725.52
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/03/2015
$11,176.62
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/03/2015
$24,246.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/13/2015
$125,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/15/2015
$200,000.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/13/2015
$39,771.64
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/05/2015
$39,771.64
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/09/2015
$39,771.65
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/19/2015
$119,166.66
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/26/2015
$185,900.01
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/02/2015
$61,966.67
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/28/2015
$61,966.66
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/17/2015
$126,059.09
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/17/2015
$126,059.09
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/07/2015
$174,088.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/06/2015
$59,187.50
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/19/2015
$59,187.50
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/14/2015
$11,120.67
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/26/2015
$28,612.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/16/2015
$28,612.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/11/2015
$7,234.45
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/24/2015
$28,830.75
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/17/2015
$30,167.85
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/17/2015
$24,228.75
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/11/2015
$355,830.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/26/2015
$28,777.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/17/2015
$8,329.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/14/2015
$9,229.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/19/2015
$53,400.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/10/2015
$214,706.70
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/17/2015
$7,425.18
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/23/2015
$12,375.30
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/07/2015
$160,228.80
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/23/2015
$14,850.36
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/26/2016
$114,107.36
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/12/2016
$250,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/26/2016
$54,115.17
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/17/2016
$174,088.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/26/2016
$35,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/02/2016
$18,334.48
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/13/2016
$174,088.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/28/2016
$224,593.02
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/13/2016
$22,950.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/09/2016
$50,279.75
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/19/2016
$28,830.75
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/12/2016
$24,228.75
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/19/2016
$24,228.75
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/26/2016
$33,332.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/08/2016
$30,589.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/19/2016
$7,234.45
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/28/2016
$15,750.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/27/2016
$42,502.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/07/2016
$38,530.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/15/2016
$22,106.80
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/16/2016
$3,103.89
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/22/2016
$114,600.84
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/23/2016
$88,057.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/27/2016
$12,930.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/13/2016
$18,768.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/14/2016
$88,057.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/14/2016
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/14/2016
$959.62
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/14/2016
$3,047.08
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/14/2016
$1,556.04
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/14/2016
$3,941.70
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/14/2016
$661.42
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/27/2016
$293,490.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/09/2016
$12,505.30
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/12/2016
$76,515.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/16/2016
$36,067.85
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/18/2016
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/29/2016
$12,930.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/29/2016
$64,130.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/29/2016
$25,730.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/31/2016
$3,103.89
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/04/2016
$76,930.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/13/2016
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/19/2016
$152,796.13
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/28/2016
$12,930.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/05/2016
$12,505.30
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/09/2016
$153,730.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/09/2016
$51,015.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/24/2016
$576,860.60
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/25/2016
$117,405.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/06/2016
$117,405.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/13/2016
$352,185.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/13/2016
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/25/2016
$11,312.95
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/26/2016
$15,040.60
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/26/2016
$21,998.88
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/26/2016
$27,466.10
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/26/2016
$24,981.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/27/2016
$7,585.30
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/27/2016
$27,963.12
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/28/2016
$12,505.30
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/31/2016
$12,930.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/01/2016
$22,106.80
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/14/2016
$3,103.89
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/27/2016
$88,057.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/10/2016
$72,120.70
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/19/2016
$22,106.80
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/24/2016
$12,505.30
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/31/2016
$293,760.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/31/2016
$58,764.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/31/2016
$12,930.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/31/2016
$58,764.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/01/2016
$29,389.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/15/2016
$77,933.40
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/17/2016
$58,764.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/21/2016
$19,265.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/21/2016
$134,465.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/14/2016
$88,138.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/19/2016
$293,760.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/05/2016
$382.26
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/17/2016
$449.71
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/09/2016
$1,122,210.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/08/2016
$1,122,209.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/16/2016
$59,187.50
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/18/2016
$67,970.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/26/2016
$19,474.93
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/02/2016
$47,400.50
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/13/2016
$47,400.50
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/04/2017
$862.56
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/10/2017
$12,930.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/11/2017
$6,317.65
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/16/2017
$862.56
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/18/2017
$29,362.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$11,247.95
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$288.66
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$11,247.95
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$1,108.73
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$19,945.80
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$4,538.12
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$13,549.36
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$3,112.08
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$24,916.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/24/2017
$810.52
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/08/2017
$884.54
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/01/2017
$884.54
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/13/2017
$25,730.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/16/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/29/2017
$6,317.65
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/30/2017
$145,308.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/06/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/01/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/08/2017
$45,402.40
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/18/2017
$29,362.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/25/2017
$29,362.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/08/2017
$22,766.20
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/12/2017
$22,766.20
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/15/2017
$29,362.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/15/2017
$29,362.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/29/2017
$14,980.36
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/05/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/13/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/17/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/25/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/25/2017
$19,945.80
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/25/2017
$10,129.40
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/25/2017
$10,194.40
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/25/2017
$24,916.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/25/2017
$2,413.36
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/02/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/15/2017
$15,220.80
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/24/2017
$440,227.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/20/2017
$30,311.60
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/21/2017
$14,980.36
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/18/2017
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/30/2017
$305,489.41
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/29/2017
$6,855.86
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/29/2017
$40,810.16
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/18/2017
$162,934.69
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/20/2017
$1,163,061.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/20/2017
$831,459.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/12/2017
$140,654.12
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/01/2017
$75,158.78
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/25/2017
$53,668.90
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/20/2017
$391,759.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/21/2017
$76,900.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/12/2017
$55,768.59
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/18/2017
$77,522.30
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/02/2017
$7,955.33
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/06/2017
$43,280.58
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/17/2017
$244,633.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/17/2017
$37,134.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/21/2017
$6,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/04/2017
$7,234.45
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/23/2017
$50,279.75
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/15/2017
$92,654.93
Investigator
...................
Sponsored Trial
Cash or Cash
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/25/2017
$128,325.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/18/2017
$128,325.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/05/2017
$128,325.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/07/2017
$128,325.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/09/2017
$66,562.62
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/06/2017
$66,562.62
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/03/2017
$66,562.62
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/02/2017
$80,715.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/04/2017
$47,400.50
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/04/2017
$47,400.97
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/17/2017
$100,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/02/2017
$26,701.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/18/2017
$190,471.20
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/15/2017
$2,100.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/14/2017
$23,348.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/30/2017
$140,654.12
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/19/2017
$188,832.43
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/05/2017
$2,835.71
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/22/2018
$16,681.38
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/22/2018
$427.27
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/22/2018
$750.53
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/23/2018
$15,679.17
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/23/2018
$3,904.40
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/23/2018
$12,928.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/25/2018
$25,640.33
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/25/2018
$1,118.37
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/25/2018
$2,872.13
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/29/2018
$712,788.63
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/20/2018
$152,752.20
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/11/2018
$314,348.09
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/17/2018
$19,930.48
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/22/2018
$261,959.23
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/29/2018
$157,181.55
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/10/2018
$16,302.40
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/10/2018
$13,607.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/12/2018
$17,650.10
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/12/2018
$27,084.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/17/2018
$209,570.39
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/19/2018
$88,057.50
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/14/2018
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/20/2018
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/23/2018
$117,405.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/17/2018
$157,181.55
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/27/2018
$157,181.55
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/29/2018
$261,959.23
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/28/2018
$58,710.00
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/29/2018
$104,792.70
Investigator
Product
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/26/2018
$348.48
Investigator
Supplies
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/26/2018
$28.32
Investigator
Supplies
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/25/2018
$67.25
Investigator
Supplies
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/28/2018
$281.36
Investigator
Supplies
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/27/2018
$793,755.00
Investigator
Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/24/2018
$277,130.00
Investigator
Investigator Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/19/2018
$207,848.00
Investigator
Investigator Fees
Sponsored Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/20/2018
$26,125.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/30/2018
$76,900.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/12/2018
$29,796.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/20/2018
$178,970.30
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/16/2018
$244,633.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
02/06/2018
$128,325.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/06/2018
$128,325.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
09/06/2018
$128,325.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/19/2018
$66,562.62
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/15/2018
$35,581.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/15/2018
$30,030.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/19/2018
$52,087.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
07/23/2018
$31,131.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/30/2018
$14,223.80
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/03/2018
$144,601.03
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/02/2018
$47,500.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/02/2018
$148,734.45
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
03/29/2018
$238,670.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/05/2018
$104,418.67
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/10/2018
$7,939.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/26/2018
$14,624.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/09/2018
$100,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/02/2018
$53,668.90
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
01/05/2018
$391,759.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
05/08/2018
$28,610.89
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10/29/2018
$78,100.80
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
08/21/2018
$29,796.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/19/2018
$103,543.60
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/19/2018
$97,510.18
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12/10/2018
$48,814.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11/19/2018
$72,000.00
Investigator
Cash or Cash
Sponsored Trial
Equivalent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Physician/
Teaching
Address
Hospital Name
Line 1
City
State
ZIP
Name of Study
(NPI)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Montefiore
111 EAST
BRONX
NY
10467
A roadmap for
Medical
210TH
the conversion
Center
STREET
from sliding
scale to basal
insulin in the
long term care
setting.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Langley Porter
405
SAN
CA
94143
A Phase I Study
Psychiatric
PARNASUS
FRANCI
of Cabazitaxel,
SCO
Mitoxanthrone,
and Prednison
(CAMP) for
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
and no Prior
Chemotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
An Exploratory
Hospital for
AVENUE
YORK
Randomized
Cancer and
Phase II
Allied
Multicenter
Diseases
Trial of
Abiraterone
Acetate with or
without
Cabazitaxel in
Treatment of
Metastatic
Castration
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keck Hospital
1500 SAN
LOS
CA
90033
Detection of
of USC
PABLO
ANGELE
early end-organ
STREET
S
damage by
endothelial
dysfunction
with reactive
hyperemia-
digital
peripheral
arterial
tonometry in
patients with
Fabry disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Improved
Alabama
19TH
HAM
Detection,
Hospital
STREET
Diagnosis, and
Management of
Fabry Disease
through Serial
Ophthalmic
Documentation
and Tear Fluid
Analysis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham and
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Effects of an
Womens
STREET
Intensive
Hospital
Intervention on
Medication
Adherence,
Glycemic
Control, and
Readmission
Rates in
Patients with
Type 2 Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
2
SEATTLE
WA
98195
FLuctuation
Washington
Reduction With
Insulin and GLP-
1 Added
Together (FLAT-
SUGAR)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beth Israel
330
BOSTON
MA
02215
Simplification
Deaconess
BROOKLINE
of diabetes
Medical
AVENUE
regimen in
Center
elderly
patients using
glargine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase I Study of
Cancer
BROOKLINE
Plerixafor
Institute
AVE
(AMD3100) and
Bevacizumab for
recurrent high-
grade glioma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase I/II Trial
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Combination
Institute
AVE
AMD3100 and
Bortezomib in
Relapsed or
Relapsed/
Refractory
Multiple
Myeloma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase I/II Trial
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Combination
Institute
AVE
AMD3100 and
Bortezomib in
Relapsed or
Relapsed/
Refractory
Multiple
Myeloma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Taxotere Plus
Cancer
BROOKLINE
Six-Month
Institute
AVE
Androgen
Suppression and
Radiation
Therapy vs Six-
Month Androgen
Suppression and
Radiation
Therapy for
Patients with
High-Risk
Localized or
Locally
Advanced
Prostate
Cancer: A
Randomized
Controlled
Trial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase I/II Study
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
of Plerixafor
BLVD
and Clofarabine
in Previously
Untreated Older
(>= 60 years)
Adult Patients
with Acute
Myelogenous
Leukemia (AML)
for Whom
Standard
Induction
Chemotherapy is
Unlikely to be
of Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
G-CSF and
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Plerixafor with
BLVD
Sorafenib for
Acute
Myelogenous
Leukemia with
FLT3(ITD)
mutations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase I/II Study
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
of Plerixafor
BLVD
and Clofarabine
in Previously
Untreated Older
(>= 60 years)
Adult Patients
with Acute
Myelogenous
Leukemia (AML)
for Whom
Standard
Induction
Chemotherapy is
Unlikely to be
of Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
G-CSF and
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Plerixafor with
BLVD
Sorafenib for
Acute
Myelogenous
Leukemia with
FLT3(ITD)
mutations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Langley Porter
405
SAN
CA
94143
A Phase III
Psychiatric
PARNASUS
FRANCI
Trial of
Institute
SCO
Irinotecan/5-FU/
Leucovorin or
Oxaliplatin/5-
FU/leucovorin
with
Bevacizumab, or
Cetuximab
(C225) or with
the Combination
of Bevacizumab
and Cetuximab
for Patients
with Untreated
Metastatic
Adenocarcinoma
of the Colon or
Rectum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
U of U
50 NORTH
SALT
UT
84132
Phase I/II Study
Hospitals &
MEDICAL
LAKE
of Low-Dose
Clinic
DRIVE
CITY
Oral
Clofarabine for
the treatment
of IPSS INT-1,
INT-2 or HIGH
Myelodysplastic
Syndromes
(dysplastic
type) Patients
who have failed
Hypomethylating
Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lehigh Valley
2100 MACK
ALLENTO
PA
18105
A Multicenter,
(.)
BLVD. 4TH
WN
Randomized,
FLOOR
Controlled
FINANCE
Trial
Evaluating the
Safety,
Efficacy and
Cost-
Effectiveness
of Seprafilm
Adhesion
Barrier
Following
Cesarean
Section
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
5841 SOUTH
CHICAGO
IL
60637
A study of the
Chicago
MARYLAND
effects of
Hospital
AVENUE
Alemtuzumab on
Surrogate
Markers of
Disease
Activity and
Repair using
Advanced MRI
measures in
Subjects with
Relapsing
Remitting
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Do the Benefits
University
CLIFTON
Outweigh the
Hospital
ROAD
Risks?
Assessing
Patients'
Perceptions of
Newborn
Screening for
Lysosomal
Storage
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Neuroimaging
General
STREET
Characteristics
Hospital
in Fabry
Disease:
Quantitation of
CNS White
Matter Lesions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Neuroimaging
General
STREET
Characteristics
Hospital
in Fabry
Disease:
Quantitation of
CNS White
Matter Lesions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Neuroimaging
General
STREET
Characteristics
Hospital
in Fabry
Disease:
Quantitation of
CNS White
Matter Lesions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
2
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Podocyturia: A
Washington
Non-Invasive
Biomarker of
Fabry
Nephropathy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
2
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Podocyturia: A
Washington
Non-Invasive
Biomarker of
Fabry
Nephropathy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Cognitive
Alabama
19TH
HAM
Function
Hospital
STREET
Assessment in
Fabry Disease:
A Pilot
Feasibility
Study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Multi-center,
Alabama
19TH
HAM
Open-label
Hospital
STREET
Study of the
Safety and
Efficacy of
Control of
Proteinuria
with ACE
Inhibitors and
ARBS in
Patients with
Fabry Disease
Who Are
Receiving
Fabrazyme?: The
Fabrazyme? +
Arbs + ACE
inhibitors
Treatments
(FAACET) Study:
The FAACET
Study.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rochester
1425
ROCHEST
NY
14621
A Study
General
PORTLAND
ER
Evaluating
Hospital
AVENUE
Acute Otitis
Media and
Nasopharyngeal
Colonization
Caused by
Streptococcus
pneumoniae in
Healthy
Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Randomized Phase
Cancer
BROOKLINE
II Study of
Institute
AVE
FOLFOX +/-
Aflibercept in
metastatic
esophagogastric
cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Randomized Phase
Cancer
BROOKLINE
II Study of
Institute
AVE
FOLFOX +/-
Aflibercept in
metastatic
esophagogastric
cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Randomized Phase
Cancer
BROOKLINE
II Study of
Institute
AVE
FOLFOX +/-
Aflibercept in
metastatic
esophagogastric
cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Randomized
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Study of Once
BLVD
Daily
Fludarabine-
Clofarabine vs
Fludarabine
Alone Combined
with IV
Busulfan
Followed by
Allogeneic
Hemopoietic
Stem Cell
Transplantation
for AML and MDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Randomized
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Study of Once
BLVD
Daily
Fludarabine-
Clofarabine vs
Fludarabine
Alone Combined
with IV
Busulfan
Followed by
Allogeneic
Hemopoietic
Stem Cell
Transplantation
for AML and MDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Randomized
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Study of Once
BLVD
Daily
Fludarabine-
Clofarabine vs
Fludarabine
Alone Combined
with IV
Busulfan
Followed by
Allogeneic
Hemopoietic
Stem Cell
Transplantation
for AML and MDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Randomized
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Study of Once
BLVD
Daily
Fludarabine-
Clofarabine vs
Fludarabine
Alone Combined
with IV
Busulfan
Followed by
Allogeneic
Hemopoie
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A phase II study
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
of cabazitaxel
BLVD
with or without
carboplatin in
patients with
metastatic
castration-
resistant
prostate cancer
previously
treated with
docetaxel-based
therapy.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A phase II study
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
of cabazitaxel
BLVD
with or without
carboplatin in
patients with
metastatic
castration-
resistant
prostate cancer
previously
treated with
docetaxel-based
therapy.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
An Exploratory
Hospital For
AVENUE
YORK
Randomized
Center
Phase II
Multicenter
Trial of
Abiraterone
Acetate with or
without
Cabazitaxel in
Treatment of
Metastatic
Castration
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Assessment of
Womens
STREET
Aubagio?s
Hospital
neuroprotective
effect on the
development of
T1 black holes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Assessment of
Womens Hosp
STREET
Aubagio?s
neuroprotective
effect on the
development of
T1 black holes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Post-partum MRI
Womens Hosp
STREET
Changes in
Women with
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Post-partum MRI
Womens Hosp
STREET
Changes in
Women with
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Post-partum MRI
Womens Hosp
STREET
Changes in
Women with
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keck Hospital
1500 SAN
LOS
CA
90033
Detection of
of USC
PABLO
ANGELE
early end-organ
STREET
S
damage by
endothelial
dysfunction
with reactive
hyperemia-
digital
peripheral
arterial
tonometry in
patients with
Fabry Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vanderbilt
1211
NASHVIL
TN
37232
Innovation in
University
MEDICAL
LE
the timely
Hospital
CENTER
diagnosis and
DRIVE
multidiscipinar
y treatment of
Fabry disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
A Prospective,
University
CLIFTON
Multicenter
Hospital
ROAD
Study Of Fabry
Disease
Clinical and
Biochemical
Findings in
Young Pediatric
Patients (The
MOPPET Study)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Reproductive
University
CLIFTON
Fitness in
Hospital
ROAD
Individuals
Affected by
Fabry Disease
(FIT)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UCI Medical
101 CITY
ORANGE
CA
92868
Investigating
Center (.)
DRIVE
Pompe
SOUTH
Prevalence in
NEuromuscular
Medicine
Academic
Practices
(IPANEMA Study)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
The Fabry Pain
General
STREET
Inventory:
Hospital
Validation of a
New Clinical
Tool to
Comprehensively
Capture the
Fabry Pain
Experience
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
2
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Effects of Fabry
Washington
Disease on
Myelination in
the In Vivo
Adult Human
Brain
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Improved
Alabama
19TH
HAM
Detection,
Hospital
STREET
Diagnosis, and
Management of
Fabry Disease
through Serial
Ophthalmic
Documentation
and Tear Fluid
Analysis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase II Study
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Clofarabine
Institute
AVE
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase I/II Trial
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Combination
Institute
AVE
AMD3100 and
Bortezomib in
Relapsed or
Relapsed/
Refractory
Multiple
Myeloma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Nebraska
DEWEY
OMAHA
NE
68198
Leukine
Medical
AVENUE AT
(sargramostim)
Center
42ND
for Parkinson's
disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Protein plus
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Christ
2139 AUBURN
CINCINN
OH
45219
A Phase II Trial
Hospital
AVENUE
ATI
of GM-CSF
Protein plus
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ohsu Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
and Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(.)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
Creation of a
Hospital for
AVENUE
YORK
registry of
Cancer and
patients
Allied
treated on
Diseases
TAX3503
(101317743)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase I/II Trial
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Combination
Institute (.)
AVE
AMD3100 and
Bortezomib in
Relapsed or
Relapsed/
Refractory
Multiple
Myeloma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
An Exploratory
Hospital for
AVENUE
YORK
Randomized
Cancer and
Phase II
Allied
Multicenter
Diseases
Trial of
(101317743)
Abiraterone
Acetate with or
without
Cabazitaxel in
Treatment of
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Randomized
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Phase 2 study
(1083730964)
BLVD
to Evaluate the
Efficacy of
Rasburicase in
Patients at
Risk for TLS
During Two
Cycles of
Chemotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Miriam
164 SUMMIT
PROVIDE
RI
02906
Aflibercept
Hospital (.)
AVENUE
NCE
Maintenance for
patients with
resected or
ablated
metastatic
colorectal
cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
An Exploratory
Hospital for
AVENUE
YORK
Randomized
Cancer and
Phase II
Allied
Multicenter
Diseases
Trial of
(101317743)
Abiraterone
Acetate with or
without
Cabazitaxel in
Treatment of
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
A Multi-center
Hospital for
AVENUE
YORK
Randomized
Cancer and
Phase II Study
Allied
of the Impact
Diseases
of CD34+ Cell
(101317743)
Dose on
Progression-
free Survival
Following High-
Dose Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase I Study of
Cancer
BROOKLINE
Plerixafor
Institute (.)
AVE
(AMD3100) and
Bevacizumab for
Recurrent High-
grade Glioma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
A Prospective,
University
CLIFTON
Multicenter
Hospital
ROAD
Study Of Fabry
(1073592747)
Disease
Clinical and
Biochemical
Findings in
Young Pediatric
Patients (The
MOPPET Study)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vanderbilt
1211
NASHVIL
TN
37232
Innovation in
University
MEDICAL
LE
the timely
Hospitals &
CENTER
diagnosis and
Clinic (.)
DRIVE
multidiscipinar
y treatment of
Fabry disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Reproductive
University
CLIFTON
Fitness in
Hospital
ROAD
Individuals
(1073592747)
Affected by
Fabry Disease
(FIT)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Reproductive
University
CLIFTON
Fitness in
Hospital
ROAD
Individuals
(1073592747)
Affected by
Fabry Disease
(FIT)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
MGH Fabry
General
STREET
Screening
Hospital (.)
Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
A Comparison of
University
CLIFTON
Pharmacological
Hospital
ROAD
vs.
(1073592747)
Psychological
Interventions
to Improve
Adaptive
Function in
Fabry Patients
Undergoing
Enzyme Replace
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USC Norris
1441
LOS
CA
90033
Detection of
Cancer
EASTLAKE
ANGELE
early end-organ
Hospital (.)
AVE
S
damage by
endothelial
dysfunction
with reactive
hyperemia-
digital
peripheral
arterial
tonometry in
patients with
Fabry Disease.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Online Social
University
CLIFTON
Networking Use
Hospital (.)
ROAD
Among
Individuals
Affected with
Lysosomal
Storage
Diseases:
``Friend'' or
Foe?
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Characterization
General
STREET
and analysis of
Hospital
pathophysiology
(1114196961)
of the
gastrointestina
l complications
of Fabry
disease.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ of MI
2301
ANN
MI
48105
A Phase II Study
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
of VEGF-Trap
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
plus Modified
(1043488760)
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital (.)
open-labeled
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Rena
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington
110 IRVING
WASHING
DC
20010
Comparison of I-
Hospital
STREET NW
TON
124 and I-131
Center
Radiopharmacoki
(1184638959)
netics in
Patients who
have Well-
differentiated
Thyroid Cancer
and have been
Prepared with
Radioactive
Iodine 124
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(.)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Aflibercept
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Advanced,
Progressive
Carcinoid
Tumors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vanderbilt
1211
NASHVIL
TN
37232
Epidemiology of
University
MEDICAL
LE
Diabetes
Hospitals &
CENTER
Interventions
Clinic
DRIVE
and
(1104202761)
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase II Study
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Clofarabine
Institute (.)
AVE
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of Iowa
200 HAWKINS
IOWA
IA
52242
Epidemiology of
Hosp & Clinic
DRIVE 1353
CITY
Diabetes
(.)
JCP
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Epidemiology of
Washington
PACIFIC ST
Diabetes
Med Ctr (.)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Epidemiology of
Hospital (.)
STREET
HAVEN
Diabetes
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Eliglustat
Hospital
STREET
HAVEN
Tatrate Named
(1003142225)
Patient Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
Safety and
Hospital For
AVENUE
YORK
Efficacy Trial
Cancer And
of Escalation
Allied
of Plerixafor
Diseases
for
(101317743)
Mobilization of
CD34+
Hematopoietic
Progenitor
Cells and
Evaluation of
Globin Gene
Traits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase II Study
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Clofarabine
Institute (.)
AVE
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Aflibercept
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Advanced,
Progressive
Carcinoid
Tumors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of MI
2301
ANN
MI
48105
A Phase II Study
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
of VEGF-Trap
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
plus Modified
(1043488760)
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University
445 LENOX
BROOKLY
NY
11203
A Phase II Study
Hospital Of
ROAD
N
of VEGF-Trap
Brooklyn (.)
plus Modified
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington
110 IRVING
WASHING
DC
20010
Comparison of I-
Hospital
STREET NW
TON
124 and I-131
Center
Radiopharmacoki
(1184638959)
netics in
Patients who
have Well-
differentiated
Thyroid Cancer
and have been
Prepared with
Radioactive
Iodine 124
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University
445 LENOX
BROOKLY
NY
11203
A Phase II Study
Hospital Of
ROAD
N
of VEGF-Trap
Brooklyn (.)
plus Modified
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dana-Farber
450
BOSTON
MA
02215
Phase II Study
Cancer
BROOKLINE
of Clofarabine
Institute (.)
AVE
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(.)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of MI
2301
ANN
MI
48105
A Phase II Study
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
of VEGF-Trap
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
plus Modified
(1043488760)
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of MI
2301
ANN
MI
48105
A Phase II Study
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
of VEGF-Trap
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
plus Modified
(1043488760)
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Eliglustat
Hospital
STREET
HAVEN
Tatrate Named
(1003142225)
Patient Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
A Multi-center
Hospital For
AVENUE
YORK
Randomized
Cancer And
Phase II Study
Allied
of the Impact
Diseases
of CD34+ Cell
(101317743)
Dose on
Progression-
free Survival
Following High-
Dose Therapy
and Autologous
Stem-cell
Rescue
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lucile
725 WELCH
PALO
CA
94304
AML08: A Phase
Packard
ROAD
ALTO
III randomized
Childrens
trial of
Hospital
clofarabine
(1003929852)
plus cytarabine
versus
conventional
induction
therapy and of
natural killer
cell
transplantation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of Iowa
200 HAWKINS
IOWA
IA
52242
Epidemiology of
Hosp & Clinic
DRIVE 1353
CITY
Diabetes
(.)
JCP
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rainbow Babies
11100
CLEVELA
OH
44106
Epidemiology of
& Childrens
EUCLID
ND
Diabetes
Hospital
AVENUE
Interventions
(1013954395)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Epidemiology of
Washington
PACIFIC ST
Diabetes
Med Ctr (.)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Epidemiology of
Hospital (.)
STREET
HAVEN
Diabetes
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mayo Clinic
1216 SECOND
ROCHEST
MN
55905
Epidemiology of
Hospital
STREET SW
ER
Diabetes
Rochester (.)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Aflibercept
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Advanced,
Progressive
Carcinoid
Tumors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital (.)
open-labeled
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington
110 IRVING
WASHING
DC
20010
Comparison of I-
Hospital
STREET NW
TON
124 and I-131
Center
Radiopharmacoki
(1184638959)
netics in
Patients who
have Well-
differentiated
Thyroid Cancer
and have been
Prepared with
Radioactive
Iodine 124
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Memorial
1275 YORK
NEW
NY
10065
Safety and
Hospital For
AVENUE
YORK
Efficacy Trial
Cancer And
of Escalation
Allied
of Plerixafor
Diseases
for
(101317743)
Mobilization of
CD34+
Hematopoietic
Progenitor
Cells and
Evaluation of
Globin Gene
Traits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital (.)
open-labeled
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Aflibercept
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Advanced,
Progressive
Carcinoid
Tumors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cook Childrens
901 SEVENTH
FORT
TX
76104
AML08: A Phase
Medical
AVENUE
WORTH
III randomized
Center
trial of
(1215907530)
clofarabine
plus cytarabine
versus
conventional
induction
therapy and of
natural killer
cell
transplantation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ohsu Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(.)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital (.)
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of Mi
2301
ANN
MI
48105
A Phase II Study
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
of VEGF-Trap
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
plus Modified
(1043488760)
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of MI
2301
ANN
MI
48105
A Phase II Study
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
of VEGF-Trap
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
plus Modified
(1043488760)
FOLFOX 6 in
Previously
Untreated
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lucile Packard
725 WELCH
PALO
CA
94304
AML08: A Phase
Childrens
ROAD
ALTO
III randomized
Hospital
trial of
(1003929852)
clofarabine
plus cytarabine
versus
conventional
induction
therapy and of
natural killer
cell
transplantation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 EAST
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical
ROAD
and High-Dose
Center
Melphalan
(103343529)
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Enhancing Anti-
University
CLIFTON
Myeloma Vaccine
Hospital
ROAD
Response after
(1073837167)
Autologous Stem
Cell
Transplantation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
MTA for :
University
CLIFTON
Enhancing Anti-
Hospital (.)
ROAD
Myeloma Vaccine
Response after
Autologous Stem
Cell Transplant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rochester
1425
ROCHEST
NY
14621
A Study
General
PORTLAND
ER
Evaluating
Hospital (.)
AVENUE
Acute Otitis
Media and
Nasopharyngeal
Colonization
Caused by
Streptococcus
pneumoniae in
Healthy
Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rochester
1425
ROCHEST
NY
14621
A Study
General
PORTLAND
ER
Evaluating
Hospital (.)
AVENUE
Acute Otitis
Media and
Nasopharyngeal
Colonization
Caused by
Streptococcus
pneumoniae in
Healthy
Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Assessment of
Womens
STREET
Aubagio?s
Hospital (.)
neuroprotective
effect on the
development of
T1 black holes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
miRNA profiling
Womens
STREET
in
Hospital
Teriflunomide
(1013935550)
(Aubagio)
treated
patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Langley Porter
405
SAN
CA
94143
Long-term
Psychiatric
PARNASUS
FRANCI
Management of
Hosptial (.)
SCO
?Younger,
Active?
Patients with
Pain from Early
Knee
Osteoarthritis
with Synvisc-
One (hylan G-F
20)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Fluctuation
Washington
PACIFIC ST
Reduction With
Med Ctr (.)
Insulin and GLP-
1 Added
Together (FLAT-
SUGAR)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Fluctuation
Washington
PACIFIC ST
Reduction With
Med Ctr (.)
Insulin and GLP-
1 Added
Together (FLAT-
UGAR)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1043549397)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Aflibercept
Hospital
in Patients
(1114196961)
with Advanced,
Progressive
Carcinoid
Tumors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1043549397)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mount Sinai
ONE GUSTAVE
NEW
NY
10029
Phase II Study
Hospital
L. LEVY
YORK
of Clofarabine
(1003063280)
PLACE
in Patients
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mayo Clinic
1216 SECOND
ROCHEST
MN
55905
Epidemiology of
Hospital
STREET SW
ER
Diabetes
Rochester (.)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mayo Clinic
1216 SECOND
ROCHEST
MN
55905
Epidemiology of
Hospital
STREET SW
ER
Diabetes
Rochester (.)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
200 HAWKINS
IOWA
IA
52242
Epidemiology of
Iowa Hosp &
DRIVE 1353
CITY
Diabetes
Clinics
JCP
Interventions
(1326474149)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
200 HAWKINS
IOWA
IA
52242
Epidemiology of
Iowa Hosp &
DRIVE 1353
CITY
Diabetes
Clinics
JCP
Interventions
(1326474149)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vanderbilt
1211
NASHVIL
TN
37232
Epidemiology of
University
MEDICAL
LE
Diabetes
Medical
CENTER
Interventions
Center
DRIVE
and
(1104202761)
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Epidemiology of
Hospital
STREET
HAVEN
Diabetes
(1003142225)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1043549397)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1043549397)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Aflibercept
Hospital
in Patients
(1114196961)
with Advanced,
Progressive
Carcinoid
Tumors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Methodist
7700 FLOYD
SAN
TX
78229
A Multi-center
Hospital
CURL DRIVE
ANTONI
Randomized
(1124074273)
O
Phase II Study
of the Impact
of CD34+ Cell
Dose on
Progression-
free Survival
Following High-
Dose Therapy
and Autologous
Stem-cell
Rescue
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1114196961)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Arkansas
1 CHILDRENS
LITTLE
AR
72202
Phase II Study
Childrens
WAY
ROCK
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1134155831)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phoenix
1919 E.
PHOENIX
AZ
85016
Phase II Study
Childrens
THOMAS
of Clofarabine
Hospital
ROAD
in Patients
(1023475506)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Epidemiology of
Hospital
STREET
HAVEN
Diabetes
(1003142225)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1114196961)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
City Of Hope
1500 E.
DUARTE
CA
91010
Phase II Study
National
DUARTE
of Clofarabine
Medical Cnt
ROAD
and High-Dose
(1033435292)
Melphalan
Conditioning
Prior to
Allogeneic
Heamtopoietic
Cell
Transplantation
for
Myelodysplasia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phoenix
1919 E.
PHOENIX
AZ
85016
Phase II Study
Childrens
THOMAS
of Clofarabine
Hospital
ROAD
in Patients
(1023475506)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mount Sinai
ONE GUSTAVE
NEW
NY
10029
Clinical Trial
Hospital (.)
L. LEVY
YORK
of a Rapidly
PLACE
Cycling, Non-
Cross Reactive
Regimen of
Approved
Therapeutic
Agents to Treat
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ohsu Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(.)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rochester
1425
ROCHEST
NY
14621
A Study
General
PORTLAND
ER
Evaluating
Hospital
AVENUE
Acute Otitis
(1023105376)
Media and
Nasopharyngeal
Colonization
Caused by
Streptococcus
pneumoniae in
Healthy
Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rochester
1425
ROCHEST
NY
14621
A Study
General
PORTLAND
ER
Evaluating
Hospital
AVENUE
Acute Otitis
(1023105376)
Media and
Nasopharyngeal
Colonization
Caused by
Streptococcus
pneumoniae in
Healthy
Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Glargine U300
University
CLIFTON
Hospital Trial:
Hospital (.)
ROAD
A Randomized
Controlled
Trial Comparing
Glargine U300
and Glargine
U100 for the
Inpatient and
Post-Hospital
Discharge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
Investigating
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
the efficacy of
Hospital (.)
Synvisc-One
(Hylan-GF 20
6ml ) as
adjunctive
therapy for
patients with
knee osteo-
arthritis or
requiring
physical
therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Enzyme
General
STREET
Replacement
Hospital
Therapy and
(1114196961)
Podocyte
Function
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
KINDRED--Kidney
General
STREET
Information
Hospital
Network for
(1114196961)
Disease
Research and
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tufts Medical
800
BOSTON
MA
02111
The Prevalence,
Center (.)
WASHINGTON
Morphology,
ST
Clinical Course
and Management
of Patients
with Anderson-
Fabry Disease
Identified
Among a Large
Adult
Population
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Teriflunomide as
Alabama
19TH
HAM
a disease
Hospital (.)
STREET
modifying anti-
inflammatory
therapy for a
severe animal
model of
chronic
inflammatory
demyelinating
polyneuropathy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Langley Porter
405
SAN
CA
94143
A Phase I Study
Psychiatric
PARNASUS
FRANCI
of Cabazitaxel,
Hosptial
SCO
Mitoxanthrone,
(1417115031)
and Prednisone
(CAMP) for
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
Post-partum MRI
Womens
STREET
Changes in
Hospital
Women with
(1013935550)
Multiple
Sclerosis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Establishing an
Washington
PACIFIC ST
in-vitro Model
Med Ctr (.)
of Fabry
Podocytopathy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UCI Medical
101 CITY
ORANGE
CA
92868
Investigating
Center (.)
DRIVE
Pompe
SOUTH
Prevalence in
NEuromuscular
Medicine
Academic
Practices
(IPANEMA Study)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UCI Medical
101 CITY
ORANGE
CA
92868
Safety and
Center (.)
DRIVE
Effectiveness
SOUTH
of Resistance
exercise
training in
late onset
Pompe disease
patients--a
pilot study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Do the Benefits
University
CLIFTON
Outweigh the
Hospital (.)
ROAD
Risks?
Assessing
Patients'
Perceptions of
Newborn
Screening for
Lysosomal
Storage
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USC Norris
1441
LOS
CA
90033
Detection of
Cancer
EASTLAKE
ANGELE
early end-organ
Hospital
AVE
S
damage by
(1104096577)
endothelial
dysfunction
with reactive
hyperemia-
digital
peripheral
arterial
tonometry in
patients with
Fabry Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
A Prospective,
University
CLIFTON
Multicenter
Hospital (.)
ROAD
Study Of Fabry
Disease
Clinical and
Biochemical
Findings in
Young Pediatric
Patients (The
MOPPET Study)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Establishing an
Washington
PACIFIC ST
in-vitro Model
Med Ctr (.)
of Fabry
Podocytopathy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin?
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal
Protection
after Liver
Transplantation
A Multi-Center
Study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin?
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal
Protection
after Liver
Transplantation
A Multi-Center
Study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin?
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal
Protection
after Liver
Transplantation
A Multi-Center
Study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin?
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal
Protection
after Liver
Transplantation
A Multi-Center
Study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
and Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1053454645)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
and Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1053454645)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
and Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1053454645)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mount Sinai
FIRST
NEW
NY
10003
Gaucher
Beth Israel
AVENUE AT
YORK
Generation--Cog
(1003052200)
16 STREET
nition, Motor
Control,
Imaging and
Pathologic
Biomarkers in
GBA1 Mutation
Carriers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Fluctuation
Washington
PACIFIC ST
Reduction with
Med Ctr (.)
Insulin and
GLP--1 Added
Together (FLAT-
SUGAR)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Fluctuation
Washington
PACIFIC ST
Reduction with
Med Ctr (.)
Insulin and GLP-
1 Added
Together (FLAT-
SUGAR)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
miRNA profiling
Womens
STREET
in
Hospital
Teriflunomide
(1013935550)
(Aubagio)
treated
patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Factors
General
STREET
influencing
Hospital
patient
(1114196961)
preferences for
oral versus
intravenous
(IV) enzyme
replacement
medication.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
1959 NE
SEATTLE
WA
98195
Localization of
Washington
PACIFIC ST
Globotriaosylce
Med Ctr (.)
ramide (GL3)
Inclusions in
Fabry Podocytes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Online Social
University
CLIFTON
Networking Use
Hospital (.)
ROAD
Among
Individuals
Affected with
Lysosomal
Storage
Diseases:
``Friend'' or
Foe?
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Comparative
Alabama
19TH
HAM
Proteomics and
Hospital (.)
STREET
Lipidomics of
Exosomes
Isolated from
Serum and Urine
in Fabry
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Glargine U300
University
CLIFTON
Hospital Trial:
Hospital (.)
ROAD
A Randomized
Controlled
Trial Comparing
Glargine U300
and Glargine
U100 for the
Inpatient and
Post-Hospital
Discharge
Management of
Medicine and
Surgery
Patients with
Type 2 Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UC Davis
2315
SACRAME
CA
95817
A Selective
Medical
STOCKTON
NTO
Frontline
Center (.)
BLVD
Jevtana
Therapeutic
Pathway for
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
with Integrated
Biomarkers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Study of
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Hematopoietic
Hospital
Stem Cell
(1013392125)
Supermobilizati
on in Patients
with Lymphoma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UH Cleveland
11100
CLEVELA
OH
44106
Epidemiology of
Medical
EUCLID
ND
Diabetes
Center
AVENUE
Interventions
(1013954395)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UH Cleveland
11100
CLEVELA
OH
44106
Epidemiology of
Medical
EUCLID
ND
Diabetes
Center
AVENUE
Interventions
(1013954395)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UH Cleveland
11100
CLEVELA
OH
44106
Epidemiology of
Medical
EUCLID
ND
Diabetes
Center
AVENUE
Interventions
(1013954395)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Epidemiology of
Hospital
STREET
HAVEN
Diabetes
(1003142225)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Dynamic
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Allocation
(1053755272)
BLVD
Modular
Sequential
Trial of
Approved and
Promising
Therapies in
Men with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Dynamic
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Allocation
(1053755272)
BLVD
Modular
Sequential
Trial of
Approved And
Promising
Therapies in
Men with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charleston
501 MORRIS
CHARLES
WV
25326
A Phase II Trial
Area Medical
STREET
TON
of GM-CSF
Center Inc.
Protein plus
(1124248752)
Ipilimumab in
Patients with
Advanced
Melanoma (ECOG
1608)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Dynamic
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Allocation
(1053755272)
BLVD
Modular
Sequential
Trial of
Approved And
Promising
Therapies in
Men with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of
ONE
COLUMBI
MO
65212
Epidemiology of
Missouri
HOSPITAL
A
Diabetes
Health Care
DRIVE
Interventions
(1033499256)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yale-New Haven
20 YORK
NEW
CT
06504
Epidemiology of
Hospital
STREET
HAVEN
Diabetes
(1003142225)
Interventions
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UH Cleveland
11100
CLEVELA
OH
44106
Epidemiology of
Medical
EUCLID
ND
Diabetes
Center
AVENUE
Interventions
(1013954395)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
22 SOUTH
BATLIMO
MD
21201
Epidemiology of
Maryland Med
GREENE
RE
Diabetes
Sys
STREET
Interventions
(1023304888)
and
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Phase II Study
General
STREET
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1114196961)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Childrens
4650 SUNSET
LOS
CA
90027
Phase II Study
Hospital Los
BOULEVARD
ANGELE
of Clofarabine
Angeles
S
in Patients
(1003102781)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Dynamic
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Allocation
(1053755272)
BLVD
Modular
Sequential
Trial of
Approved and
Promising
Therapies in
Men with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
A Dynamic
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Allocation
(1053755272)
BLVD
Modular
Sequential
Trial of
Approved and
Promising
Therapies in
Men with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Texas
6621 FANNIN
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Phase II Study
Childrens
of Clofarabine
Hospital
in Patients
(1013283159)
with Recurrent
or Refractory
Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
IST-1L-
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Smoldering
(1053755272)
BLVD
myeloma-PT-IV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
SAR650984--Anti-
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
CD38 naked mAb--
(1053755272)
BLVD
isatuximab
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
IST-1L-
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Smoldering
(1053755272)
BLVD
myeloma-PT-IV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
IST-1L-
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Smoldering
(1053755272)
BLVD
myeloma-PT-IV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rochester
1425
ROCHEST
NY
14617
A Study
General
PORTLAND
ER
Evaluating
Hospital
AVENUE
Acute Otitis
(1023105376)
Media and
Nasopharyngeal
Colonization
Caused by
Streptococcus
pneumoniae in
Healthy
Children
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KFH-Hawaii
3288
HONOLUL
HI
96819
Efficacy of
(1306928254)
MOANALUA
U
Flublok study
ROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KFH-Hawaii
3288
HONOLUL
HI
96819
Vaccine
(1306928254)
MOANALUA
U
effectiveness
ROAD
of Flublok 18-
64
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
855 WEST
CHARLOT
VA
22908
IRB-HSR#14386
Virginia
MAIN
TESVIL
Medical Cente
STREET
L
(.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tufts Medical
800
BOSTON
MA
02111
The Prevalence,
Center
WASHINGTON
Morphology,
(1114162013)
ST
Clinical Course
and Management
of Patients
with Anderson-
Fabry Disease
Identified
Among a Large
Adult
Population
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Characterization
General
STREET
and analysis of
Hospital
pathophysiology
(1114196961)
of the
gastrointestina
l complications
of Fabry
disease.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
Biomarkers of
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Disease
Hospital
Heterogeneity
(1013392125)
in Multiple
Sclerosis:
Phase II
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UCI Medical
101 THE
SOUTH
CA
92868
Investigating
Center (.)
CITY DRIVE
ORANGE
Pompe
Prevalence in
NEuromuscular
Medicine
Academic
Practices
(IPANEMA Study)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin?
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin?
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cleveland
9500 EUCLID
CLEVELA
OH
44195
A Randomized,
Clinic
AVENUE
ND
Controlled,
Hospital
open-labeled
(1013392125)
Clinical Trial
of
Thymoglobulin?
Induction and
Extended Delay
of Calcineurin
Inhibitor
Therapy for
Renal Failure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
A Phase I/II
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
Trial of
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
Concurrent
Chemohormonal
Therapy Using
Enzalutamide
(MDV-3100) and
Cabazitaxel in
Patients with
Metastatic
Castration-
Resistant
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mount Sinai
1ST [emailprotected]
NEW
NY
10003
Gaucher
Beth Israel
16TH
YORK
Generation--Cog
(1003052200)
STREET
nition, Motor
Control,
Imaging and
Pathologic
Biomarkers in
GBA1 Mutation
Carriers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mount Sinai
1ST [emailprotected]
NEW
NY
10003
Gaucher
Beth Israel
16TH
YORK
Generation--Cog
(1003052200)
STREET
nition, Motor
Control,
Imaging and
Pathologic
Biomarkers in
GBA1 Mutation
Carriers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Newborn
University
CLIFTON
Screening XLSD
Hospital (.)
ROAD
Pilot Study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Comparative
Alabama
19TH
HAM
Proteomics and
Hospital (.)
STREET
Lipidomics of
Exosomes
Isolated from
Serum and Urine
in Fabry
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT MD Anderson
1515
HOUSTON
TX
77030
Interest of CT
Cancer Center
HOLCOMBE
Morphological
(1053755272)
BLVD
Evaluation in
Patients with
Metastatic
Colorectal
Cancer Treated
with ZIV-
Aflibercept
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
New England
Womens
STREET
Multiple
Hospital
Sclerosis
(1013935550)
Pregnancy
Registry (PREG-
MS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham and
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
New England
Womens
STREET
Multiple
Hospital
Sclerosis
(1013935550)
Pregnancy
Registry (PREG-
MS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
New England
Womens
STREET
Multiple
Hospital
Sclerosis
(1013935550)
Pregnancy
Registry (PREG-
MS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of Mi
2301
ANN
MI
48105
Regulatory B
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
Lymphocytes as
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
Central
(1043488760)
Mediators of
the Therapeutic
Effects of
Teriflunomide
in MS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ Of Mi
2301
ANN
MI
48105
Regulatory B
Hospitals &
COMMONWEAL
ARBOR
Lymphocytes as
Hlth Ctrs
TH BLVD
Central
(1043488760)
Mediators of
the Therapeutic
Effects of
Teriflunomide
in MS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
Bright tongue
and Clinics
JACKSON
D
sign in Pompe
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
disease:
sensitivity and
specificity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHSU Hospital
3181 SAM
PORTLAN
OR
97239
Bright tongue
And Clinics
JACKSON
D
sign in Pompe
(1033650353)
PARK ROAD
disease:
sensitivity and
specificity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brigham And
75 FRANCIS
BOSTON
MA
02115
miRNA profiling
Womens
STREET
in
Hospital
Teriflunomide
(1013935550)
(Aubagio)
treated
patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Enzyme
General
STREET
Replacement
Hospital
Therapy and
(1114196961)
Podocyte
Function
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
KINDRED--Kidney
General
STREET
Information
Hospital
Network for
(1114196961)
Disease
Research and
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
ThinkGenetic
University
CLIFTON
LSD: A project
Hospital (.)
ROAD
to identify
educational
gaps in the
informational
needs of
individuals
with Pompe,
Fabry, Gaucher,
Mucopolysacchar
ide Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cedars-Sinai
8700
LOS
CA
90048
A Pilot
Medical
BEVERLY
ANGELE
Randomized
Center (.)
BLVD.
S
Study to Assess
the Effect and
Safety Profile
of
Thymoglobulin?
in Primary
Cardiac
Transplant
Recipients: A
12-month,
single center
study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts
FRUIT
BOSTON
MA
02114
Characterization
General
STREET
and analysis of
Hospital
pathophysiology
(1114196961)
of the
gastrointestina
l complications
of Fabry
disease.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
University Of
619 SOUTH
BIRMING
AL
35233
Teriflunomide as
Alabama
19TH
HAM
a disease
Hospital (.)
STREET
modifying anti-
inflammatory
therapy for a
severe animal
model of
chronic
inflammatory
demyelinating
polyneuropathy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USC Norris
1441
LOS
CA
90033
Assessing the
Cancer
EASTLAKE
ANGELE
induction of
Hospital
AVE
S
long-term
(1104096577)
immune
regulation
following
treatment with
Lemtrada?
(Alemtuzumab).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USC Norris
1441
LOS
CA
90033
Assessing the
Cancer
EASTLAKE
ANGELE
induction of
Hospital
AVE
S
long-term
(1104096577)
immune
regulation
following
treatment with
Lemtrada?
(Alemtuzumab).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emory
1364
ATLANTA
GA
30302
Functional
University
CLIFTON
Resolution of
Hospital (.)
ROAD
Multi-loci
Pathogenic
Variants and
VUSs in Pompe
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prepared Statement of Giovanni Caforio, M.D., Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to be here today on behalf of
the 24,000 employees at Bristol-Myers Squibb, who are working every day
to improve the lives of patients with serious diseases. I look forward
to working together to align incentives to ensure all Americans have
access to the medicines they need.
I am a physician who joined the biopharmaceutical industry 30 years
ago because of the impact companies like Bristol-Myers Squibb--and the
others represented here today--have on patients with serious diseases.
We should all be proud that American companies lead our industry.
Bristol-Myers Squibb researchers have contributed to the
development of medicines that have reduced mortality from
cardiovascular disease, helped transform HIV/AIDS into a chronic
disease, and are now making significant progress in the treatment of
cancer.
Just 10 years ago, the idea of harnessing the immune system to
treat cancer was viewed with great skepticism. But Bristol-Myers Squibb
researchers saw the promise of the approach and ignited an era of
scientific innovation that has changed survival expectations in
multiple tumor types.
Prior to the availability of Immuno-Oncology treatments, only 25
percent of patients diagnosed with metastatic melanoma survived 1 year.
Today, thanks to Immuno-Oncology therapies, this has increased to 74
percent.
The potential of this approach has also been seen in lung cancer,
kidney cancer, and many other difficult-to-treat tumors. Patients with
these diseases now have a chance for quality, long-term survival.
But not all patients respond to current immunotherapies, so we must
do more. We recently opened a new discovery facility dedicated to
investigating Immuno-
Oncology resistance, and we continuously seek external innovation to
augment our pipeline across multiple therapeutic areas. In this
context, we recently announced our plan to acquire Celgene, a natural
next step for our company. Our goal is to bring together the drive and
dedication of two science-driven organizations to do even more for
patients.
As a physician, I recognize that medicines are only helpful if
patients and health-care systems can afford them. We share the
committee's concern with escalating health-care costs and believe that
our responsibility to patients extends to ensuring they can access and
afford our medicines.
The average net pricing across our U.S. portfolio of medicines
increased by 5 percent or less per year during the last 5 years. In
2018, it did not increase and we anticipate the same in 2019.
Despite this fact, we recognize that patients' out-of-pocket costs
continue to increase. We believe it is possible to work together to
realign incentives to ensure patients can afford medicines without
stifling scientific innovation.
So what are the solutions?

We are supportive of the proposed rule aimed at reforming
the rebate system with a focus on what is best for patients.

We need to ensure more generics are available whenever
permissible under our system, and applaud Congress and the
administration's success with speeding the approval of
generics.

We support value-based purchasing arrangements that tie
payments to value. These models can reduce costs, improve
access and adherence, and contribute to better outcomes. We
applaud efforts by Health and Human Services and the Committee
to remove regulatory barriers and facilitate greater use of
these arrangements.
We do not believe the U.S. should adopt policies that stifle
innovation in other countries, which could reduce a patient's access to
new medicines. Outside of the U.S., reimbursement of new medicines can
often take more than two years. Our Opdivo and Yervoy regimen was first
approved in September 2015 to treat metastatic melanoma in the U.S.
Today, six of the 16 countries included in the International Price
Index proposal do not provide access to this combination, which is now
considered the standard of care for this cancer.
This exemplifies why Bristol-Myers Squibb does not support HHS's
proposed International Price Index Model for Medicare Part B drugs.
I would like to leave you with a few thoughts.
We are witnessing a historic era in biomedical innovation. But we
must ensure patients have affordable access to these innovations.
We recognize the need for change, and we are committed to working
with Congress to ensure every patient can benefit from today's medical
innovations.
American research-based companies are leading the next wave of
biomedical innovation to help patients whose diseases cannot be
adequately treated with today's medicines. We should work to ensure
policies that support and reward these investments.
On behalf of my colleagues at Bristol-Myers Squibb, and the
patients we serve, my sincere thanks for your time and attention today.
I look forward to working together to implement real change that
broadens access to innovative medicines for patients.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Giovanni Caforio, M.D.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. At the hearing, you testified that Bristol-Myers Squibb
does not withhold samples from generic manufacturers in order to block
generic versions of your drug from entering the market. You also
expressed your support for the ``Creating and Restoring Equal Access to
Equivalent Samples Act,'' also known as the CREATES Act.
As you know, the FDA has a list on its website which identifies
reference listed drug (RLD) access inquiries where brand manufacturers
may have prevented generic companies from obtaining samples of products
necessary to support FDA approval. Celgene is on this FDA list.
According to your testimony, Bristol-Myers Squibb is in the process of
acquiring Celgene.
Are you aware that Celgene is on the FDA list and that Celgene had
multiple access inquiries?
Answer. Yes.
Question. Will you ensure that Bristol-Myers Squibb/Celgene will
not block access to samples once the Celgene acquisition is final?
Answer. As Dr. Caforio testified at the hearing, BMS does not
withhold samples from generic manufacturers in order to block generic
versions of the drug from entering the market. BMS believes it is
important to ensure generics are made available whenever that is
permissible under our system, and supports the administration's focus
on increasing the approval of generics. As part of that system, it is
important that generic companies perform the needed testing to ensure
product quality and patient safety. BMS cannot comment on Celgene's
practices in this area, but once the transaction closes, BMS's
practices with regard to generic samples will govern the combined
portfolio.
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' proposed
rule, ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates
Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees,'' envisions that drug manufacturers will offer up-front
discounts rather than the back-end rebates that are now commonly
provided. Some observers argue that a 1996 court case called into
question whether manufacturers could offer up-front discounts,
resulting in today's rebate-based system. I've heard differing opinions
as to whether the issues related to the initial court case are still
relevant. If the HHS proposed rule is finalized, can you assure the
committee that your company will offer up-front discounts? If not, why?
Answer. BMS supports the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor
protection for back-end rebates under Medicare Part D and the rule's
objective to ensure that patients benefit from price reductions that
BMS provides on its drugs. As the proposed rule notes, there is
uncertainty as to the strategic behavior changes that will occur if the
rule is enacted, and therefore uncertainty as to precise mechanisms
that will be available to meet the objectives of the rule. However,
there is some risk that manufacturers would have to defend themselves
against antitrust litigation if they were to offer up-front discounts
instead of rebates if the proposed rule were finalized. In particular,
there may be risk of claims being crafted under the Robinson-Patman
Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 13. Any such claims would have to meet significant
substantive requirements and be subject to important statutory
defenses. Nonetheless, even if meritless, Robinson-Patman claims can be
expensive and time consuming for manufacturers to defend against.
In light of the potential for antitrust litigation, BMS recommends
that the committee consider how best to address this risk as it
considers the HHS proposal. Congress, could, for example, enact
legislation that immunizes from liability under the Robinson-Patman Act
drug manufacturers who offer up-front discounting under Medicare Part D
in accordance with the fraud and abuse safe harbor created by the HHS
rule.
Question. Please describe how you expect your company to respond to
the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor protection for back-end
rebates in Medicare Part D that is referenced above if it is finalized.
Assuming you are confident that antitrust laws do not prevent your
company from offering up-front discounts, specifically, do you envision
that your company lowers the list price of a drug to the current after-
rebate net price, offer discounts equal to the current rebate amount,
or a combination of both?
Answer. BMS supports the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor
protection for back-end rebates in Medicare Part D, and we believe it
would lead to lower out-of-pocket costs. This question rightly supposes
that the goals of the proposed rule could be achieved through lower
list prices, negotiated discounts at the point-of-sale, or some
combination of these two approaches. While it is unclear how Part D
plans and PBMs will react to the proposed rule, at this time, BMS
envisions that we would offer point-of-sale discounts to Part D plans
equivalent on average to the current contracted rebate amount and will
continue to assess the possibility of lowering list price on a product-
by-product basis. Our ability to lower list prices, however, is
constrained by the fact that the HHS proposed rule does not apply to
the commercial insurance market, where we anticipate back-end rebates
to continue for the foreseeable future.
Please also see the answer to the previous question.
Question. To what extent are the back-end rebates your company
currently offers contingent on the amount of market share realized for
your drugs as a result of Part D plan formulary placement and other
techniques?
Answer. The back-end rebates BMS currently offers pursuant to its
Medicare Part D agreements are not contingent on the amount of market
share realized for any of BMS's drugs as a result of Part D plan
formulary placement or any other performance requirement.
Question. Please provide a breakdown of percentage of sales that go
to each payer (including Medicare, Medicaid, private pay, other) and a
similar percentage by volume of the total number of each drug compared
to total volume. Please provide this data for the most recent year
available.
Answer. This information is not available publicly and is
competitively sensitive.
Question. Do your companies hire consultants or lobbyists to
promote products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committees? To whom do you disclose advocacy activities surrounding
State Medicaid programs, if at all?
Answer. BMS does not hire consultants or lobbyists to promote its
products at State Medicaid P&T Committees. BMS complies with the
applicable lobbying laws across all 50 States, Puerto Rico, and the
District of Columbia. Many States require engagement with its Medicaid
officials to be reported. We disclose required lobbying activities to
each State in accordance with the individual State lobbying disclosure
and ethics laws.
Question. Please describe how the costs of patient assistance
programs are accounted for within your company's financial statements.
Please also describe the types of market information, such as
prescribing and use patterns that your company collects from different
types of patient assistance programs and patient hub services.
Answer. For purposes of responding to this request, BMS interprets
``patient assistance programs'' and ``patient hub services'' as BMS
programs or services supporting education, access and/or treatment
adherence for eligible patients who are prescribed a BMS medicine.
Costs associated with these programs are accounted for in our financial
statements as marketing, selling and administrative expenses or gross-
to-net sales adjustments, depending on the type of assistance offered.
Data captured through the administration of patient support
programs allows our program administrators to validate information
provided directly from patients and providers in support of the
specific program(s) for which assistance is being requested. This data
capture includes, but may not be limited to: (1) information that
supports determination of patient eligibility; (2) validation of
licensed provider/prescriber; (3) prescription related information
necessary to execute patient assistance available through program(s)
(i.e., dosage and units being prescribed/dispensed); and, (4) insurance
information.
Question. Please provide a list of all contributions since January
1, 2014, that your company has made to any tax exempt organizations
working on issues related to drugs within your product lines, including
but not limited to patient groups, disease awareness groups, medical or
professional societies, universities or hospitals, industry
associations or leagues. For each contribution, please provide the name
of the organization that received the donation, the date the donation
was made, the amount of the donation, and a description of the purpose
of the contribution (i.e., was the contribution for the general fund, a
specific purpose to a specific program, or continuing medical
education). Please also note whether the contribution was unrestricted
or restricted; if it was restricted, please explain all restrictions.
Finally, if your company maintains a foundation or other separate
charitable arm, please provide the name of all such entities, and list
all donations made from that entity or entities.
Answer. BMS refers the committee to the Corporate Giving page on
the BMS website (https://www.bms.com/about-us/responsibility/corporate-
giving.html). This page includes comprehensive information about BMS'
Corporate Giving policies and practices. It also includes comprehensive
lists of IME Grants, Charitable Donations and Corporate Giving for
calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018. These grants are made for a variety
of appropriate purposes, not limited to issues related to drugs within
the BMS product line.
BMS supports the BMS Patient Assistance Foundation (BMSPAF), a non-
profit organization that helps patients in the United States who need
temporary help obtaining various BMS medications. In 2018, BMS donated
over $1 billion worth of BMS medicines to the BMSPAF, and the BMSPAF
provided free medicine to more than 75,000 patients.
BMS also supports the Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation, a non-profit
organization that promotes health equity and seeks to improve the
health outcomes of populations disproportionately affected by serious
diseases by strengthening health-care worker capacity, integrating
medical care and community based support services, and mobilizing
communities to fight against disease. BMS views the activities of the
BMS Foundation as outside the scope of this question.
Question. Pay for delay agreements cost consumers and taxpayers
billions in higher drug costs every year. The FTC has gone after drug
companies that enter into these settlements where the brand pays the
generic company to keep its lower cost alternative off the market. I'm
the lead Republican sponsor of S. 64, the ``Preserve Access to
Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act,'' which would help put an end
to these deals.
Do you agree that these pay-off agreements keep drug costs high for
patients because they delay competition?
Answer. BMS agrees that patent settlement agreements that have
substantial payments going from innovators to generics, and are solely
intended to delay competition, are anticompetitive.
Question. Has your company ever entered into these kinds of
settlements with a generic company?
Answer. BMS has not entered into patent settlements that have
substantial payments going from innovator to generics and are solely
intended to delay competition.
Question. Do you support the pay for delay bill?
Answer. In general, the ability to settle patent litigation, like
any litigation, reflects a balancing of considerations by the involved
parties and often leads to earlier generic entry than patent
expiration. The current system provides the government with the ability
to monitor and review these settlements, and has worked well.
With regard to S. 64, BMS supports the goals of the legislation but
has objections to the legislation as currently drafted. For example,
the legislation should be revised: (1) only to apply prospectively and
not retroactively to agreements already entered into; (2) eliminate the
presumption that all settlements are presumptively anticompetitive; (3)
eliminate restrictions on the arguments companies would be permitted to
advance to defend agreements; and (4) include ``exclusions'' for
certain types of agreements, such as those containing exclusive
licenses, to name a few. BMS would be happy to follow up and provide
further details to the committee.
rebate traps/walls
Question. I'm increasingly concerned about the effect of so-called
``rebate traps'' or ``rebate walls'' on patients' access to quality,
lower cost medicine. I understand there is ongoing litigation
challenging these practices as anti-competitive.
Does your company engage in the bundling of rebates over multiple
products? If so, why? And what benefit does the consumer gain from
that?
Answer. BMS does not have any Medicare Part D or any other payer
contracts with bundling of rebates.
Question. Does your company view these practices as anticompetitive
or harmful to patients' access to quality, lower cost medicine?
Answer. BMS believes that clinical treatment decisions should be
made by physicians in consultation with patients. As noted, BMS does
not have bundled payer agreements and without insight to the specific
terms of other manufacturers' bundling agreements, it is difficult to
assess the impact on patient access and healthcare costs. BMS does not
support agreements that create barriers to patients' access to quality,
lower cost medicines.
Question. If a policy were adopted to eliminate rebates, or to
require that rebate savings be passed on to the consumer, would that in
and of itself solve the issue of rebate ``traps'' and ``walls''? And
would consumers benefit from such a policy?
Answer. BMS believes that requiring PBMs and payers to pass
manufacturer rebates on to patients has the potential to lower patient
out-of-pocket costs, and therefore benefit consumers. However, it is
unclear how payers will adjust their benefit plan designs in response
to this change and whether it would completely solve the issue of
rebate ``traps'' and ``walls.'' It is possible, for example, that in
response to such changes, PBM and payer business models might evolve,
and thus we recommend implementing safeguards to protect consumers'
access to medicines.
drug pricing
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider regulatory costs or compliance? If so, how specifically do
those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least
one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. BMS does not consider these costs in setting list price.
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider the risk of liability or litigation? If so, how specifically
do those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at
least one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. BMS does not consider the risk of liability or litigation
in setting list price.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. What role do you see Value Based Arrangements (VBAs)
playing in the effort to reduce prescription drug costs? What potential
do these arrangements have to find the ``sweet spot'' between
controlling costs to patients and encouraging innovation of new drugs?
Answer. Manufacturers and payers have been participating in Value
Based Agreements (VBAs) with increasing frequency. These agreements can
potentially reduce overall health-care costs by reducing costs for
medicines, and importantly, improving outcomes for patients and
reducing overall health-care costs. Although there are many types of
VBAs, and the goals and impact of these arrangements differ by specific
medicines and therapeutic areas, we believe that as the sophistication
of these payer and manufacturer arrangements increase, and the capture,
integrity and timeliness of health-care data improves, these agreements
will evolve to the ``sweet spot'' between controlling costs and
encouraging the innovation of new medicines.
Question. How can VBAs help lower what patients pay out-of-pocket?
Answer. VBAs may lower patient out-of-pocket costs where, as a
result of the VBA, the drug is placed on a preferred or lower formulary
tier. In addition, as explained above, VBAs can potentially reduce
overall healthcare costs, including patient out-of-pocket costs, by
improving outcomes for patients through the reduction or elimination of
the need for additional medicines and/or healthcare services.
Question. Can Congress do more to allow for and encourage the use
of VBAs?
Answer. Yes. Congress can do more to allow for and encourage the
use of VBAs. For example, Congress could adopt an exception to the
Anti-Kickback Statute and enact measures to avoid unintended
consequences under Medicaid price reporting.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. We continue to hear that rebates negotiated off of the
list price of a drug are both good and bad. Pharmacy benefit managers
and plans have argued that rebates are used to lower premiums across
the board and that it is the best way to seek a price concession on
otherwise expensive drugs. Your industry argues that these payers are
insisting on higher rebates that can only be achieved by raising list
prices. But patients often lose under this system, with out of pocket
costs being tied to list price. Insulin patients appear to be routinely
impacted by this perversity in the system.
Please explain to the committee how your company would reduce list
prices if rebates were no longer a part of the equation?
Answer. BMS supports the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor
protection for back-end rebates in Medicare Part D, and we believe it
would lead to lower out-of-pocket costs. The goals of the proposed rule
could be achieved through lower list prices, negotiated discounts at
the point-of-sale, or some combination of these two approaches. While
it is unclear how Part D plans and PBMs will react to the proposed
rule, at this time, BMS envisions that we would offer point-of-sale
discounts to Part D plans equivalent on average to the contracted
rebate amount and will continue to assess the possibility of lowering
list prices on a product-by-product basis. BMS would likely follow a
similar approach if back-end rebates were eliminated from the
commercial insurance market.
Question. What assurance can you provide that you would in fact
lower your prices?
Answer. Please see answer to previous question.
Question. What actions should be taken to ensure that patients are
actually seeing the benefits of lower out of pocket costs?
Answer. In order to ensure that patients receive the full benefits
of manufacturer discounts, we support the proposed rule's requirement
that manufacturer discounts be passed on to patients at the point-of-
sale. In addition, we recommend implementing safeguards to protect
consumers' access to medicines, to prevent increases in patients' out-
of-pocket costs, and to ensure that patients' costs at the point-of-
sale fully reflect manufacturer discounts.
Question. If rebates are driving high list prices for drugs as drug
manufacturers' claim, why do you think that Part B drugs, which have no
PBM rebates, are also seeing significant price increases? Whose fault
is that?
Answer. The price increases for BMS Part B drugs have been largely
in line with Medical CPI. We cannot comment on the Part B price
increase practices of other manufacturers.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
re-evaluating business strategies in foreign countries
Question. Since taking office, President Trump has made reducing
drug prices one of his highest priorities--and has repeatedly spoken
about his frustration with the U.S. subsidizing the costs of
pharmaceuticals for the rest of the world. He has gone so far as to
issue proposals, like the International Pricing Index (IPI) Model, in
an attempt to bring down prescription drug prices.
With the increased scrutiny of the industry and of the drug supply
chain as a whole in the United States, have any of your companies re-
evaluated your business strategy in foreign countries?
Answer. Please see answer below.
Question. If not, then why?
Answer. Please see answer below.
Question. If a proposal, like IPI, were implemented, would it force
your companies to potentially ``walk away from the negotiating table
when other countries demand low prices subsidized by America's
seniors,'' as HHS Senior Advisor for Drug Pricing Reform John O'Brien
has said?
Answer. Please see answer below.
Question. What are some of your ideas on how we can ensure
Americans aren't shouldering the full cost of pharmaceuticals?
Answer. BMS reviews its business strategies within and outside of
the U.S. on a regular basis. BMS believes that all patients deserve
access to life changing medicines. Because of these ethical
considerations, BMS would not walk away from discussions about access
to our medicines in foreign countries. We believe that the most likely
outcome of IPI is further delays in access to life extending and
innovative medicines within the referenced countries, resulting in, for
example, lower cancer survival rates.
The IPI proposal imposes price controls in the U.S. based on the
policies of foreign countries with socialized health-care systems that
often deny their citizens access to innovative medicines. Patients in
many of the countries included in the reference basket wait
significantly longer for new, life extending and innovative medicines
to reach them. Outside of the U.S., reimbursement of new medicines can
often take more than 2 years. In Greece, for example, only 8 percent of
new cancer therapies are available, and on average it requires 32
months for these products to be available to patients. In comparison,
in the U.S., 96 percent of new cancer drugs are available within 3
months of market approval. Eventually, the industry often accepts
foreign prices which do not recognize the value and cost-effectiveness
of our medicines because patients can wait no longer.
BMS is committed to working with Congress and the administration to
advance better, more effective ways to lower drug prices for patients.
As an alternative to the IPI model, finalizing the proposed rebate rule
would lower seniors' out-of-pocket costs at the pharmacy counter.
Regulatory reforms at the FDA are leading to more medicine approvals
and greater competition in the market. Value-based arrangements (VBAs)
and indication-based pricing (IBP) can reduce the payer risk of
exposure to failed outcomes, more closely associate drug costs and
value, and make prescription medicines more affordable for patients.
foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
Question. President Trump and Secretary Azar have both repeatedly
described their frustrations with ``foreign freeloading'' of U.S. drugs
in the last year.
``When foreign governments extort unreasonably low prices from U.S.
drug makers, Americans have to pay more to subsidize the enormous cost
of research and development. . . . It's unfair and it's ridiculous, and
it's not going to happen any longer.''
Do you agree that because of foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems, U.S. patients and innovators are shouldering the
burden for financing medical advances?
Answer. Please see answer below.
Question. How do foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
systems affect our prescription drug costs?
Answer. Please see answer below.
Question. Are foreign governments taking note of the concerns being
raised by the Trump administration, and have they responded in any way?
Answer. Please see answer below.
Question. Has there been any noticeable change in any of our trade
agreements since these concerns have been raised by the Trump
administration?
Answer. Drug pricing in markets outside of the U.S. must take into
account significant differences in economic status, cultural beliefs
and values, as well as differences in the local processes for setting
prices, which vary significantly from market-to-market. Countries vary
significantly in their per capita gross domestic product (GDP), their
willingness to invest in, and provide rapid access to, health-care
innovation, their focus on a single best average treatment for a
population versus focusing on patient heterogeneity and preserving
consumer choice and provider autonomy, and their tolerance and
acceptability for optimal patient care.
The countries selected for international comparison through the IPI
model are not economically comparable with the U.S. Many of the
countries in the IPI model, most notably Greece, the Czech Republic,
and Italy, do not have comparable economies as measured in per capita
gross domestic product (GDP). The significant difference in drug costs
between the U.S. and other countries referred to by CMS in the IPI
proposal is also seen with the comparative cost of physician services,
hospital care, diagnostics, and medical devices. For example, according
to a recent report by the OECD, hospital services in the U.S. cost 150
percent more than in Japan, France, Germany, Finland and Spain; 170
percent higher than in UK, Greece, and Italy.
Through the USMCA and other trade actions, the Trump administration
has taken steps to crack down on foreign violations of U.S.
intellectual property rights. There remain, however, several practices
that undermine U.S. intellectual property and violate existing trade
deals. We need to continue to negotiate better trade deals with better
enforcement that protect American medical innovations.
medicaid closed formulary proposals
Question. In an attempt to bring down drug costs, various States
have been exploring whether to exclude certain drugs from its Medicaid
program. For example, the State of Massachusetts' recently asked CMS
for permission to create a closed formulary where the State Medicaid
program would pick at least one drug per therapeutic class. CMS denied
their waiver request citing violation of Federal law, but this proposal
does bring up important questions on how to contain drug prices in
State Medicaid programs.
If the principles of the Medicare Part D program--including the
necessary patient protections--were applied to State Medicaid programs,
do you think it lower drugs costs while ensuring access to patients?
Answer. It is unlikely that applying Part D principles to Medicaid
would lower drug costs. Medicaid is already a lower-cost channel and
patients have little to no copay obligations.
medicaid ``best price''
Question. In the Trump administration's Blueprint, they suggested
that because drug manufactures have to give Medicaid the ``best price''
on drugs, there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers--both government and commercial--than what is already offered
under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Does the Medicaid ``best price'' requirement encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices?
Answer. For BMS, Medicaid ``best price'' is not a consideration in
determining initial product pricing.
Question. What, if any, changes would you suggest we make to the
program?
Answer. As clarification, prices offered to Medicare Part D plans
are excluded from Medicaid ``best price,'' and therefore, manufacturers
can offer deeper discounts to Part D without impacting Medicaid best
price.
More generally, BMS recommends the creation of an exemption from
best price and AMP for select value based purchasing arrangements and
greater clarity on best price and AMP reporting on issues related to
such arrangements.
outcomes-based contracts
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you highlight your
support of outcomes-based contracts and how we need to be shifting our
system toward that approach.
How will these contracts lower drug costs for patients in both the
near term and long-term?
Answer. The goal and design of outcome-based contracts will vary
depending on the specific drug and the therapeutic area/disease State
which is being evaluated. In general, outcome-based contracts are
designed to demonstrate the efficacy, safety, clinical superiority,
cost savings and/or improvement in overall patient health outcomes. To
the extent that outcomes-based contracts demonstrate improvement in
clinical outcomes and/or reduction in overall health-care costs and
facilitate access to appropriate medicines, patients will benefit from
improved outcomes and reduced out-of-pocket costs, and Federal health-
care programs will benefit from lower overall health-care costs.
Question. How will they lower overall health-care costs for our
Federal programs?
Answer. Please see answer to previous question.
Question. What have the preliminary results looked like so far?
Answer. Eliquis has demonstrated a better safety profile than
alternate therapies (less bleeding events) as proven through outcomes-
based contracts using real world data. Oncology patients have higher
rates of diagnostic testing done to monitor disease progression (as
recommended by guidelines), through our testing based value-based
contract.
transparency/point of sale
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you express your
support for the Trump administration's proposal to allow manufacturers
to provide PBMs up-front discounts that are passed onto patients at the
point-of-sale.
Do you feel like this proposal will make the transactions within
the drug supply chain more transparent?
Answer. To the extent that discounts provided by manufacturers to
PBMs and payers are passed through to the patients at the point-of-
sale, transactions within the drug supply chain will be more
transparent.
Question. If so, would this transparency bring down drug costs--
overall and for specialty drugs?
Answer. In terms of bringing down drug costs, the result of passing
discounts through to patients at the point-of-sale will likely vary
depending on the individual drug. We anticipate that patients who are
prescribed high-cost, highly discounted drugs, primarily specialty
drugs, and are subject to high co-insurance costs, will experience the
greatest reduction in drug costs.
the relationship between wholesalers and manufacturers
Question. When talking about the pharmaceutical supply chain, a lot
of focus has been placed on the Pharmacy Benefit Manager. But there's
another side of the equation that I'd like to ask about.
How do wholesalers negotiate pricing with manufacturers?
Answer. Wholesalers and manufacturers negotiate distribution
service agreements that include terms and fees. The fees are typically
a percentage of list price.
Question. What impact does this have on drug costs?
Answer. It is BMS's understanding that the fees negotiated by
wholesalers and manufacturers do not have a material impact on drug
costs.
Question. What incentives or disincentives do they have to contain
price increases?
Answer. This question is best answered by wholesalers.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
proposed rebate rule
Question. As has been done in many other settings, drug
manufacturers said during the hearing that one reason list prices for
drugs are high is that pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) demand
larger and larger rebates in order for the drug to receive favorable
placement on a formulary. You and your colleagues who testified during
the hearing stated if the administration's proposal on changes to the
anti-kickback safe harbor for pharmaceutical rebates took effect, your
company would likely lower list price.
Like many Oregonians, I am skeptical drug manufacturers would
voluntarily lower their prices. Therefore, would you support
legislation that would (1) make similar changes the administration has
put forward related to Part D and Medicaid managed care, (2) change the
rebate system in a similar way to the proposal for the commercial
market, and (3) require drug makers to lower the list price of their
drugs equal to the amount of rebates provided today?
Answer. BMS supports the extension of rebate reforms to the
commercial market. However, given the significant market change in the
proposed Part D safe harbor change, we urge the committee to pursue an
implementation timeline that will allow manufacturers, PBMs, plans,
retail pharmacies, wholesalers, and other impacted parties to address
the many operational challenges for the industry. We anticipate that
the implementation of the safe harbor change in Part D will provide
important learnings, but in order to extend these changes to the
commercial market, industry will need additional lead time to do so.
Given the many payers and channels in the health-care market, an
individual drug has multiple net price points. Moreover, the goals of
the proposed rebate rule can be achieved not only through lower list
prices, but also through negotiated discounts at the point-of-sale, or
through some combination of the two approaches. We believe the goals of
the proposed rule can be best achieved by giving manufacturers the full
range of options in their negotiations with plans and PBMs.
Consequently, BMS would not support legislation that required drug
makers to lower the list price of their drugs equal to the amount of
rebates provided today.
There may be instances where a reduction in product list price is
warranted, but with or without a list price change, in order for
patients to benefit fully from the changes, regulations would need to
ensure that manufacturer discounts are passed through to patients at
the point-of-sale and that patient out-of-pocket costs are based on
product net price.
medicaid drug rebate program
Question. The Medicaid Drug Rebate Program (MDRP) requires
manufacturers to provide a basic rebate and an additional inflationary
rebate for both brand and generic drugs. The inflationary rebate is an
increasingly substantial part of total rebates due in large part to
large increases in drug prices that exceed inflation. Under current
law, this inflationary rebate is capped at 100 percent of Average
Manufacturer Price (AMP). This is the case even when manufacturers
continue to raise their prices well above inflation.
Please provide a list of all of your pharmaceutical products that
have reached the Medicaid AMP rebate cap in any of the 20 quarters from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
Answer. Please see answer below.
Question. For each drug listed in response to question 1, please
also provide a list of which quarters and years each drug hit the cap.
Answer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Quarter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BARACLUDE TAB 0.5MG
Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1 2015, Q2 2015, Q3
2015, Q4 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BARACLUDE TAB 1MG
Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1 2015, Q2 2015, Q3
2015, Q4 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 4MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 4MG (1BTLX1000)
Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1 2015, Q2 2015
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 1MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 2MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 5MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 7.5MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 10MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 2.5MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 3MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 6MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1
2016, Q2 2016, Q3 2016, Q4 2016, Q1
2017, Q2 2017, Q3 2017, Q4 2017, Q1
2018, Q2 2018, Q3 2018, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COUMADIN TAB 6MG US
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AVAPRO TAB 75MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AVAPRO TAB 150MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AVAPRO TAB 300MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014, Q1
2015, Q2 2015, Q3 2015, Q4 2015, Q1 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AVALIDE TAB 150/12.5MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014, Q3 2014, Q4 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AVALIDE TAB 300/12.5MG
Q1 2014, Q2 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
medicaid drug rebate program compliance
Question. I am concerned about recent reports and legal settlements
surrounding drug manufacturers' failure to comply fully with the
requirements of the MDRP. For example, an analysis by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General
found that between 2012 and 2016 taxpayers may have overpaid by as much
as $1.3 billion for 10 potentially misclassified drugs. That is why I
introduced the Right Rebate Act with Chairman Grassley to prevent drug
manufacturers from manipulating Medicaid to increase their profits.
However, I continued to be concerned about oversight and manufacturer
compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Accordingly, please describe the following:
Your company's current compliance plan and procedures used to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program including internal audits or other checks you use to identify
compliance vulnerabilities.
Answer. The Company routinely assigns new employees working in the
government pricing area formal training on U.S. government pricing and
contracting. This training includes an overview of the Medicaid Program
obligations and requirements. BMS also maintains policy and procedural
documents which govern compliance relative to the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program. In addition, BMS periodically holds informal training sessions
as part of departmental and other internal meetings, where compliance
training is provided on topics relevant to the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program. BMS has also identified key controls related to the Medicaid
Drug Rebate Program which are independently tested as part of the
Company's Sarbanes-Oxley controls. As part of these controls, all
Medicaid pricing submissions are reviewed and approved by the
appropriate Company management. In addition, BMS Global Internal Audit
and Assurance periodically conducts internal audits of the Company's
operations, which include activities that support the Medicaid Drug
Rebate Program.
Question. Any past or ongoing issues of non-compliance.
Answer. There are no ongoing issues of non-compliance with the
Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, nor were there any within the past 5
years. (BMS interprets the question as asking for a reasonable period
in the past, and has selected 5 years).
Question. Any corrective actions taken to address identified
problems or issues of non-compliance with the MDRP and how such steps
were communicated to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Answer. There are no ongoing issues of non-compliance with the
Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, nor were there any within the past 5
years. (BMS interprets the question as asking for a reasonable period
in the past, and has selected 5 years).
Question. Any steps taken to improve compliance and ensure that all
Medicaid drug rebates owed to the Federal Government and the States are
paid in full.
Answer. In addition to the compliance and audit activities already
outlined, the BMS Government Pricing team conducts regular cross-
functional information sharing meetings in order to facilitate
communication within the organization, to gather all relevant pricing
and contracting information, and to provide education that is focused
on ensuring compliance with our Medicaid reporting obligations. The
Government Pricing team also conducts quarterly Medicaid Best Price
review meetings with key members of the pricing and contracting
organization and requires that leaders of key functions within the
pricing and contracting organization sign-off on quarterly Medicaid
Best Price information prior to the Company's final. Additionally, the
Company has made significant investments in the systems which are used
to support the calculation and payment of Medicaid rebates to help
ensure greater compliance, standardization and automation of our
processes. BMS also maintains a Compliance and Ethics hotline and
encourages all employees to raise potential compliance concerns so that
they can be investigated and addressed.
More specifically with regard to the payment of Medicaid drug
rebates, based on the current portfolio of active drugs, all BMS drugs
are classified as Innovator Single Source or Innovator Multiple Source
drugs which are subject to the higher basic rebate calculation. When
BMS launches a new drug that is subject to Medicaid reporting, the drug
classification is reviewed as part of the Medicaid submission approval
process.
To the extent that BMS has questions on MDRP compliance or on
interpretative approaches to MDRP price reporting, we communicate with
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
bonus payments tied to specific drugs
Question. I am concerned by the potential for employee financial
incentives to encourage high launch prices and price increases for
prescription drugs.
Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to sales or
revenue targets of a single product your company sells? Has it ever
been? If yes, please state the product or products to which your
salary, bonus or other compensation was tied.
Answer. No, Dr. Caforio's salary and bonus are not tied to sales or
revenue targets for a single product. Dr. Caforio's compensation is
tied in part to the revenue of the Company as a whole. Please see
answer below.
Question. Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to
either revenue or net income of the company as a whole? Has it ever
been? If yes, please explain what assumptions about price increases are
used when the compensation committee sets revenue or net income goals.
Does the compensation committee provide any guidance to executives in
regards to the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth?
Answer. Dr. Caforio's compensation is tied in part to the revenue
of the Company as a whole. The revenue metric is based on the overall
Company target for the applicable performance period (annual for annual
bonus and longer-term, 3 years for Performance Share Units), which
typically includes assumptions concerning both price changes and volume
growth. Over the last few years, BMS' revenue growth has been primarily
attributable to increased volume arising from increased demand for our
products rather than price increases.
Dr. Caforio's compensation is reviewed and recommended by the
Compensation and Management Development Committee, which is a committee
consisting of only independent directors, and approved by at least
three-fourths of the independent directors of our Board of Directors.
The Compensation Management and Development committee annually
completes a thoughtful and rigorous evaluation of the Company's
executive compensation program to ensure that the program is aligned
with our mission and delivers shareholder value, while not encouraging
excessive or inappropriate risk-taking by our executives. When
determining metrics and setting incentive plan targets each year and
for 3 year performance period, the committee is aware of the risks
associated with drug pricing, among other risks, and ensures our plans
do not incentivize risky behavior in order to meet targets and goals.
net prices
Question. In your testimony you stated, ``for this reason, the
average net pricing across our U.S. portfolio of medicines increased by
5 percent of the last year-over-year for the last 5 years. Importantly,
it did not increase at all in 2018 and we expect that it will not
increase in 2019.'' Please describe how the company's year-over-year
aggregate net price is calculated. Please also specifically address the
following questions.
Answer. Dr. Caforio testified that BMS's average net pricing across
the company's U.S. portfolio increased by 5 percent or less year-over-
year for the last 5 years. Please see the answer below for a
description of how year-over-year net price is calculated.
Question. How many products are included in the calculation of the
average net price change? What was the median net price change?
Answer. Approximately 20 products are included in the calculation
of the average net price change. The median net price change over the
last 5 years is 3.4% based on the following net price change per year:
2018
2017
2016
2015
2014
(0.3%)
1.6%
5.2%
3.4%
4.0%
Question. Is net price weighted? If so, how? For example, in
determining the aggregate net price does the company assign different
weights to different products based on volume or other factors? Are
``on patent'' and ``off patent'' drugs weighted identically? Are other
statistical weights used or are all products treated equally?
Answer. Net price is weighted according to the product's sales
relative to total BMS sales. Year-over-year change in Net Price =
Change in List Price + Change in effective discount rate across all
channels. Patent and off-patent drugs are treated equally in the
calculation.
Question. Does the figure that you provided during your testimony
account for U.S. prices, international prices, or both? Generally
speaking, when your company reports net price changes, does it
differentiate between U.S. and international prices?
Answer. The figure included in Dr. Caforio's testimony accounted
for U.S. prices. Yes, BMS discloses by region (i.e., U.S., Europe, Rest
of World) in our quarterly 10Q and Annual 10K filings. However, the
only net price changes specifically outlined (i.e., in percentage
terms) is for the U.S.
Question. Please list the five drugs your company sold in the U.S.
that had the greatest year-over-year net price increase in 2018, noting
the increase for each drug by dollar figure and percentage. Please list
the five drugs your company sold in the U.S. that had the lowest year-
over-year net price increase (and/or the greatest decrease) in 2018,
noting the increase (or decrease) for each drug by dollar figure and
percentage.
Answer. This question calls for information that BMS does not
disclose publicly and considers to be competitively sensitive.
Question. For 2018, what was the average net price change in the
U.S. market for (1) drugs with no competition, (2) drugs with only
branded competition, and (3) drugs with generic competition?
Answer. This questions calls for information that BMS does not
disclose publicly and considers to be competitively sensitive.
Question. You stated that average net price increased 5 percent in
2017, but did not increase in 2018, and that you do not expect it to
increase in 2019. What factors contributed to the change from 2017 to
2018? What would the net price increase have been if your company
excluded the impact of drugs like Reyataz and Sustiva, which lost
exclusivity in the United States at the end of 2017, and Daklinza,
which the company reported losing revenue on?
Answer. Dr. Caforio testified that BMS's average net pricing across
the Company's U.S. portfolio increased by 5 percent or less year-over-
year for the last 5 years. Average U.S. net price remained unchanged
from 2017 to 2018 (i.e., 0 percent net price increase from 2017 to
2018), because discounts across all channels increased at a rate higher
than list price increased. If drugs which lost exclusivity, like
Reyataz, Sustiva and Daklinza, were excluded, the net price change
would still be 0 percent.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. When new products enter the market, do drug companies set
high initial rebates and then provide deep rebates in order to gain
access to insurance plan's formularies?
Answer. BMS does not. We cannot comment on the pricing practices of
other manufacturers.
Question. If CMS finalizes the rebate rule, do you anticipate
future products entering the market with significantly lower initial
list prices?
Answer. If CMS were to finalize the rebate rule, the impact on list
prices of future products would likely differ by product depending on
such factors as the clinical profile of the product, competition,
market dynamics, and the channel into which the product is primarily
sold. As noted above, the goals of the proposed rule could be achieved
through lower list prices, negotiated discounts at the point-of-sale,
or some combination of these two approaches.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
Question. What are your recommendations for lowering prices for the
40 percent of drugs that do not offer rebates in Medicare Part D?
Answer. BMS believes that market-based reforms are the best way to
lower costs and maintain the appropriate incentives for innovation. BMS
supports policies that enable payers to negotiate innovative and
flexible ways to pay for medicines, including value-based purchasing
arrangements. Additionally, we need to ensure generics are available
whenever permissible under our system. BMS notes also that even
manufacturers pay coverage gap discounts for all Part D drugs
regardless of whether a payer rebate is provided for that drug.
Question. In the health insurance plans that you offer your
employees, do you ask your insurers to pass through the full
manufacturer rebates to the beneficiaries?
Answer. Based on the contract negotiated with the PBM with which
BMS has contracted, BMS has elected to reinvest the rebates we would
otherwise have received from the PBM to reduce the per claim cost for
brand drugs across the entire population of members we cover. BMS
provides health care coverage to approximately 10,000 active employees,
4,000 retirees and 18,000 spouses and other dependents.
Under this reinvested model, those rebate dollars are applied to
reduce the negotiated rate our enrollees pay for brand drugs. This
means that the PBM charges the plan a lower negotiated rate for all
branded drugs (not just those associated with specific rebates),
benefiting a broader portion of our covered population. Since our
health plan benefit design uses a coinsurance for member cost sharing,
this lower negotiated drug cost enabled by the application of the
rebate value, reduces the coinsurance amount our members pay for their
medications at the pharmacy counter.
Question. The systems for pricing and distributing drugs are opaque
and difficult to understand. What are your recommendations for
increasing transparency in how your companies set the list prices for
drugs, and for improving transparency in the supply chain for
prescription drugs? Would you support Federal standards for
transparency in setting the list prices for drugs?
Answer. BMS intends to provide added transparency around the list
prices for its medicines. We are creating pricing pages for all of our
advertised medicine websites to include list price and additional
information on out-of-pocket costs and support programs. Any DTC TV ads
will direct patients to the site through a web link. Our plan is to
have this information available by April 15, 2019. We solicited
feedback from the patient community to ensure the resources we provide
about pricing are meaningful to patients. The research suggests
patients may misinterpret list price information in a television
advertisement without additional context.
BMS is complying with the recently enacted California drug price
transparency legislation and would like to work with the committee on
similar legislation at the Federal level, or legislation similar to the
SPIKE Act (S. 474), both of which are intended to require manufacturers
to disclose price increases above a certain threshold.
Question. In nearly every sector of the health-care industry,
Medicare, Medicaid, employers, and insurers are moving away from fee-
for-service payments to reimbursements based on value and performance.
Prescription drugs and medical devices were the glaring exceptions to
this trend until recently. How many of your drugs are included in
value-based contracts and how many patients are benefiting from them?
How do these value-based contracts work to lower drug prices for both
patients and taxpayers?
Answer. Currently, BMS has value-based contracts for two products.
Approximately 39 million patients are eligible for potential coverage
under those contracts.
The goal and design of outcome-based contracts will vary depending
on the specific drug and the therapeutic area/disease state which is
being evaluated. In general, outcome-based contracts are designed to
demonstrate the efficacy, safety, clinical superiority, cost savings
and/or improvement in overall patient health outcomes. To the extent
that outcomes-based contracts demonstrate improvement in clinical
outcomes and/or reduction in overall health-care costs, patients will
benefit from improved outcomes and reduced costs, and the Federal
programs will benefit from lower overall health-care costs.
Question. Last year, Senator Portman and I did an investigation on
the pricing of an opioid overdose reversal drug called EVZIO,
manufactured by Kaleo. Kaleo increased the price of EVZIO from $575 in
2014 to $4,100 in 2017. We found that the best price Medicare was able
to get for EVZIO, about $4,000, was much higher than the price other
Federal programs and private insurers were able to get. It seemed that
Kaleo was able to get this higher price of $4,000 from Medicare by
helping doctors fill out paperwork showing that the drug was medically
necessary, even though there are cheaper alternatives on the market. As
a result of the investigation, Kaleo announced it will bring a generic
version of the drug to market at only $168 per pack. Are any of your
companies providing medical necessity paperwork to doctors in order to
get your drugs covered by Medicare?
Answer. BMS offers patient support programs that help eligible
patients who are prescribed our medicines obtain access to those
medicines. This includes assisting patients in navigating the insurance
approval process. Consistent with longstanding OIG guidance and common
industry practices, BMS does provide the template forms required by
insurers for use in making coverage determinations, but BMS does not
provide medical necessity content. That content must be independently
provided by the prescribing health-care provider.
Question. In 2017, the Rand Corporation estimated that biosimilar
drugs, which are competitors to complex, biologic drugs, could save the
United States more than $50 billion over the next decade. Some of you
have also argued that increasing the use of biosimilar drugs would help
lower drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers. What is delaying the
uptake of biosimilar drugs in the United States? What policies do you
recommend to increase the development of biosimilar drugs?
Answer. BMS does not have a biosimilar or a branded product with
biosimilar competition, and consequently, is not in a position to offer
first-hand insight.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
Question. The United States is one of the only countries in the
world to allow prescription drug manufacturers to advertise directly to
consumers through magazines, billboards, radio, and television
commercials. While I will not argue that it is beneficial to educate
consumers about an unfamiliar disease and encourage them to seek
medical help, most commercials from all of your companies recommend
asking about a specific brand name drug, not a medical condition.
Furthermore, even if your advertisements follow all FDA rules and list
medication side effects, they also almost always list these while a
smiling, apparently healthy person is walking on a beach.
Researchers say that this type of imagery, combined with viewing
hours of drug commercials each month, leads consumers to underestimate
the risks associated with medications. For the past decade, studies
have shown that aggressive direct-to-consumer advertising is associated
with rising drug prices and an increase in inappropriate drug
prescriptions.
Question. Since researchers have concluded that consumers are
misunderstanding the benefits and risks described in your ads, what
further policies could help you and your colleagues ensure that you are
educating patients in a clear manner?
Answer. BMS engages in DTC TV advertising selectively and only when
we think it will help educate patients. Our DTC TV advertising is
submitted to the FDA for advisory comments prior to being broadcast in
accordance with FDA guidance. BMS believes that our DTC advertising
clearly and appropriately communicates the benefits and risks of our
medicines.
BMS believes responsible DTC communications play a critical role in
educating patients and families about treatment options and encourages
them to have an informed discussion with their physician about the best
treatment for their needs. BMS would be open to considering any
additional policy proposals that further facilitate the achievement of
this goal.
pharmaceutical companies continue to raise prices
Question. As you are well aware, high prescription drug prices are
the number one concern for Americans and their families. According to
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the average
American spends around $1,208 annually on prescription drugs. There
have been several instances where brand name or even generic drugs that
have been on the market for years continue to increase in price.
One of the most well-known examples is Mylan's increase of the
price of EpiPen from less than $100 in 2007 to more than $600 in 2016.
Another example, is the ever-increasing price of insulin. Sanofi
increased the price of a vial of Lantus from $88.20 in 2007 to $307.20
in 2017. And those are just a small sample of price increases.
Why don't we see price decreases for drugs that have been on the
market for years without new formulations or added benefit?
Answer. Although list prices for a drug without new formulations or
added benefits may not decrease over time, in our experience, net
prices generally decrease over time and/or volume decreases
significantly as generics enter the market.
pay for delay
Question. Pay for delay is a tactic that more and more branded drug
manufacturers have been using to stifle competition from lower-cost
generic manufacturers. This allows you to sidestep competition by
offering patent settlements that pay generic companies not to bring
lower-cost alternatives to market.
These ``pay-for-delay'' patent settlements benefit both brand-name
pharmaceutical companies by helping them avoid costly patent litigation
and general manufacturers by rewarding them a hefty sum to delay
entering the market with a cheaper drug alternative. However, these
deals do not benefit consumers. According to an FTC study, these
anticompetitive deals cost consumers and taxpayers $3.5 billion in
higher drug costs every year.
Does your company partake in pay-for-delay settlements?
Answer. No.
Question. Why would a pharmaceutical company enter into a pay-for
delay agreement?
Answer. As stated above, BMS does not enter into any pay-for-delay
settlements. We cannot comment on the actions and motivations of other
manufacturers.
Question. Do you think these agreements stifle competition and
prevent generic alternatives to your branded medications?
Answer. BMS agrees that patent settlement agreements that have
substantial payments going from innovators to generics, and are solely
intended to delay competition, are anticompetitive. In contrast,
agreements that do not contain such substantial payments and properly
balance litigation considerations often lead to earlier generic entry
than patent expiration.
drug rebate rule
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services'
(HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG) promulgated a new regulation to
remove regulatory safe harbor protections under the Anti-Kickback
Statute (AKS) for rebates on prescription drugs rebates paid by
manufactures to PBMs under Medicare Part D and for Medicaid managed
care organizations (MCOs). The OIG proposal attempts to ban most
rebates by eliminating their regulatory protections.
The rule is predicted to increase net drug costs in its early
years. The CMS actuaries estimate it would cost $196 billion over 10
years. Despite this high price tag, the beneficiary benefits are
limited. The proposed rule notes that under the CMS Actuary's analysis,
the majority of beneficiaries would see an increase in their total out-
of-pocket payments and premium costs; reductions in total cost sharing
will exceed total premium increases.
I wanted to ask a question about the administration's rebate rule,
which I understand that many of the drug manufacturers, and your main
trade association, strongly support. According to an analysis of the
rule by the Office of Actuaries at CMS, drug manufacturers are likely
to initially retain 15 percent of the current rebates as higher net
drug prices.
Given that estimate, can you provide the committee with any
assurances that prices will not increase under this proposed rule?
Answer. BMS supports HHS's proposed rule because BMS believes it
will lower patient costs at the point-of-sale and ensure patients
realize the benefit of manufacturer discounts. We do not anticipate
that manufacturer average net prices will increase as a result of this
rule.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. According to an article recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, medical marketers spent nearly $30
billion dollars in 2016, up from $17 billion in 1997. Direct-to-
Consumer (DTC) advertising had the biggest percentage increase: from
$2.1 billion, or 11.9 percent of all medical marketing, in 1997 to $9.6
billion, or 32 percent of total spending, in 2016.
Can you please provide what your ratio of spending on sales and
marketing to research and development is today?
Answer. BMS does not disclose sales and marketing investments
separately. In 2018, BMS marketing, selling and administrative expenses
were $4.6 billion, which is inclusive of sales and marketing, and R&D
expenses were $6.3 billion. That ratio is approximately 7 to 10.
price-gouging
Question. Sanofi, as I understand it, has made a pledge to the
public to limit its price increases to the national health expenditures
growth projection.
Would your company commit to a cap on annual price increases as
part of your PhRMA membership criteria?
Answer. It is BMS's understanding that a cap on annual price
increases as part of PhRMA membership would raise significant antitrust
concerns.
Question. What policies would you propose to help ensure lower
launch prices for new drugs?
Answer. BMS does not believe that government policies should govern
launch pricing of new drugs. Payers, providers, patients, and the
marketplace should freely assess the value of new innovative therapies
relative to their improvement in outcomes and impact to total cost of
care. At BMS, we believe the prices of our medicines reflect the value
they bring to patients, healthcare providers, payers, and society as a
whole.
transparency
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mentioned that the
current system of pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) back-end rebates do
not rarely results in a scenario where the PBM passes on savings to
consumers at the point of sale (POS). The administration recently
proposed a rule to eliminate the anti-kickback statute safe harbor
protections for these drug rebates.
Do you agree that greater transparency should be required to
understand how manufacturers and PBMs are negotiating prices and
rebates to ensure that savings are passed down to beneficiaries?
Answer. Yes, BMS agrees that manufacturer's net prices should be
transparent to and passed through to beneficiaries. BMS also believes
that this transparency should be required for all entities in the
health-care market.
pbms
Question. An Axios article from March 7, 2019 highlights the fact
that, while ``pharmaceutical companies put a lot of the blame for high
drug prices on pharmacy benefit managers,'' many large pharmaceutical
companies ``rely on PBMs to manage their own health care benefits.''
In your role as an employer, does your company contract with a
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) to administer the prescription
drug benefits for your employees and negotiate lower drug costs on your
behalf?
Answer. Yes.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, how do you utilize the
rebates your PBM negotiates to lower health care costs or drug costs
for your employee plans and what does your company do with that
savings? Specifically, do the savings go toward lowing premiums?
Answer. BMS uses a PBM for our self-funded Pharmacy Benefit
Program, which is part of our overall healthcare plan. The PBM offers
the option of direct point-of-sale rebates, however, based on the
contract negotiated with the PBM, BMS has elected to reinvest the
rebates we would otherwise have received from the PBM to reduce the per
claim cost for brand drugs. Under this reinvested model those rebate
dollars are applied to reduce the negotiated rate our enrollees pay for
branded drugs. This means that the PBM charges the plan a lower
negotiated rate for all branded drugs (not just those associated with
specific rebates). Since our health plan benefit design uses a
coinsurance for beneficiary cost sharing, this lower negotiated drug
cost enabled by the application of the rebate value, reduces the
coinsurance amount our members pay for their medications at the
pharmacy counter. Under this model, a greater number of participants
benefit from the value of the rebates.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, does your PBM offer
point-of-sale rebates to your employees?
Answer. Please see answer to previous question.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. Please describe any policy changes you support that would
result in your company lowering the list prices of its drugs.
Answer. BMS supports the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor
protection for back-end rebates in Medicare Part D, and we believe it
would lead to lower out-of-pocket costs. The goals of the proposed rule
could be achieved through lower list prices, negotiated discounts at
the point-of-sale, or some combination of these two approaches. While
it is unclear how Part D plans and PBMs will react to the proposed
rule, at this time, BMS envisions that we would offer point-of-sale
discounts to Part D plans equivalent to the contracted rebate amount
and will continue to assess the possibility of lowering list price on a
product-by-product basis. Our ability to lower list prices, however, is
constrained by the fact that the HHS proposed rule does not apply to
the commercial insurance market, where we anticipate back-end rebates
to continue for the foreseeable future.
Question. How much does your company's research and development
portfolio rely on taxpayer-funded research conducted by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)? How many of your company's products are
based, at least in part, on NIH research, and how many are the result
of research funded solely by your company?
Answer. Government institutions such as NIH and NCI do critically
important basic research. However, the most significant investment
behind any molecule is the clinical development program, which is
usually when a pharmaceutical company comes into the development
process. On average it takes 10 to 15 years and about $2.5 B to bring a
medicine to patients, depending on the asset, therapeutic area, number
of indications, and other factors. This is highly dependent on the
stage of the molecule/asset when it comes to BMS. There is also
considerable risk of failure given the complexity of clinical
development. Only about 12 percent of drugs that make it to Phase 1
clinical trials result in an approved product.
Question. In each of the last 5 years, how much has your company
spent on research and development versus the advertising and marketing
of your products?
Answer. BMS does not publicly disclose specific advertising and
marketing expenditures. The figures below are for marketing, sales and
administrative expenses, which includes advertising and marketing
expenditures.
2018 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.6 billion
Research and development expenses: $6.3 billion
2017 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.8 billion
Research and development expenses: $6.5 billion
2016 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $5.0 billion
Research and development expenses: $5.0 billion
2015 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.8 billion
Research and development expenses: $5.9 billion
2014 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.8 billion
Research and development expenses: $4.5 billion
Question. During the hearing, you mentioned that your company would
be likely to lower the list prices of its drugs if the recent proposal
by the Trump administration to change the current system of rebates was
extended to the private market.
If the policy was extended to the private market, how large would
the list price reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
Answer. While it is unclear how health plans and PBMs would react
if the HHS proposed rule's policy were extended to the private market,
at this time, BMS envisions that we generally would offer point-of-sale
discounts to health plans equivalent on average to the contracted
rebate amount and would continue to assess the possibility of lowering
list price on a product-by-product basis. In the absence of list price
reductions, the policy requirement that manufacturer discounts be
passed on at the point-of-sale would accomplish the goal of reducing
patient out-of-pocket costs.
Question. How will this proposal affect how your company sets the
list prices for new drug products?
If the proposal is finalized and not extended to the private
market, will your company make any list price reductions? If so, how
large would the reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
Answer. While it is unclear how health plans and PBMs would react
if the HHS proposed rule were finalized and not extended to the private
market, at this time, BMS envisions that we would offer point-of-sale
discounts to Part D plans equivalent on average to the contracted
rebate amount and would continue to assess the possibility of lowering
list price on a product-by-product basis. In the absence of a list
price reduction, the proposed rule's requirement that manufacturer
discounts be passed through to patients at the point-of-sale would
accomplish the goal of reducing patient out-of-pocket costs.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan
Question. In June of 2018, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission (MACPAC) unanimously recommended under Recommendation 1.1 in
their annual report to Congress that Congress remove the statutory
requirement that manufacturers blend the average manufacturer price
(AMP) of a brand drug and its authorized generic.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ MACPAC, ``Improving Operations of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program,'' https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Improving-
Operations-of-the-Medicaid-Drug-Rebate-Program.pdf.
This requirement created an unintended loophole. Rather than use
the price of the authorized generic, drug companies can sell its
authorized generic to a corporate subsidiary at an artificially lower
price, and use that lower price to bring down the AMP, which in turn
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lowers the rebate obligation.
Does your company engage in this practice? Has your company ever
engaged in this practice in the past?
Answer. No. BMS does not have any authorized generics with its own
corporate subsidiary.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
Question. Dr. Caforio, your company has entered a merger agreement
to acquire Celgene, which makes the cancer drug Remlivid. The price of
Remlivid was hiked nearly 20 percent in 2017, 5 percent last year, and
another 3.5 percent just last month.\2\ Remlivid was also high on a
list of brands whose manufacturers have refused to provide generic
companies with the samples they need to submit an FDA application.
Celgene refused 13 such inquiries, despite FDA's assurance that they
were safe to share.\3\, \4\ Today Remlivid stands as a
$70,000 sole source drug with no competition.\5\ You mention increasing
access to generics as a priority in your testimony. In a case were
Remlivid falls under your purview, what specific actions will you take
to promote generic competition of that drug?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.reuters.com/article/us-celgene-results/celgene-
profit-tops-expectations-will-limit-
future-price-hikes-idUSKBN1KG1IC.
\3\ https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandApp
roved/ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm
?utm_campaign=FDA%20publishes%20list%20of%20inquiries%20from%20generic%2
0drug%20
applicants%20about%20RLD%20access&utm_medium=email&utm_source=Eloqua.
\4\ https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2018/05/17/571986468/
how-a-drugmaker-gamed-the-system-to-keep-generic-competition-away.
\5\ https://twitter.com/megtirrell/status/1016769284025016320.
Answer. BMS believes it is important to ensure generics are made
available whenever that is permissible under our system, and supports
the administration's focus on increasing the approval of generics. As
part of that system, it is important that generic companies perform the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
needed testing to ensure product quality and patient safety.
Until the transaction closes, BMS and Celgene will continue to
operate as separate companies. BMS thus does not know and cannot
comment on Celgene's practices as they relate to generic manufacturers.
Once the transaction closes, BMS' practices with regard to generic
manufacturers, including the provision of samples, will govern the
combined portfolio.
Question. As a portion of your revenue, for what percentage of the
drugs in your portfolio do you offer no rebates? Based on the drugs in
your pipeline, do you foresee that portion growing? For those drugs is
your list price equal to your net price?
Answer. Although the level of rebates varies by product and
channel, BMS pays rebates for all products in our portfolio.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you generate in US sales
revenue? Please include specific figures.
Answer. BMS invested $6.3 billion in R&D in 2018, which includes
the discovery and development of new medicines.
U.S. sales for 2018 were $12.5 billion.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? What company functions do you consider to be included
in administration? Please include specific figures.
Answer. BMS does not publicly disclose specific marketing and
administration expenditures. The figures below are for marketing, sales
and administrative expenses, which includes marketing and
administration expenditures.
2018 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.6 billion
Research and development expenses: $6.3 billion
2017 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.8 billion
Research and development expenses: $6.5 billion
2016 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $5.0 billion
Research and development expenses: $5.0 billion
2015 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.8 billion
Research and development expenses: $5.9 billion
2014 spend:
Marketing, selling, and administrative expenses: $4.8 billion
Research and development expenses: $4.5 billion
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
sales? What company functions do you consider to be included in sales?
Please include specific figures.
Answer. BMS does not publicly disclose the functions included in
sales nor specific marketing and sales expenditures. Please see the
answer to the prior question for R&D and marketing, selling and
administrative expenses.
Question. Why do you advertise for the drugs you manufacture? What
factors do you consider in choosing which drugs you advertise?
Answer. BMS believes responsible DTC communications plays a
critical role in educating patients and families about treatment
options, and encourages them to have an informed discussion with their
physician about the best treatment for their needs. As a company, BMS
engages in DTC TV advertising selectively and only when we think it
will help educate patients. Currently BMS is engaging in DTC TV
advertising for one product (Eliquis).
______
Prepared Statement of Kenneth C. Frazier, Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer, Merck and Company, Inc.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Wyden, and members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear today. Merck's mission is to save and
improve lives around the world by bringing forward breakthrough
medicines and vaccines, and ensuring they are available and affordable
to patients who need them.
Merck is a science-based company that exists to help solve the
world's most vexing medical challenges. We have a long history of doing
this, from the development of most of the common childhood vaccines, to
bringing the first protease inhibitor to patients, turning AIDS from a
death sentence to a chronic disease, to developing the first statin,
which led to significant reductions in the negative health effects of
high cholesterol. This legacy of invention continues today.
Research is at the core of who we are and what we do. Last year,
Merck invested nearly $10 billion in research and development toward
our mission of preventing, treating, and curing disease, and since 2010
we've invested nearly $70 billion in these efforts. Our more than
12,000 researchers are focused on cancer, infectious diseases, and
Alzheimer's, as well as other major health challenges that affect large
numbers of people around the world. For our breakthrough immuno-
oncology drug Keytruda alone we have over 900 clinical trials under
way.
In pursuit of these efforts, we are also investing significantly in
infrastructure here in the United States. We have invested more than $5
billion in the last five years, and we plan to invest $9 billion more
over the next few years to increase manufacturing capacity and open two
new discovery research centers.
Our mission is to go where the science leads us, which means we
don't allocate resources only to addressing diseases in wealthy
countries; we focus our efforts on conditions that significantly impact
people living all over the world.
For instance, we are proud to have deployed 70,000 doses of our
experimental Ebola vaccine in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
working in partnership with the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority,
and the Department of Health and Human Services. For efforts such as
this there is no commercial opportunity, but we pursue them because
these are the challenges that Merck was created to tackle.
At the end of the day we do all of this to serve patients. We
understand that patients are having a harder and harder time affording
their health care, including their prescription medicines. As a result
of robust negotiation and competition in the marketplace, medicine
costs are growing at the slowest rate in years, but the system is still
not working for patients who are too often being asked to pay more out-
of-pocket due to the complex system of pricing, distribution, and
insurance. I am here today to suggest a few ways that we can address
this problem together.
First, we want to be clear that our industry has a duty to be
responsible in our pricing practices and contribute to solutions that
address the affordability problems facing patients. We have all heard
the egregious examples of irresponsible behavior. At Merck, we have a
history of responsible pricing. To help increase transparency about our
pricing practices, we publicly disclose information about our prices in
the U.S. and the rebates and discounts we provide to payers--including
insurers, pharmacy benefit managers, and the government. Last year, we
pledged that we will not increase our average net prices for our
portfolio by more than the rate of inflation annually.
From 2010 to 2017, Merck's average net price increase across our
portfolio each year has been in the low to mid-single digits. In fact,
our average net price declined in 2017 by almost 2 percent. In 2017,
the average discount for our medicines and vaccines was more than 45
percent lower than the list price. Despite these very large discounts,
patients do not see a commensurate benefit. In fact, patient out-of-
pocket costs continue to rise, and patients are being asked to shoulder
more of their drug costs than other health-care services.
Second, we must ensure that patients get the benefit of the large
rebates and discounts that manufacturers are paying to PBMs and
insurance companies.
The incentives in the current system are badly misaligned. As a
result, the current system of drug competition that depends on rebating
is not working for patients. The growing gap between our list prices
and our net prices that results from rebating has created incentives
for supply chain entities to favor products with higher list prices.
For instance, in 2016, we introduced our hepatitis C therapy, Zepatier,
at a list price that was 42 percent below the price of the therapy that
was the standard of care. However, due to the misaligned incentives in
the supply chain that create a preference for higher priced products,
we had difficulty gaining access for patients in certain market
segments.
This kind of misalignment can have a significant negative impact on
patients because their cost-sharing is often based on the list price of
a drug, even when insurance companies and PBMs are paying a fraction of
that price. Our current system that incentivizes high list prices and
large rebates as a mechanism to keep insurance premiums low means that
sick patients are essentially subsidizing healthy patients. In this
way, our insurance system is broken. We urge you to support action to
make sure that all patients benefit from the discounts we make
available.
Third, we can significantly reduce spending on pharmaceuticals,
especially for patients, by ensuring that we have a viable market for
biosimilars in the United States. We believe, like with traditional
small molecule medicines, generic competition after a reasonable period
of exclusivity will create headroom for patients to afford the newest,
most innovative medicines. Research shows that generics and biosimilars
are expected to drive savings of $105 billion through 2022 in the
U.S.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. ``Medicine use and
spending in the U.S.: A review of 2017 and outlook to 2022.'' https://
www.iqvia.com/institute/reports/medicine-use-and-spending-in-the-us-
review-of-2017-outlook-to-2022. Published April 19, 2018. Accessed
April 2018.
However, we share the concerns expressed by FDA Commissioner
Gottlieb regarding the challenges biosimilars have experienced in
penetrating the market. Merck introduced a biosimilar to the market 18
months ago at a 35 percent discount to the originator product, yet we
have captured only a tiny fraction of the market. In general,
biosimilars competition thus far has resulted in moderation of prices,
but actual utilization of the biosimilars remains modest at best. We
fear that an environment where market entry of biosimilars brings value
to the market, but little or none of that value accrues to the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
biosimilar, will not be sustainable.
Therefore, we urge Congress to pursue policies to encourage and
support biosimilar uptake and utilization in order to realize these
potential savings for the system and patients. These could include
reduced cost sharing in Medicare Part B.
Fourth, we believe that prices can more align with a drug's value
when manufacturers and payers are able to negotiate innovative
contracts that base payment on a drug's benefits. Manufacturers should
be rewarded based on the value that our therapies deliver. When we
developed our breakthrough immuno-oncology treatment Keytruda, we
incorporated a biomarker where clinically appropriate so that we could
identify those patients most likely to benefit, but this is not always
the case. We did this because we believe in giving the right medicine
to the right patient at the right time. This is important both for
therapeutic and economic reasons. If patients regularly take our
medicines as they are prescribed, we are prepared to stand behind their
effectiveness.
Moving to a system where we are reimbursed for the value our
medicines provide would be revolutionary. Yet there remain major
regulatory and operational obstacles to value-based payment and
contracting in the commercial and public markets, which we urge
Congress to address.
Fifth, we support efforts to encourage generic competition. A
version of Chairman Grassley's CREATES Act could make some needed
reforms to encourage generic competition, and there are likely other
policies we should consider as well to ensure there is no inappropriate
gaming of the system.
We also support the idea of eliminating the use of drug company
coupons in cases where a brand name drug now has generic competition.
This slows the use of generics and violates the spirit of the Hatch-
Waxman drug price competition law.
Finally, we would also like to work with the committee to find ways
to end the price gouging pursued by those who jack up the prices of
off-patent drugs that have no competition. These high prices hurt
patients and do not create incentives for the kind of cutting edge
research we pursue.
These six changes could bring real relief to patients while
preserving the incentives that allow us to invest billions in
developing new medicines. These are exciting times, when decades of
investment in scientific research are yielding life-changing
discoveries. But it is the investment of today that fuels the
innovations of tomorrow, and if we damage the ecosystem that drives
those investments, we'll never know what we could have achieved for the
patients we are all here to serve.
The single most important contribution that we make at Merck--to
economies, to health care, and to individual patients and their
families--is to continue making the necessary costly and long-term
investments in R&D and persuading thousands of brilliant researchers to
sit at a lab bench and try to create something transformative--despite
the overwhelming odds that their efforts will not succeed, since 9 out
of 10 compounds that even start clinical trials will fail.
The solutions to health-care spending and out-of-pocket costs for
patients must be achieved in a way that provides the balance necessary
for innovation to occur. The innovation ecosystem includes academia,
small biotechnology companies, large pharmaceutical companies,
government, and patients and providers. It is incumbent on all of us to
solve the affordability challenges of today's patients without
compromising our ability to invent for tomorrow's patients.
I'd like to end on a personal note. My mother died when I was a
child and my siblings and I were raised by my dad who worked as a
janitor in North Philadelphia. He was a giant in my life and it was
devastating when Alzheimer's took him away from me and my family.
Last year, after spending many years and over a billion dollars,
Merck had to end development of a promising new Alzheimer's therapy
because it simply didn't work. Yet we continue on, seeking better
approaches. And I truly believe Merck or one of the other companies at
this table can and will find a medicine that will ensure that no one
will have to experience the pain of seeing a loved one taken from them
in this way.
But, our success depends on having a U.S. market that is free,
competitive, and predictable. The changes I've discussed today have the
potential to vastly improve that market and help patients survive and
thrive without financial hardship. I am here to pledge our cooperation
with you for creating such changes.
Thank you.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Kenneth C. Frazier
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. At the hearing, you testified that Merck does not
withhold samples from generic manufacturers in order to block generic
versions of your drug from entering the market. You also expressed your
support for the ``Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent
Samples Act,'' also known as the CREATES Act.
However, the FDA has a list on its website which identifies
reference listed drug (RLD) access inquiries where brand manufacturers
may have prevented generic companies from obtaining samples of products
necessary to support FDA approval. Cubist Pharmaceuticals is on this
FDA list. According to news reports, Merck bought this company in 2014.
If this is accurate, this would appear to contradict your testimony at
the hearing that Merck has not withheld samples of their products to
delay generic competition.
Could you please explain in detail the discrepancy between your
testimony and the FDA list?
Has Merck ever blocked access to samples?
Answer. Merck does not block generic companies from accessing
samples. Your inquiry references FDA's website for reference listed
drugs, or RLDs, which lists inquiries the agency has received from
potential generic companies for samples of RLDs. Importantly, FDA's
website also provides the following statement in describing the various
inquiries related to the RLDs listed: ``We note that FDA has not
independently investigated or confirmed the access limitations
described in the inquiries received.''
As FDA's website details, ENTEREG (alvimopan) has a restricted
distribution requirement mandated by its FDA-approved Risk Evaluation
and Mitigation Strategy (REMS). ENTEREG is the only Merck product
subject to an FDA-approved REMS. Under this program, ENTEREG is
available only to hospitals that perform surgeries that include a bowel
resection and dispensed by pharmacies that are enrolled in the E.A.S.E.
ENTEREG REMS Program. This program is designed to ensure that ENTEREG
is used in accordance with the FDA-approved label.
Merck acquired ENTEREG from Cubist Pharmaceuticals in 2015. Since
acquiring ENTEREG, whenever Merck has received a request from a
generics company to supply ENTEREG, we have directed them to the draft
FDA Guidance which outlines how the generics company can obtain a
letter from FDA stating that their study protocols contain the
appropriate safety protections for products subject to this type of
REMS. If provided with a copy of such a letter from FDA, Merck is happy
to work with generics companies on supply arrangements. To date, we
have not received any such letters. FDA's website also details that the
agency has not issued any Safety Determination Letters for samples of
ENTEREG.
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' proposed
rule, ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates
Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees,'' envisions that drug manufacturers will offer up-front
discounts rather than the back-end rebates that are now commonly
provided. Some observers argue that a 1996 court case called into
question whether manufacturers could offer up-front discounts,
resulting in today's rebate-based system. I've heard differing opinions
as to whether the issues related to the initial court case are still
relevant. If the HHS proposed rule is finalized, can you assure the
committee that your company will offer up-front discounts? If not, why?
Answer. Merck is aware that some in the industry have asked whether
the antitrust laws as interpreted in the In re Brand Name Prescription
Drugs Antitrust Litigation would limit the ability of manufacturers to
offer point-of-sale discounts (as opposed to rebates). But, the U.S.
antitrust laws, including the Robinson-Patman Act, apply to price
discrimination in any context (including rebates), and nothing about In
re Brand Name Prescription Drugs Antitrust Litigation changes this
fact. As a result, Merck commits that, if the OIG's Proposed Rule is
finalized, we will modify our contracts to comply with the new safe
harbors and will provide discounts in a manner consistent with the new
regulations.
Question. Please describe how you expect your company to respond to
the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor protection for back-end
rebates in Medicare Part D that is referenced above if it is finalized.
Assuming you are confident that antitrust laws do not prevent your
company from offering up-front discounts, specifically, do you envision
that your company lowers the list price of a drug to the current after-
rebate net price, offer discounts equal to the current rebate amount,
or a combination of both?
Answer. We expect that the robust negotiations that occur today
will continue in the highly competitive Part D market, and we expect to
realize the same level of net price that we do today. In fact, we
expect that there could be additional pricing pressure under the new
system, which could lead to lower net prices.
Over time, we expect that our list prices will go down if the
misaligned incentives across the system are addressed. We are currently
working with other stakeholders in the system to solve the operational
challenges that will enable these changes.
But, it is also important to note that if the rule is implemented,
Medicare beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs will be reduced,
independent of any lowering of list prices, since their cost-sharing
will be based on the net price. Nonetheless, we believe the rebate rule
will align incentives in a way that will restrain list prices.
If this rule is implemented as written, it would only apply to our
contracts with PBMs and health plans for Medicare Part D and Managed
Medicaid. If PBMs and health plans maintain the rebate model in the
commercial market, we would still have commercial contracts based on
rebates, which would be subject to the existing constraints to lowering
list price. We also would still need a mechanism to revalue drug in the
distribution channel in a financially viable manner.
Question. To what extent are the back-end rebates your company
currently offers contingent on the amount of market share realized for
your drugs as a result of Part D plan formulary placement and other
techniques?
Answer. Our contracts typically provide rebates to Part D plans in
exchange for a specified formulary status. We are aware of only one
current agreement that makes a Part D rebate contingent on reaching a
certain market share.
Question. Please provide a breakdown of percentage of sales that go
to each payer (including Medicare, Medicaid, private pay, other) and a
similar percentage by volume of the total number of each drug compared
to total volume. Please provide this data for the most recent year
available.
Answer. The table below provides a proxy for volume by reporting
percentages based on gross sales from 2018, given that there is no
standard unit of volume measure that can be applied across our diverse
product line (e.g., tablet products, injectable products, vaccines).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Segment
Gross/Volume
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CML+Specialty Pharm
28%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hospital / GPO / 340B
23%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicare Part D
19%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicare Part B
12%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicaid
12%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal
6%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes: CML refers to private commercial payers; Medicare Part B
also encompasses Part B products sold through Medicare
Advantage Plans; Medicaid includes fee for service and managed
Medicaid; Federal includes the VA, DoD, Coast Guard, Public
Health Service and other similar purchasers.
Question. Do your companies hire consultants or lobbyists to
promote products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committees?
Answer. No. While Merck does contract with lobbyists who may
interact with individuals associated with State Medicaid programs, they
do not promote products at State Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committees.
Question. To whom do you disclose advocacy activities surrounding
State Medicaid programs, if at all?
Answer. Merck requires employees to adhere to State ethics law
requirements for disclosing advocacy activity. Additionally, employees
who attend Medicaid program meetings must comply with State public
meeting law requirements pertaining to their attendance and
participation.
Question. Please describe how the costs of patient assistance
programs are accounted for within your company's financial statements.
Please also describe the types of market information, such as
prescribing and use patterns, that your company collects from different
types of patient assistance programs and patient hub services.
Answer. For purposes of this question, we are interpreting
``patient assistance programs'' to include the Merck Patient Assistance
Program (Merck PAP), which provides free product to qualifying
patients, Merck donations to independent patient assistance
foundations, and Merck's patient coupon programs which help eligible
privately insured patients afford their prescribed medications. Merck
also makes available patient hub support programs to assist patients
with accessing their prescribed medications.
With respect to the company's financial statements, for Merck PAP
and Merck's donations to independent patient assistance foundations,
the costs are recorded to the ``Selling, general and administrative''
category on our Consolidated Statement of Income. The co-pay assistance
made available to patients through Merck's coupon programs is treated
as a reduction to Merck's gross sales for the applicable products and
is included in the ``Sales'' line of our Consolidated Statement of
Income. The expenses associated with administering Merck's coupon
programs are recorded in the ``Selling, general and administrative''
category on our Consolidated Statement of Income. Similarly, the
expenses associated with administering Merck's patient hub support
programs are recorded in the ``Selling, general and administrative''
category of our Consolidated Statement of Income.
Merck receives different types of market information in connection
with the different programs identified above. For market information
associated with the Merck PAP, the Merck PAP reviews data, such as
patient insurance status and household income, to determine an
individual's eligibility for PAP program enrollment. Merck PAP also
tracks the number of prescriptions associated with the PAP for
budgeting and planning purposes, but Merck PAP does not collect
information associated with the courses of therapy for individual
patients. With respect to Merck's donations to independent patient
assistance foundations Merck does not receive any market information.
Merck receives only a final report that confirms donations were
received and spent in their totality for their intended purpose.
With respect to Merck's patient coupon programs, Merck may receive
certain market information to assist it with evaluating whether its
coupons programs are functioning consistent with their intended purpose
and whether the vendor is meeting its contractual obligations. The
information also may be used to assist Merck with budgeting and
planning. For example, Merck may receive information about: the product
filled; the product dispensing date and site; the prescriber; the
number of patients enrolled in the coupon program; the number of
coupons redeemed; the patient out-of-pocket costs associated with the
use of a Merck coupon; and the benefit amount Merck pays on behalf of
privately-insured patients using a coupon.
With respect to Merck's patient hub support programs, Merck may
receive certain market information to assist it with evaluating whether
its hub support programs are functioning consistent with their intended
purpose and whether the vendor is meeting its contractual obligations.
The information also may be used to assist Merck with budgeting and
planning. For example, Merck may receive aggregate information about:
call type, frequency, and vendor response times; the number of patients
enrolled in the program; patient enrollment demographic and diagnosis
information; patient benefit investigations; insurance coverage
information for the applicable product; and pharmacy product
fulfillment information.
Merck's third-party contractors may receive additional, patient-
specific information that is not shared directly with Merck.
Question. Please provide a list of all contributions since January
1, 2014, that your company has made to any tax-exempt organizations
working on issues related to drugs within your product lines, including
but not limited to patient groups, disease awareness groups, medical or
professional societies, universities or hospitals, industry
associations or leagues. For each contribution, please provide the name
of the organization that received the donation, the date the donation
was made, the amount of the donation, and a description of the purpose
of the contribution (i.e., was the contribution for the general fund, a
specific purpose to a specific program, or continuing medical
education). Please also note whether the contribution was unrestricted
or restricted; if it was restricted, please explain all restrictions.
Finally, if your company maintains a foundation or other separate
charitable arm, please provide the name of all such entities, and list
all donations made from that entity or entities.
Answer. The information concerning our Philanthropic grants and
charitable contributions, including contributions made through the
Office of Corporate Responsibility, our company's Foundation, U.S.
Global Human Health, and the MSD for Mothers Program can be found here:
https://www.msdresponsibility.com/ethics-transparency/transparency-
disclosures/. Please note the website does not include grants or
contributions from Merck's Research Laboratories or Merck's
Manufacturing Division.
In addition, the information concerning our grants of more than
$500 provided by the company's Global Human Health division to U.S.
organizations in support of independent, accredited educational
programs for health-care professionals, as well as grants to patient
organizations and other medical education or scientific societies and
organizations in the United States, Europe, the Middle East, Africa and
Canada can also be found at the website referenced above.
Question. Pay for delay agreements cost consumers and taxpayers
billions in higher drug costs every year. The FTC has gone after drug
companies that enter into these settlements where the brand pays the
generic company to keep its lower cost alternative off the market. I'm
the lead Republican sponsor of S. 64, the Preserve Access to Affordable
Generics and Biosimilars Act, which would help put an end to these
deals.
Do you agree that these pay-off agreements keep drug costs high for
patients because they delay competition?
Answer. Patent settlement agreements challenged by the FTC as anti-
competitive, in which brands pay generic companies to stay out of the
market when it would otherwise be lawful for them to enter the market,
could delay patient access to lower cost alternatives. In contrast,
patent settlement agreements in which the brand, while not conceding
the invalidity or non-infringement of the patents, but in the face of
the uncertainties and costs associated with protracted litigation,
settles cases in a manner that allows a generic to enter the market
prior to expiry of the brand's patents could actually accelerate
patient access to lower cost alternatives. Still, brands do not enter
into such agreements lightly because they believe in the rights of
patent holders to vigorously enforce their intellectual property rights
in court. At the end of the day, these settlements do not delay entry
or cause the loss of any lawful competition because entry prior to the
expiry of these patents would be unlawful infringement unless and until
the generic manufacturers prevailed in court.
Question. Has your company ever entered into these kinds of
settlements with a generic company?
Answer. Merck has not entered into patent settlement agreements
with generic companies to delay their entry past when it would
otherwise be lawful for them to enter the market. Merck has been party
to a number of patent settlement agreements that provide for generic
market entry prior to patent expiry, including some that have provided
some level of exclusivity for a limited time. These agreements allowed
generic products to enter the market earlier than would have otherwise
been the case. The FTC has not challenged as anti-competitive any of
these types of agreements involving Merck.
Question. Do you support the pay for delay bill?
Answer. Merck does not support S. 64 in its present form. Merck
believes that the development of the law through the judicial process
is the most effective way to address the balance between antitrust law
and patent law raised by settlement agreements. S. 64 upsets the
careful balance embodied in a rule-of-reason analysis by creating a
presumption that ``anything of value'' or an ``exclusive license'' are
anticompetitive, thus denying an antitrust defendant the ability to
present and rely on countervailing evidence of pro-competitive effects,
such as the impact on competition by the entry of the generic product
before the expiration of the patent or statutory exclusivity term. As
noted by the Supreme Court in FTC v. Actavis:
Given these factors, it would be incongruous to determine
antitrust legality by measuring the settlement's
anticompetitive effects solely against patent law policy,
rather than by measuring them against procompetitive antitrust
policies as well.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FTC v. Actavis, 570 U.S. 136, 148 (2013).
S. 64 also seeks to insulate the FTC's fact finding from judicial
review. Finally, the retroactive application of the provisions of the
bill to June 2013 is unworkable. While there had been a split between
the Circuit Courts over the proper analysis of reverse payment
settlements, the Supreme Court's opinion in Actavis in 2013 settled
that split by holding that patent settlements including those with
reverse payments were subject to a rule-of-reason analysis. That
decision did not provide hard and fast rules for the balance between
antitrust and patent principles. To impose a process that alters that
balance, and to do so retroactively, is imprudent and unfair.
rebate traps/walls
Question. I'm increasingly concerned about the effect of so-called
``rebate traps'' or ``rebate walls'' on patients' access to quality,
lower cost medicine. I understand there is ongoing litigation
challenging these practices as anti-competitive.
Does your company engage in the bundling of rebates over multiple
products? If so, why? And what benefit does the consumer gain from
that?
Answer. Merck understands this question to refer to certain
concerns about contracting practices applied to contracts between
manufacturers and PBMs or health plans. Merck offers rebates to payers
on bundles of products within certain product families (e.g., JANUVIA
and JANUMET, ASMANEX TWISTHALER and ASMANEX HFA). These bundled
discounts benefit patients by ensuring that multiple therapies are
maintained on a PBM or health plan formulary, thus ensuring wider
patient access to our medicines at lower costs to the payer. Merck also
offers discounts with respect to multiple bundled products outside of
the PBM and health plan contracts, such as in the vaccine and hospital
markets.
Question. Does your company view these practices as anticompetitive
or harmful to patients' access to quality, lower cost medicine?
Answer. No. Merck believes the rebates it offers to payers on
pharmaceutical products are procompetitive. Merck does not believe that
its rebating practices are harmful to patients.
Question. If a policy were adopted to eliminate rebates, or to
require that rebate savings be passed on to the consumer, would that in
and of itself solve the issue of rebate ``traps'' and ``walls''? And
would consumers benefit from such a policy?
Answer. Merck is very supportive of current efforts to change the
system. We believe these efforts will remove misaligned incentives
within the system, drive more transparency in the system and, most
importantly, benefit patients by lowering out-of-pocket costs. It is
difficult to predict whether these changes will solve all of the issues
seen today, but Merck is committed to working toward additional
solutions if issues remain after these changes are implemented.
drug pricing
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider regulatory costs or compliance? If so, how specifically do
those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least
one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
When setting the list price of a drug, does your company consider
the risk of liability or litigation? If so, how specifically do those
factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least one
specific example, if applicable, from your current product portfolio.
Answer. In setting the list price for a drug, we do not
specifically consider the regulatory costs or compliance or the risk of
liability or litigation.
Merck approaches pricing from the perspective of value. This
approach looks at the value that a medicine provides through multiple
lenses with the goal of reflecting its benefit to patients and to
society, while at the same time paying an appropriate return on
invested capital to our investors, to ensure that we are able to
sustain R&D. While each individual situation varies based on factual
circumstances and market dynamics, generally, we consider:

Value provided to patients--to what extent does a new
medicine or vaccine establish a new standard of care that has
the potential to significantly extend and improve patient
lives?

Value provided to health-care systems--to what extent does a
new medicine or vaccine reduce the costs associated with
hospitalization and other costly complications of disease if
not appropriately (or optimally) treated?

Unmet need--does a new medicine or vaccine address a
critically unmet medical need, where few or no treatments
exist?

Access--what is the ability of various customers around the
world--including national, regional or local institutional
payers, physicians, employers and patients--to pay for our
products?

R&D sustainability--given the long-term risk and cost of
capital, can we appropriately compensate our investors to
ensure continued investment in the kind of risky and capital-
intensive research and development that will bring forward
medically important breakthroughs?

Competition--what are the costs of other treatments
currently on the market relative to the value provided by
Merck's products?
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. What role do you see value-based arrangements (VBAs)
playing in the effort to reduce prescription drug costs? What potential
do these arrangements have to find the ``sweet spot'' between
controlling costs to patients and encouraging innovation of new drugs?
How can VBAs help lower what patients pay out-of-pocket?
Can Congress do more to allow for and encourage the use of VBAs?
Answer. For more than 10 years, Merck has worked with payers and
health-care providers to advance alternative pricing and contracting
arrangements, and Merck has publicly shared information about value-
based agreements (VBAs) it entered into with the payers Aetna and
Cigna. We are continuously reviewing ways in which the company may
enter into VBAs for our products, which we define as a contractual
framework aimed at achieving a mutually agreed upon value objective
that that drives greater value from health care spending. Merck is
interested, where business and customer objectives align, to implement
VBAs across the health care market, including Medicare Part D, Managed
Medicaid, and Fee-For-Service Medicaid.
By aligning payments for medicines more directly with their value
in improving meaningful health outcomes and/or reducing the need for
other health-care services (such as hospitalizations), VBAs make
pharmaceutical manufacturers accountable for the results their products
achieve in a concrete way and can help improve patients' health and
maximize the benefits of health-care spending. A recent Avalere survey
of payers found that 44 percent of payers engaged in outcomes-based
contracts experienced improvements in patient outcomes.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Avalere Health. ``Outcomes-Based Contracts: Payer
Perspectives.'' Avalere Policy 360. July 19, 2018.
VBAs also can increase patient access to new therapies which could
ultimately improve patient outcomes. A payer that might otherwise
decline to cover a new medicine (or that would only cover the medicine
with significant utilization management restrictions or high cost
sharing) due to uncertainties about the expected percentage of its
patient population who would benefit might increase access to the
medicine if the manufacturer shared the risks of the medicine's
performance. These agreements may make medicines more accessible to
patients who will benefit from them and increase competition in
relevant therapeutic classes.\3\ Researchers have found that value-
based arrangements can improve patient access to medicines.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Staley, L. ``A Drug's Worth: Why Federal Law Makes It Hard to
Pay for Pharmaceutical Performance.'' Boston University Law Review.
2018;98(1):303-334. (``Tying reimbursement to health outcomes presents
new opportunities for competition with rival manufacturers. . . . [A]
manufacturer that can demonstrate sustained health benefits in post-
market studies may distinguish itself from competitors.'').
\4\ See, for example, description of Entresto and Repatha contracts
in: Seely, E., and Kesselheim, A. ``Outcomes-Based Pharmaceutical
Contracts: An Answer to High U.S. Drug Spending?'' Commonwealth Fund.
Issue Brief. September 2017.
While Merck has had some experience with VBAs, these efforts have
not been as robust as they could be due to the challenges involved in
developing and implementing them. In addition to infrastructure and
data limitations, challenges include regulatory limitations such as
government pricing frameworks (e.g., Medicaid Best Price (BP) rules,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicare's Average Sales Price (ASP)) and Federal fraud and abuse laws.
Accordingly, we support opportunities that would enable greater
experimentation in the design, structure, and implementation of VBAs.
Further innovation in this space is needed to support overall sponsor
and plan learning, and to determine the range of potential benefits to
diverse health systems and beneficiaries. To fully achieve these goals,
however, the impacts of the current regulatory framework, including
government pricing requirements, the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute
(AKS), and overall environmental barriers, must be analyzed and
addressed as appropriate. Policy solutions such as the Patient
Affordability Value and Efficiency Act (PAVE), introduced by Senators
Warner and Cassidy, could provide necessary regulatory flexibility for
properly structured VBAs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Michael B. Enzi
Question. More than 10 years ago, I worked on a bipartisan basis
with my good friends Ted Kennedy and Orrin Hatch to develop a
biosimilars approval pathway. One of the difficult things was
accounting for the differences between biosimilars and generics. I have
said before that if a drug was a three-bedroom, two-bath home, a
biologic would be a skyscraper. The size and complexity of the items
are just that different. I understand that it is much harder to build a
skyscraper without blueprints than a house. Even though the science has
come a long way since then, there aren't as many biosimilars on the
market as we might have hoped. Do you think the incentives in the law
appropriately account for the differences between biosimilars and
generics?
Answer. In general, biosimilars competition thus far has resulted
in moderation of prices, but actual utilization of the biosimilars
remains modest at best. We fear that an environment where market entry
of biosimilars brings value to the market, but little or none of that
value accrues to the biosimilar patient or the health-care system, will
not be sustainable.
Merck remains an advocate for rigorous biosimilarity standards
globally, and we believe that all biosimilar product applicants should
be required to demonstrate equivalence (i.e., biosimilarity) in safety
(including immunogenicity) and efficacy, and no differences in purity
and potency profiles between the originator reference product and the
biosimilar candidate. We believe the FDA has instituted such a standard
with its Totality of the Evidence approach, ``including structural and
functional characterization, nonclinical evaluation, human PK and PD
data, clinical immunogenicity data, and comparative clinical study(ies)
data.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Food and Drug Administration. ``Scientific Considerations
in Demonstrating Biosimilarity to a Reference Product Guidance for
Industry.'' (Apr. 2015), https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidances/
ucm291128.pdf.
We are urging Congress to pursue policies to encourage and support
biosimilar uptake and utilization in order to realize these potential
savings for the system and patients. These policies could include
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
reduced cost sharing in Medicare Part B.
Question. I know there are proposals to essentially pay more for
biosimilars to make them more attractive, but that is not exactly what
we were intending when we wrote the law. Can you talk about adverse
incentives in the market and any barriers to market penetration that we
might address to help improve patient access to these lower cost
products?
Answer. Merck introduced a biosimilar to the market 18 months ago
at a 35-
percent discount to the originator product, yet we have captured only a
tiny fraction of the market. Uptake of the product was limited, we
believe due to physician confusion regarding interchangeability and
extrapolation, and a lack of physician, patient, and payer incentives.
While we believe that the prescribing physician must always have the
authority to designate exactly which biological product is dispensed to
the patient, we believe there are market barriers that hamper
appropriate adoption of biosimilars. Merck encountered the following
market barriers that hampered uptake of RENFLEXIS:

We have observed cases where Medicare Advantage plans seem
to be imposing utilization management controls that require
providers to first use the reference biologic before providing
coverage for the biosimilar. This is a significant disincentive
to biosimilar uptake in that setting, and we believe is
contrary to policy objectives to promote the uptake of
biosimilars.

Some providers may be hesitant to adopt biosimilar products
due to overall confusion and the current lack of standardized
definitions of biosimilarity (including the concepts of
extrapolation and interchangeability). Currently, we lack
standardized definitions of interchangeability as it relates to
clinical significance, and concerns about the clinical
appropriateness of switching stable patients to a biosimilar
product have been contentious issues for some prescribers.
Further, prescribers may be comfortable with a single switch
(i.e., moving a stable patient from a reference product
treatment protocol to a biosimilar), but may have concerns
about switching a patient multiple times, absent the
interchangeability designation. We believe that regulatory
clarification of these terms and concepts could help mitigate
concerns for providers and support biosimilar product adoption.
We suggest the following policy changes to help encourage and
support prescriber biosimilar utilization:

Consider options to reduce or eliminate patient cost sharing
in Medicare Part B for biosimilars. While some Part B
beneficiaries are already able to reduce their 20 percent cost
sharing via supplemental coverage, we believe eliminating cost
sharing will encourage many physicians to use biosimilars for
their patients. A similar approach in Part D and in Medicaid
for small-molecule generics has driven generic utilization up
to 90 percent.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Inspector
General. ``Generic Drug Utilization in the Medicare Part D Program.''
(Nov. 2007), https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-05-07-00130.pdf.

Create pathways for MA and Part D plans to receive bonus
payments and/or enhanced star ratings for achieving metrics
related to access to biosimilars. This will incentivize plans
to implement policies that drive additional utilization of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
biosimilars.

Consider alternative reimbursement methodologies that adjust
the current Part B reimbursement formula. The current structure
in Part B to reimburse at ASP + 6 percent of the reference
product's ASP ensures there is no reimbursement downside to
physicians for using biosimilars. But so far, the evidence does
not suggest the current reimbursement rate sufficiently
incentivizes providers to use biosimilar products. Congress
should consider alternatives to further incentivize physician
adoption of biosimilars.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. We continue to hear that rebates negotiated off of the
list price of a drug are both good and bad.
Pharmacy benefit managers and plans have argued that rebates are
used to lower premiums across the board and that it is the best way to
seek a price concession on otherwise expensive drugs.
Your industry argues that these payers are insisting on higher
rebates that can only be achieved by raising list prices.
But patients often lose under this system, with out of pocket costs
being tied to list price. Insulin patients appear to be routinely
impacted by this perversity in the system.
Please explain to the committee how your company would reduce list
prices if rebates were no longer a part of the equation?
What assurance can you provide that you would in fact lower your
prices?
What actions should be taken to ensure that patients are actually
seeing the benefits of lower out of pocket costs?
Answer. As we stated when we reduced the list price of several of
our products in July 2018, we will continue to look for opportunities
to reduce our list prices. We think the proposed rule will help create
those opportunities, but it can't happen overnight. We are currently
working with other stakeholders in the system to solve the operational
challenges that will enable these changes.
It is important to note that if the proposed rule is implemented,
Medicare beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs will be reduced,
independent of any lowering of list prices, since their cost-sharing
will be based on the net price. Further actions to ensure patients
actually see the benefit of lower out of pocket costs might include
prohibitions on changes in benefit design by payers/PBMs that could
allow payers/PBMs to defeat the intent of delivering savings to
patients.
Question. If rebates are driving high list prices for drugs as drug
manufacturers' claim, why do you think that Part B drugs, which have no
PBM rebates, are also seeing significant price increases? Whose fault
is that?
Answer. While the misaligned incentives of Part D are partly
responsible for PBMs favoring high list prices, that is not the sole
dynamic associated with price increases. There may be unique reasons
for price increases on specific products given their individual
circumstances, including competitive dynamics and the costs of clinical
research and manufacturing improvements. In addition, while PBMs
generally do not manage Part B benefits, this does not mean that
discounts are not provided or applied on these products. Providers and
commercial health plans do receive discounts, the average of which is
passed along to patients through ASP-based reimbursement.
The 20-percent coinsurance paid by a patient is based on the ASP,
which reflects the average discounts received by providers and payers.
biosimilar competition/insulin
Question. Biosimilars have been much anticipated as a solution to
the drug pricing crisis. In particular, the FDA is moving to make
insulin a biologic that would be subject to biosimilar competition in
the future.
But we are hearing from all of you that the biosimilar market
doesn't work and the benefit of these cheaper but equally effective
alternatives are really not available to U.S. patients.
Can a biosimilar version of insulin be part of the solution for
diabetes patients?
If so, what changes need to be made to the system so that patients
and the taxpayer can realize the benefit of biosimilars? (Merck gave up
on pursuing a biosimilar to Sanofi's Lantus \7\)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Arlene Weintraub. ``Merck Ditches Biosimilar Lantus, But Will
That Ease the Path for Mylan's Rival Insulin Product?'' FiercePharma.
(Oct. 12, 2018), https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/merck-ditches-
biosimilar-lantus-but-will-ease-path-for-mylan-s-rival-insulin-product.
Answer. We believe there is potential for significant savings to
national health-care systems if high quality biosimilars--including
insulins--can be brought to the market and compete with those biologics
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
that have exhausted their intellectual property protections.
Biosimilar products are still the subject of a great deal of
confusion, particularly among providers, regarding the scientific,
regulatory, and clinical basis for extrapolation and interchangeability
decisions made by the FDA. Merck has urged the FDA to expand its work
in educating providers and other stakeholders on these topics.
Beyond that, we believe Congress should consider policy changes to
help encourage and support prescriber biosimilar utilization. In our
Blueprint comments to HHS we recommended incentives targeting patients,
health plans, and providers that we believe can move the needle in
stimulating uptake. One idea is for Congress to consider options to
reduce or eliminate patient cost sharing in Medicare Part B for
biosimilars.
As to the Lantus biosimilar, after a comprehensive assessment of
the current and future market environment for insulin glargine,
including biosimilars, which included an assessment of anticipated
pricing and cost of production, we made the business decision to
terminate our agreement on the commercialization of the Lusduna pen and
vial. There is already one other biosimilar glargine on the market and
others on the way. So, we concluded this space was, or soon will be,
adequately covered. This will allow us to allocate resources to other
products in development.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
re-evaluating business strategies in foreign countries
Question. Since taking office, President Trump has made reducing
drug prices one of his highest priorities--and has repeatedly spoken
about his frustration with the U.S. subsidizing the costs of
pharmaceuticals for the rest of the world. He has gone so far as to
issue proposals, like the International Pricing Index (IPI) Model, in
an attempt to bring down prescription drug prices.
With the increased scrutiny of the industry and of the drug supply
chain as a whole in the United States, have any of your companies re-
evaluated your business strategy in foreign countries?
If not, then why?
If a proposal, like IPI, were implemented, would it force your
companies to potentially ``walk away from the negotiating table when
other countries demand low prices subsidized by America's seniors,'' as
HHS Senior Advisor for Drug Pricing Reform John O'Brien has said?
What are some of your ideas on how we can ensure Americans aren't
shouldering the full cost of pharmaceuticals?
Answer. Merck continually reevaluates its business strategies in
all markets, seeking in particular to make its vaccines and medicines
accessible to patients while realizing their full value in foreign
markets with regulatory schemes that do not recognize the full value of
these products and artificially reduce prices. Nevertheless, in most
markets there are very limited options for adjusting prices to
recognize the full value of our medicines and vaccines. One-sided and
onerous pricing and reimbursement schemes most often leave little room
for negotiation.
With regard to ``walking away from the negotiating table,'' Merck
always reserves that option. However, we recognize the serious and
negative implications on patient health and access, the company's
ultimate mission, and other possible repercussions that would result
from denying patient access to our medicines. Moreover, foreign
governments can resort to compulsory licensing, essentially seizing
patent rights, where a company refuses to market a product, which also
makes it difficult to withdraw from a foreign market.
Regarding ideas to ensure Americans aren't shouldering the full
cost of pharmaceuticals, we believe appropriate U.S. trade strategies
are a promising avenue to dealing with unreasonable foreign government
action. Positive actions in the U.S. can also reduce prices in the
U.S., including removing misaligned incentives that cause PBMs to favor
more expensive products and lead to higher out-of-pocket costs for U.S.
patients, like the administration's proposal regarding the rebate safe
harbor. One potential proposal would be to create a special USTR
negotiator specifically for drug pricing issues.
foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
Question. President Trump and Secretary Azar have both repeatedly
described their frustrations with ``foreign freeloading'' of U.S. drugs
in the last year.
``When foreign governments extort unreasonably low prices from U.S.
drug makers, Americans have to pay more to subsidize the enormous cost
of research and development. . . . It's unfair and it's ridiculous, and
it's not going to happen any longer.''
Do you agree that because of foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems, U.S. patients and innovators are shouldering the
burden for financing medical advances?
How do foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement systems affect
our prescription drug costs?
Are foreign governments taking note of the concerns being raised by
the Trump administration and have they responded in any way?
Has there been any noticeable change in any of our trade agreements
since these concerns have been raised by the Trump administration?
Answer. We agree that foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
systems result in their not paying enough to support the
biopharmaceutical innovation from which they benefit. This causes the
U.S. to shoulder more than its fair share of financing medical
advances. These pricing and reimbursement systems do not necessarily,
however, affect prescription drug costs in the U.S. in any direct or
algorithmic fashion. Rather, Merck approaches pricing from the
perspective of value. This approach looks at the value that a medicine
provides through multiple lenses with the goal of reflecting its
benefit to patients and to society, while at the same time paying an
appropriate return on invested capital to our investors, to ensure that
we are able to sustain R&D. While each individual situation varies
based on factual circumstances and market dynamics, generally, we
consider:

Value provided to patients--to what extent does a new
medicine or vaccine establish a new standard of care that has
the potential to significantly extend and improve patient
lives?

Value provided to health-care systems--to what extent does a
new medicine or vaccine reduce the costs associated with
hospitalization and other costly complications of disease if
not appropriately (or optimally) treated?

Unmet need--does a new medicine or vaccine address a
critically unmet medical need, where few or no treatments
exist?

Access--what is the ability of various customers around the
world--including national, regional or local institutional
payers, physicians, employers and patients--to pay for our
products?

R&D sustainability--given the long-term risk and cost of
capital, can we appropriately compensate our investors to
ensure continued investment in the kind of risky and capital-
intensive research and development that will bring forward
medically important breakthroughs?

Competition--what are the costs of other treatments
currently on the market relative to the value provided by
Merck's products?
Prices in other countries often reflect different value systems and
criteria. It is important to note that all components of the health
care system, including hospital services, physician services, physician
salaries, and medical devices are considerably less expensive in
foreign countries than in the U.S. That said, we agree that foreign
countries' pricing and reimbursement systems result in their not
sufficiently supporting biopharmaceutical innovation. While foreign
governments are generally aware of concerns raised by the Trump
administration, we are not aware of any substantive response.
There has been some change in trade agreements, but more work needs
to be done. U.S. free trade agreements address discriminatory
approaches to pricing and reimbursement and ensure fair treatment for
innovative medicines through commitments established by trade partners.
Free trade agreements can help advance innovation, versus approaches
proposed by the administration such as the International Pricing Index
that have the potential to stifle investment in R&D by driving down
prices across markets.
Here are three examples:

A 2004 U.S. Department of Commerce study examining OECD
countries found that foreign price controls restrict the
ability to innovate in our sector and identified trade
agreements as a key lever. We strongly encourage the Trump
administration to update this report to reflect the impact of
continued price controls in OECD countries.

The pharmaceutical pricing and reimbursement provisions in
the U.S.-
Mexico-Canada Agreement commit governments to provide
transparency and due process protections in national
pharmaceutical reimbursement processes and decisions. This is a
step in the right direction, but more is needed to ensure that
many countries, such as Canada, appropriately recognize the
value of innovative medicines.

The Trump administration has worked to ensure adherence to
commitments in pricing and reimbursement in the Korea-U.S. Free
Trade Agreement, and direct advocacy by the U.S. has also made
an impact in Japan to mitigate some approaches.
There is clearly more work to be done in these areas, and trade
tools such as a new U.S.-Japan Free Trade Agreement, are critical.
medicaid closed formulary proposals
Question. In an attempt to bring down drug costs, various States
have been exploring whether to exclude certain drugs from its Medicaid
program. For example, the State of Massachusetts' recently asked CMS
for permission to create a closed formulary where the State Medicaid
program would pick at least one drug per therapeutic class. CMS denied
their waiver request citing violation of Federal law, but this proposal
does bring up important questions on how to contain drug prices in
State Medicaid programs.
If the principles of the Medicare Part D program--including the
necessary patient protections--were applied to State Medicaid programs,
do you think it lower drugs costs while ensuring access to patients?
Answer. There are important differences in the population covered
under Medicaid and the coverage options available that need to be
considered. Medicaid beneficiaries remain some of the sickest and most
complex populations of patients, with sometimes inconsistent
relationships with health-care providers and other complicating factors
that make accessing medical care already difficult. Many Medicaid
patients have complex diseases for which there are not always
therapeutically equivalent drugs available, so access to the specific
drug providers prescribe is crucial.
Part D is a highly competitive, successful program that has come in
at nearly half the cost that was originally projected. It also has
extremely high rates of beneficiary satisfaction--generally around 90
percent. While Part D offers multiple plan options and levels of
benefits such that patients can shop for plans that cover their
medicines at varying levels of cost-sharing, patients in Medicaid do
not have access to alternative coverage options. So, if a medicine they
need is not available, they do not have the ability to switch plans or
otherwise obtain access to the medicine.
As a result, the use of restrictive formularies is likely to result
in adverse effects on beneficiary outcomes and increased costs when
applied in Medicaid. While the patient protections that exist in Part D
may provide beneficiaries with an option to appeal formulary decisions,
it would be complicated to navigate for Medicaid patients and their
providers, who may have limited resources to take on the additional
responsibility and may take time that patients with complex conditions
may not have.
Medicaid is already receiving the best price based on the statutory
rebate and States have flexibility to exert utilization management
controls to negotiate supplemental rebates. Given this, we believe that
applying the principles of Medicare Part D in Medicaid is not likely to
result in lower drug costs without significantly impacting access.
medicaid ``best price''
Question. In the Trump administration's Blueprint, they suggested
that because drug manufactures have to give Medicaid the ``best price''
on drugs, there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers--both government and commercial--than what is already offered
under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Does the Medicaid ``best price'' requirement encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices?
What, if any, changes would you suggest we make to the program?
Answer. We can speak only to Merck's practices, and Merck does not
consider the Medicaid Best Price requirement when setting initial
prices. Merck approaches pricing from the perspective of value. This
approach looks at the value that a medicine provides through multiple
lenses with the goal of reflecting its benefit to patients and to
society, while at the same time paying an appropriate return on
invested capital to our investors, to ensure that we are able to
sustain R&D. While each individual situation varies based on factual
circumstances and market dynamics, generally, we consider:

Value provided to patients--to what extent does a new
medicine or vaccine establish a new standard of care that has
the potential to significantly extend and improve patient
lives?

Value provided to health-care systems--to what extent does a
new medicine or vaccine reduce the costs associated with
hospitalization and other costly complications of disease if
not appropriately (or optimally) treated?

Unmet need--does a new medicine or vaccine address a
critically unmet medical need, where few or no treatments
exist?

Access--what is the ability of various customers around the
world--including national, regional or local institutional
payers, physicians, employers and patients--to pay for our
products?

R&D sustainability--given the long-term risk and cost of
capital, can we appropriately compensate our investors to
ensure continued investment in the kind of risky and capital-
intensive research and development that will bring forward
medically-important breakthroughs?

Competition--what are the costs of other treatments
currently on the market relative to the value provided by
Merck's products?
We recognize the value that the Medicaid program provides for
patients who need it, and we do not believe the ``best price''
requirement encourages manufacturers to increase initial prices.
Merck believes that the exclusion of value-based arrangements
(VBAs) from the calculations of Best Price, Average Manufacturer Price,
and Average Sales Price would facilitate VBA implementation, which
would further align prices with the value that pharmaceutical products
bring to the market.
outcomes-based contracts
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you highlight your
support of outcomes-based contracts and how we need to be shifting our
system toward that approach.
How will these contracts lower drug costs for patients in both the
near term and long-term?
How will they lower overall health-care costs for our Federal
programs?
What have the preliminary results looked like so far?
Answer. For more than 10 years, Merck has worked with payers and
health-care providers to advance alternative pricing and contracting
arrangements and Merck has publicly shared information about value-
based agreements (VBAs) it entered into with the payers Aetna and
Cigna. We are continuously reviewing ways in which the company may
enter into VBAs for our products, which we define as a contractual
framework aimed at achieving a mutually agreed upon value objective
that that drives greater value from health-care spending. Merck is
interested, where business and customer objectives align, to implement
VBAs across the health-care market, including Medicare Part D, Managed
Medicaid, and Fee-For-Service Medicaid.
By aligning payments for medicines more directly with their value
in improving meaningful health outcomes and/or reducing the need for
other health-care services (such as hospitalizations), VBAs make
pharmaceutical manufacturers accountable for the results their products
achieve in a concrete way and can help improve patients' health and
maximize the benefits of health-care spending. A recent Avalere survey
of payers found that 44 percent of payers engaged in outcomes-based
contracts experienced improvements in patient outcomes.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Avalere Health. ``Outcomes-Based Contracts: Payer
Perspectives.'' Avalere Policy 360. July 19, 2018.
VBAs also can increase patient access to new therapies which could
ultimately improve patient outcomes. A payer that might otherwise
decline to cover a new medicine (or that would only cover the medicine
with significant utilization management restrictions or high cost
sharing) due to uncertainties about the expected percentage of its
patient population who would benefit might increase access to the
medicine if the manufacturer shared the risks of the medicine's
performance. These agreements may make medicines more accessible to
patients who will benefit from them and increase competition in
relevant therapeutic classes.\9\ Researchers have found that value-
based arrangements can improve patient access to medicines.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Staley, L. ``A Drug's Worth: Why Federal Law Makes it Hard to
Pay for Pharmaceutical Performance.'' Boston University Law Review.
2018;98(1):303-334. (``Tying reimbursement to health outcomes presents
new opportunities for competition with rival manufacturers. . . . [A]
manufacturer that can demonstrate sustained health benefits in post-
market studies may distinguish itself from competitors.'').
\10\ See, for example, description of Entresto and Repatha
contracts in: Seely, E., and Kesselheim, A. ``Outcomes-Based
Pharmaceutical Contracts: An Answer to High U.S. Drug Spending?''
Commonwealth Fund. Issue Brief. September 2017.
While Merck has had some experience with VBAs, these efforts have
not been as robust as they could be due to the challenges involved in
developing and implementing them. In addition to infrastructure and
data limitations, challenges include regulatory limitations such as
government pricing frameworks (e.g., Medicaid Best Price (BP) rules,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicare's Average Sales Price (ASP)) and Federal fraud and abuse laws.
Accordingly, we support opportunities that would enable greater
experimentation in the design, structure, and implementation of VBAs.
Further innovation in this space is needed to support overall sponsor
and plan learning, and to determine the range of potential benefits to
diverse health systems and beneficiaries. To fully achieve these goals,
however, the impacts of the current regulatory framework, including
government pricing requirements, the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute
(AKS), and overall environmental barriers, must be analyzed and
addressed as appropriate. Policy solutions such as the Patient
Affordability Value and Efficiency Act (PAVE), introduced by Senators
Warner and Cassidy, could provide necessary regulatory flexibility for
properly structured VBAs.
transparency/point of sale
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you express your
support for the Trump administration's proposal to allow manufacturers
to provide PBMs up-front discounts that are passed onto patients at the
point-of-sale.
Do you feel like this proposal will make the transactions within
the drug supply chain more transparent?
If so, would this transparency bring down drug costs--overall and
for specialty drugs?
Answer. We believe we must change the system to ensure that
patients receive the benefit of the significant rebates and discounts
that manufacturers like Merck pay to PBMs and plans. The proposed rule
is a positive step in that direction. Based on our initial assessment
of the proposal, we believe that it will remove misaligned incentives
within the system, drive more transparency in the system, and most
importantly, lower beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs.
the relationship between wholesalers and manufacturers
Question. When talking about the pharmaceutical supply chain, a lot
of focus has been placed on the Pharmacy Benefit Manager. But there's
another side of the equation that I'd like to ask about.
How do wholesalers negotiate pricing with manufacturers?
What impact does this have on drug costs?
What incentives or disincentives do they have to contain price
increases?
Answer. There are many entities supporting the distribution and
dispensing of pharmaceutical products. Wholesalers purchase
pharmaceutical products directly from manufacturers and subsequently
sell those products to sites of care for dispensing. Downstream
customers of the wholesalers include retail and specialty pharmacies,
hospitals, clinics, and others. Those entities that purchase from the
wholesalers ultimately dispense or administer the drug to patients.
Many manufacturers typically offer a ``prompt pay'' discount to
wholesalers in exchange for timely payment of invoices (2 percent for
payment within 30 or 35 days is fairly standard in the industry).
Manufacturers also contract with wholesalers for services that
support the appropriate storage and distribution of product to
appropriate customers within the supply chain. These ``Distribution
Service Agreements'' provide wholesalers with an opportunity to earn
fees based on performance against pre-defined metrics that are part of
a set of standard services. These services include managing inventory
levels, achieving defined service levels, consolidating receipt of
inventory to a central location, and administering contract pricing and
chargebacks. Although these distribution service fees manufacturers pay
to wholesalers are commonly administered as a percent of the list
price, they are negotiated at arm's length and are based on fair market
value for the services rendered.
The terms of wholesaler agreements with their downstream customers
vary; however, in general, the prices they offer to their customers are
set relative to a product's list prices. In general, fees paid to
wholesalers by manufacturers are modest and wholesaler economics
(including both buy and sell side) are not likely to influence the
setting of a product's list price.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
proposed rebate rule
Question. As has been done in many other settings, drug
manufacturers said during the hearing that one reason list prices for
drugs are high is that pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) demand
larger and larger rebates in order for the drug to receive favorable
placement on a formulary. You and your colleagues who testified during
the hearing stated if the administration's proposal on changes to the
anti-kickback safe harbor for pharmaceutical rebates took effect, your
company would likely lower list price.
Like many Oregonians, I am skeptical drug manufacturers would
voluntarily lower their prices. Therefore, would you support
legislation that would (1) make similar changes the administration has
put forward related to Part D and Medicaid managed care, (2) change the
rebate system in a similar way to the proposal for the commercial
market, and (3) require drug makers to lower the list price of their
drugs equal to the amount of rebates provided today?
Answer. We believe we must change the system to ensure that
patients receive the benefit of the significant rebates and discounts
that manufacturers like Merck pay to PBMs and plans. The proposed rule
is a positive step in that direction. Based on our initial assessment
of the proposed rule, we believe that it will remove misaligned
incentives within the system, drive more transparency in the system,
and most importantly, lower beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs. Merck
supports the earliest possible implementation of the proposed rule that
can be achieved without creating disruption for the beneficiaries who
rely on Medicare for their drug coverage. We are committed to working
with the PBMs and health plans and other intermediaries to make this
happen.
We do not support legislation to require manufacturers to lower
their list price equal to the amount of rebates today. First, different
purchasers receive different levels of discounts, based on
individualized negotiations and the formulary positioning of Merck's
products. So, there is not a uniform ``rebate amount'' that could
reduce the list price. Moreover, we expect that the robust negotiations
that occur today will continue in the highly competitive Part D market,
and we expect to realize the same level of net price that we do today.
In fact, we expect that there could be additional pricing pressure
under the new system, which could lead to lower net prices.
Over time, we expect that our list prices will go down if the
misaligned incentives across the system are addressed. We are currently
working with other stakeholders in the system to solve the operational
challenges that will enable these changes.
But, it is also important to note that if the rule is implemented,
Medicare beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs will be reduced,
independent of any lowering of list prices, since their cost-sharing
will be based on the net price. Nonetheless, we believe the rebate rule
will align incentives in a way that will restrain list prices.
As we stated when we reduced the list price of several of our
products in July 2018, we have continued to look for opportunities to
reduce our list prices. We think the proposed rule would help create
those opportunities, but it can't happen overnight. All the players in
the ecosystem will need to adjust to the new model. We are actively
working to support the move to a contracting model in Part D that would
change the incentives to support lower list prices.
Lowering list prices is not an easy thing to do in our health-care
system:

One of the key challenges to lowering list prices is the
contractual arrangements that companies have with PBMs and
health plans, which are intended to ensure access to our
products. These contracts are often multi-year and are most
often written to provide a discount off of the list price,
which is paid as a rebate later.

To reduce the list price without significant financial
consequences, all of these contracts would need to be modified
to maintain the same net price. Unless the entire system
changes, one manufacturer runs the risk of being disadvantaged
and losing formulary status or being required to pay the same
percentage discount on a lower list, which could be
unsustainable.

In addition, drugs flow through a complex supply chain, from
the manufacturer, to the wholesaler, to a pharmacy or hospital
who dispenses the drug to patients. For any product but even
more so for a high volume primary care product that is flowing
through to all pharmacies and hospitals, there is not a
mechanism in place to readjust the value of the inventory being
held by all those parties.
If the proposed rule is implemented as written, it would only apply
to our contracts with PBMs and health plans for Medicare Part D and
Managed Medicaid. If PBMs and health plans maintain the rebate model in
the commercial market, we would still have commercial contracts based
on rebates, which would be subject to the existing constraints to
lowering list price. We also would still need a mechanism to revalue
drug in the distribution channel in a financially viable manner.
medicaid drug rebate program
Question. The Medicaid Drug Rebate Program (MDRP) requires
manufacturers to provide a basic rebate and an additional inflationary
rebate for both brand and generic drugs. The inflationary rebate is an
increasingly substantial part of total rebates due in large part to
large increases in drug prices that exceed inflation. Under current
law, this inflationary rebate is capped at 100 percent of Average
Manufacturer Price (AMP). This is the case even when manufacturers
continue to raise their prices well above inflation.
Please provide a list of all of your pharmaceutical products that
have reached the Medicaid AMP rebate cap in any of the 20 quarters from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
For each drug listed in response to question 1, please also provide
a list of which quarters and years each drug hit the cap.
Answer. Merck conforms to all statutory, regulatory, and sub-
regulatory guidance regarding its participation in the Medicaid Drug
Rebate Program, including the payment of Medicaid rebates. The
information requested by this question, however, is confidential,
proprietary, and commercially and competitively sensitive. Merck would
be happy to explore other means to share this information with the
committee in a confidential fashion.
medicaid drug rebate program compliance
Question. I am concerned about recent reports and legal settlements
surrounding drug manufacturers' failure to comply fully with the
requirements of the MDRP. For example, an analysis by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General
found that between 2012 and 2016 taxpayers may have overpaid by as much
as $1.3 billion for 10 potentially misclassified drugs. That is why I
introduced the Right Rebate Act with Chairman Grassley to prevent drug
manufacturers from manipulating Medicaid to increase their profits.
However, I continued to be concerned about oversight and manufacturer
compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Accordingly, please describe the following:
Your company's current compliance plan and procedures used to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program including internal audits or other checks you use to identify
compliance vulnerabilities.
Answer. Merck's government price reporting team--in consultation
with in-house attorneys, outside counsel, and third-party vendors as
appropriate--maintains comprehensive and detailed government price
reporting policies, procedures, and reasonable assumptions for
compliance with all price reporting programs, including the Medicaid
Drug Rebate Program (MDRP). Merck's policies are evaluated and updated,
as needed, on an annual basis by the government price report team, in-
house attorneys, and outside counsel to ensure that they are consistent
with current regulations and applicable guidance from the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Additionally, Merck's reasonable
assumptions are evaluated and updated, as needed, on a monthly basis
for Average Manufacturer Price and on a quarterly basis for Best Price
by the government price reporting team, in-house attorneys, and outside
counsel. Merck has a long history of transparency and communication
with CMS regarding its MDRP compliance and reasonable assumptions, and
company compliance personnel regularly oversee Merck's price reporting
operations. Merck evaluates any new guidance issued by CMS to ensure
that its price reporting calculations and processes are in compliance
with the law.
Question. Any past or ongoing issues of non-compliance.
Answer. Merck maintains comprehensive and detailed reasonable
assumptions for its MDRP participation. In situations in which Merck is
uncertain about a calculation approach that is not clearly addressed in
CMS rules or guidance, the company documents its approach in
assumptions and/or discloses its intended approach to CMS.
Additionally, given the complexity of the calculations, Merck may
identify calculation mistakes or other issues that require correction.
This may happen, for example, to the extent that Merck believes that
any new CMS rules or guidance call into question a reasonable
assumption that the company has previously maintained. In such cases,
if Merck has any concern about its program compliance, it promptly
communicates with CMS to seek the agency's guidance and potentially
restate its prior MDRP reports.
Question. Any corrective actions taken to address identified
problems or issues of non-compliance with the MDRP and how such steps
were communicated to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Answer. As noted above, to the extent that Merck believes that any
of its existing calculation or compliance processes for MDRP
participation are not in keeping with current CMS rules or guidance,
the Company would promptly engage with the agency to identify any
necessary remedial steps and the appropriate way forward, including
filing pricing restatements.
Question. Any steps taken to improve compliance and ensure that all
Medicaid drug rebates owed to the Federal Government and the States are
paid in full.
Answer. As noted above, Merck takes its government price reporting
obligations very seriously, and the Company maintains robust, ongoing
legal and compliance oversight of its price reporting team and its
operations. As discussed above, we routinely review our policies,
procedures, and reasonable assumptions to ensure compliance with
current law. Merck also has an annual training requirement for
government price reporting compliance. If Merck were to identify any
potential noncompliance issue associated with the underpayment of
rebates to the State Medicaid Programs, Merck immediately would
identify this issue to CMS and would work with the agency to ensure the
implementation of any appropriate remedy (including restating pricing
metrics and reconciling rebate amounts with the States).
bonus payments tied to specific drugs
Question. I am concerned by the potential for employee financial
incentives to encourage high launch prices and price increases for
prescription drugs.
Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to sales or
revenue targets of a single product your company sells? Has it ever
been? If yes, please state the product or products to which your
salary, bonus, or other compensation was tied.
Answer. My salary, bonus, or other compensation is not tied to
sales or revenue targets of a single product that Merck sells. In 2011,
a very small percentage of my annual bonus was tied to the net sales of
3 new products (DULERA, SIMPONI, and VICTRELIS).
Question. Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to
either revenue or net income of the company as a whole? Has it ever
been? If yes, please explain what assumptions about price increases are
used when the compensation committee sets revenue or net income goals.
Does the compensation committee provide any guidance to executives in
regards to the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth?
Answer. Yes, a portion of my annual bonus is tied to revenue and
pretax income (i.e., a variation of net income) of the company as a
whole, with each contributing 40 percent (for a total of 80 percent) to
the aggregate incentive target, and research and development
productivity constituting the other 20 percent of the target. The final
bonus that I receive is then calculated based on the company's actual
performance for those three metrics.
The Compensation and Benefits Committee of the Board sets annual
targets for revenue and pretax income based upon the company's annual
plan, as approved by the full Board of Directors.
The company's annual plan includes U.S. pricing assumptions
informed by several variables, including volume, price, and discount
rates, which for 2019 are fully consistent with our July 19, 2018
commitment to not increase net price across our product portfolio in
the U.S. by more than inflation annually.
Neither the board of directors as a whole, nor the Compensation and
Benefits Committee specifically, provides guidance to executives with
regard to the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth.
net prices
Question. In your testimony, you stated, ``last year we pledged
that we will not increase our average net prices for our portfolio by
more than the rate of inflation annually,'' and that ``From 2010 to
2017, Merck's average net price increase across our portfolio each year
has been in the low to mid-single digits. In fact, our average net
price declined in 2017 by almost 2 percent. In 2017, the average
discount for our medicines and vaccines was more than 45 percent lower
than the list price.'' Please describe how the company's year-over-year
aggregate net price is calculated. Please also specifically address the
following questions:
Answer. Net Price Change represents the year-over-year change in
average net price, which is Wholesale Acquisition Cost (WAC) less
rebates, discounts, and returns. The annual percent change versus prior
year was calculated at a product level and weighted across the
company's U.S. Product Portfolio. U.S. Product Portfolio includes human
health pharmaceutical and vaccine products marketed by the company,
excluding partnered products. The product sales utilized in the
analysis represent 97 percent of the total U.S. Product Portfolio in
2010, increasing each year to approach 99.8 percent of coverage in
2017.
Question. How many products are included in the calculation of the
average net price change? What was the median net price change?
Answer. In 2017, 78 products were included. The median net price
change was 0 percent.
Question. Is net price weighted? If so, how? For example, in
determining the aggregate net price does the company assign different
weights to different products based on volume or other factors? Are
``on patent'' and ``off patent'' drugs weighted identically? Are other
statistical weights used or are all products treated equally?
Answer. The Net Price Change percent for each product is weighted
by its Net Sales relative to the Total Net Sales of the Product
Portfolio for the current year. On and off patent drugs are calculated
in the same fashion, and no other ``statistical weighting'' is applied.
Question. Does the figure that you provided during your testimony
account for U.S. prices, international prices, or both? Generally
speaking, when your company reports net price changes, does it
differentiate between U.S. and international prices?
Answer. Only U.S. prices are used in the report.
Question. Please list the five drugs your company sold in the U.S.
that had the greatest year-over-year net price increase in 2018, noting
the increase for each drug by dollar figure and percentage. Please list
the five drugs your company sold in the U.S. that had the lowest year-
over-year net price increase (and/or the greatest decrease) in 2018,
noting the increase (or decrease) for each drug by dollar figure and
percentage.
Answer. The product-specific information requested is competitively
sensitive and Merck therefore cannot produce it in a public setting in
which it could be accessed by competitors. However, Merck does report
similar information in an aggregated format in its annual price
transparency report, which we proactively make available on our
corporate responsibility website:
https://s3.amazonaws.com/msd18-assets/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/
281553
45/2018-US-PRICING-TRANSPARENCY-REPORT_02.2019.pdf
The report sets forth the average annual list price changes across
the Merck portfolio as well as other price related information
concerning Merck medicines and vaccines. The report shows that in 2018
the average annual list price across the Merck portfolio increased by
5.5 percent--the lowest increase since 2010--as compared with a 6.6
percent increase in 2017. In 2018, the Company's gross U.S. sales were
reduced by 44.3% as a result of rebates, discounts and returns. The
below chart reflects additional information about the price changes for
Merck products.
U.S. Product Portfolio Percent Change vs. Prior Year
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
List Price Change (WAC)
7.4
9.5
9.2
9.6
10.5
9.8
9.6
6.6
5.5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Net Price
3.4
5.1
6.2
5.5
3.7
5.5
5.5
(1.9)
2.99
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. Product Portfolio
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Average Discount (%)
27.3
28.9
29.9
32.1
37.0
38.2
40.9
45.1
44.3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. For 2018, what was the average net price change in the
U.S. market for (1) drugs with no competition, (2) drugs with only
branded competition, and (3) drugs with generic competition?
Answer. The product-specific information requested is competitively
sensitive and Merck therefore cannot produce it in a public setting in
which it could be accessed by competitors. However, Merck does report
similar information in an aggregated format in its annual price
transparency report, which we proactively make available on our
corporate responsibility website:
https://s3.amazonaws.com/msd18-assets/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/
281553
45/2018-US-PRICING-TRANSPARENCY-REPORT_02.2019.pdf
The report sets forth the average annual list price changes across
the Merck portfolio as well as other price related information
concerning Merck medicines and vaccines. The report shows that in 2018
the average annual list price across the Merck portfolio increased by
5.5 percent--the lowest increase since 2010--as compared with a 6.6-
percent increase in 2017. In 2018, the company's gross U.S. sales were
reduced by 44.3% as a result of rebates, discounts and returns. The
below chart reflects additional information about the price changes for
Merck products.
U.S. Product Portfolio Percent Change vs. Prior Year
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
List Price Change (WAC)
7.4
9.5
9.2
9.6
10.5
9.8
9.6
6.6
5.5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Net Price
3.4
5.1
6.2
5.5
3.7
5.5
5.5
(1.9)
2.99
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. Product Portfolio
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Average Discount (%)
27.3
28.9
29.9
32.1
37.0
38.2
40.9
45.1
44.3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. In Merck's most recent pricing transparency report, the
company notes that the ``the average annual net price across our
portfolio declined by 1.9 percent, reflecting specific in-year
dynamics, including the impact of loss of patent protection for three
major medicines.'' Please identify these medicines, and the net price
change for each of them on a dollar and percentage basis for 2017. What
was Merck's average net price increase/decrease in 2017 for drugs
excluding these three medications?
Answer. This information is confidential, proprietary, and
commercially sensitive. Merck's average net price increase/decrease in
2017 excluding the three drugs referred to is -0.6 percent.
Question. In Merck's pricing transparency report, the company
states that its net price is ``represents the year-over-year change in
average net price, which is WAC less rebates, discounts and returns,''
while its average discount is ``weighted . . . [and] calculated by
dividing annual rebates, discounts and returns by annual gross sales.''
Please clarify whether the company's average net price is weighted for
purposes of complying with its publically stated pledge.
Answer. Yes, the average net price is weighted.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. When new products enter the market, do drug companies set
high initial rebates and then provide deep rebates in order to gain
access to insurance plan's formularies?
Answer. Merck approaches pricing from the perspective of value.
This approach looks at the value that a medicine provides through
multiple lenses with the goal of reflecting its benefit to patients and
to society, while at the same time paying an appropriate return on
invested capital to our investors, to ensure that we are able to
sustain R&D. While each individual situation varies based on factual
circumstances and market dynamics, generally, we consider:

Value provided to patients--to what extent does a new
medicine or vaccine establish a new standard of care that has
the potential to significantly extend and improve patient
lives?

Value provided to health-care systems--to what extent does a
new medicine or vaccine reduce the costs associated with
hospitalization and other costly complications of disease if
not appropriately (or optimally) treated?

Unmet need--does a new medicine or vaccine address a
critically unmet medical need, where few or no treatments
exist?

Access--what is the ability of various customers around the
world--including national, regional or local institutional
payers, physicians, employers and patients--to pay for our
products?

R&D sustainability--given the long-term risk and cost of
capital, can we appropriately compensate our investors to
ensure continued investment in the kind of risky and capital-
intensive research and development that will bring forward
medically important breakthroughs?

Competition--what are the costs of other treatments
currently on the market relative to the value provided by
Merck's products?
When the company launched ZEPATIER into the Hepatitis C market,
Merck chose a low list price strategy, while competitors had a higher
price with significant rebates. Unfortunately, we were unable to gain
reasonable formulary status or resulting sales in certain market
segments with this strategy. Positive actions in the U.S., such as the
administration's proposal regarding the rebate safe harbor could
provide incentives for lower initial list prices in the future.
Question. If CMS finalizes the rebate rule, do you anticipate
future products entering the market with significantly lower initial
list prices?
Answer. Over time, we expect that list prices will go down if you
remove the misaligned incentives in the system. It is also important to
note that if the rule is implemented, Medicare beneficiaries' out-of-
pocket costs will be reduced--independent of any lowering of list
prices--since their cost-sharing will be based on the net price. But we
believe the rebate rule will align incentives in a way that will
restrain list prices.
If this rule is implemented as written, it would only apply to our
contracts with PBMs and health plans for Medicare Part D and Managed
Medicaid. If PBMs and health plans maintain the rebate model in the
commercial market, we would still have commercial contracts based on
rebates, which would be subject to the existing constraints to lowering
list price. We also would still need a mechanism to revalue drug in the
distribution channel in a financially viable manner.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
Question. What are your recommendations for lowering prices for the
40 percent of drugs that do not offer rebates in Medicare Part D?
Answer. Assuming the 40 percent reference is correct, we believe
that the administration's rebate safe harbor proposal will lead to
lower prices even for products which currently may offer no or minimal
rebates in Medicare Part D. We believe the increasing transparency of
prices will spur heightened competition even in classes and for
products where rebating has been limited in the current system.
Similarly, the fact that price concessions will be made directly
available to patients will also create a price-reducing dynamic since
price concessions will make products more affordable to patients,
resulting potentially in greater adherence and appropriate use of
prescribed medicines, clearly benefiting patients and encouraging
manufacturers to offer price concessions. Additionally, assuming policy
changes are made to further incentivize value-based contracts, we
believe that value-based contracts can also help to restrain initial
list prices by tying those prices to the value that the products bring
to patients and the health-care system.
Question. In the health insurance plans that you offer your
employees, do you ask your insurers to pass through the full
manufacturer rebates to the beneficiaries?
Answer. Merck offers a generous health-care benefit for our 24,000
U.S. employees. There is no deductible for medications covered under
our pharmacy benefit, and employees never have to pay more than $50 for
a retail prescription for a covered medication, and in most cases pay
less. We contract with a PBM for management of the prescription drug
benefits for our employees, and the benefit does not offer point-of-
sale rebates to our employees. Merck uses savings generated by rebates
to lower overall costs for employees while ensuring low out-of-pocket
costs.
Question. The systems for pricing and distributing drugs are opaque
and difficult to understand. What are your recommendations for
increasing transparency in how your companies set the list prices for
drugs, and for improving transparency in the supply chain for
prescription drugs? Would you support Federal standards for
transparency in setting the list prices for drugs?
Answer. We are open and transparent about the factors we consider
in setting prices. Merck approaches pricing from the perspective of
value. This approach looks at the value that a medicine provides
through multiple lenses with the goal of reflecting its benefit to
patients and to society, while at the same time paying an appropriate
return on invested capital to our investors, to ensure that we are able
to sustain R&D. While each individual situation varies based on factual
circumstances and market dynamics, generally, we consider:

Value provided to patients--to what extent does a new
medicine or vaccine establish a new standard of care that has
the potential to significantly extend and improve patient
lives?

Value provided to health-care systems--to what extent does a
new medicine or vaccine reduce the costs associated with
hospitalization and other costly complications of disease if
not appropriately (or optimally) treated?

Unmet need--does a new medicine or vaccine address a
critically unmet medical need, where few or no treatments
exist?

Access--what is the ability of various customers around the
world--including national, regional or local institutional
payers, physicians, employers and patients--to pay for our
products?

R&D sustainability--given the long-term risk and cost of
capital, can we appropriately compensate our investors to
ensure continued investment in the kind of risky and capital-
intensive research and development that will bring forward
medically important breakthroughs?

Competition--what are the costs of other treatments
currently on the market relative to the value provided by
Merck's products?
Question. In nearly every sector of the health-care industry,
Medicare, Medicaid, employers, and insurers are moving away from fee-
for-service payments to reimbursements based on value and performance.
Prescription drugs and medical devices were the glaring exceptions to
this trend until recently. How many of your drugs are included in
value-based contracts and how many patients are benefiting from them?
How do these value-based contracts work to lower drug prices for both
patients and taxpayers?
Answer. Merck has been party to value-based discounting
arrangements for four of its products. It is difficult to assess
exactly how many patients have benefitted from them, however, since
that information is not in Merck's possession under the arrangements.
Merck agrees that value-based discounting strategies can benefit
patients and the Federal health care programs by ensuring that payment
aligns with the value or outcomes that a manufacturer's products bring
to the system. If, for example, a value-based agreement demonstrates
that a manufacturer's product helps patients to achieve meaningful
clinical outcomes (or even to avoid more serious illness complications
or comorbidities), the product would have demonstrated a savings to
patients and taxpayers (for example, by avoiding hospitalization or
further treatment for a particular condition). There are, however,
significant impediments under current law regarding adopting this type
of contract--including under the Anti-Kickback Statute and manufacturer
government price reporting obligations--and Merck supports legislative
or regulatory reforms to increase the proliferation of value- or
outcomes-based discounting.
Question. Last year, Senator Portman and I did an investigation on
the pricing of an opioid overdose reversal drug called EVZIO,
manufactured by Kaleo. Kaleo increased the price of EVZIO from $575 in
2014 to $4,100 in 2017. We found that the best price Medicare was able
to get for EVZIO, about $4,000, was much higher than the price other
Federal programs and private insurers were able to get. It seemed that
Kaleo was able to get this higher price of $4,000 from Medicare by
helping doctors fill out paperwork showing that the drug was medically
necessary, even though there are cheaper alternatives on the market. As
a result of the investigation, Kaleo announced it will bring a generic
version of the drug to market at only $168 per pack. Are any of your
companies providing medical necessity paperwork to doctors in order to
get your drugs covered by Medicare?
Answer. In the United States, Merck provides limited reimbursement
support for patients in connection with the purchase of certain of
Merck's products following a physician's prescribing decision (in
accordance with Department of Health and Human Services Office of
Inspector General guidance). In certain cases, this support includes
identifying--for patients and physicians--the appropriate forms and
insurance processes attendant to securing insurance coverage for our
products. But it is Merck's policy never to interfere with the
physician-patient relationship or the decision about whether to seek
insurance coverage.
Question. In 2017, the Rand Corporation estimated that biosimilar
drugs, which are competitors to complex, biologic drugs, could save the
United States more than $50 billion over the next decade. Some of you
have also argued that increasing the use of biosimilar drugs would help
lower drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers. What is delaying the
uptake of biosimilar drugs in the United States? What policies do you
recommend to increase the development of biosimilar drugs?
Answer. Merck agrees that we can significantly reduce spending on
pharmaceuticals, especially for patients, by ensuring that we have a
viable market for biosimilars in the United States. We believe, like
with traditional small molecule medicines, generic competition after a
reasonable period of exclusivity will create headroom for patients to
afford the newest, most innovative medicines. In addition to the RAND
data that you referenced, other research shows that generics and
biosimilars are expected to drive savings of $105 billion through 2022
in the U.S.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ IQVIA. ``Medicine Use and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of
2017 and Outlook to 2022.'' (Apr. 19, 2018), https://www.iqvia.com/
institute/reports/medicine-use-and-spending-in-the-us-review-of-2017-
outlook-to-2022.
We suggest the following policy changes to help encourage and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
support prescriber biosimilar utilization:

Consider options to reduce or eliminate patient cost sharing
in Medicare Part B for biosimilars. While some Part B
beneficiaries are already able to reduce their 20 percent cost
sharing via supplemental coverage, we believe eliminating cost
sharing will encourage many physicians to use biosimilars for
their patients. A similar approach in Part D and in Medicaid
for small-molecule generics has driven generic utilization up
to 90 percent.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Inspector
General. ``Generic Drug Utilization in the Medicare Part D Program.''
(Nov. 2007), https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-05-07-00130.pdf.

Create pathways for MA and Part D plans to receive bonus
payments and/or enhanced star ratings for achieving metrics
related to access to biosimilars. This will incentivize plans
to implement policies that drive additional utilization of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
biosimilars.

Consider alternative reimbursement methodologies that adjust
the current Part B reimbursement formula. The current structure
in Part B to reimburse at ASP + 6 percent of the reference
product ASP ensures there is no reimbursement downside to
physicians for using biosimilars. But so far, the evidence does
not suggest the current reimbursement rate sufficiently
incentivizes providers to use biosimilar products. The
administration should consider alternatives to further
incentivize physician adoption of biosimilars.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
Question. The United States is one of the only countries in the
world to allow prescription drug manufacturers to advertise directly to
consumers through magazines, billboards, radio, and television
commercials. While I will not argue that it is beneficial to educate
consumers about an unfamiliar disease and encourage them to seek
medical help, most commercials from all of your companies recommend
asking about a specific brand name drug, not a medical condition.
Furthermore, even if your advertisements follow all FDA rules and list
medication side effects, they also almost always list these while a
smiling, apparently healthy person is walking on a beach.
Researchers say that this type of imagery, combined with viewing
hours of drug commercials each month, leads consumers to underestimate
the risks associated with medications. For the past decade, studies
have shown that aggressive direct-to-consumer advertising is associated
with rising drug prices and an increase in inappropriate drug
prescriptions.
Since researchers have concluded that consumers are
misunderstanding the benefits and risks described in your ads, what
further policies could help you and your colleagues ensure that you are
educating patients in a clear manner?
Answer. Merck believes that direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertising
can be an important and helpful way to inform patients about diseases
that may be relevant to them and therapeutic options they may want to
discuss with their physician. Data demonstrate that DTC can have a
positive impact on patient health in terms of diagnosis, treatment, and
adherence to prescribed therapies. We recognize that DTC is one channel
amongst many to help educate patients. Print materials, telephone,
websites, and other channels are also used to provide more in-depth
information to patients. The ultimate decision to prescribe a product
for any specific patient remains with the physician following
discussion with their patient.
Merck adheres to FDA regulations and guidelines governing DTC
promotion and has a long-standing policy to voluntarily submit new DTC
broadcast advertising campaigns to FDA for pre-review. Merck also
follows the PhRMA Guiding Principles for DTC Advertisements About
Prescription Medicines. We are currently considering what additional
information we can make available to consumers to ensure that they can
make informed health care decisions.
pharmaceutical companies continue to raise prices
Question. As you are well aware, high prescription drug prices are
the number one concern for Americans and their families. According to
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the average
American spends around $1,208 annually on prescription drugs. There
have been several instances where brand name or even generic drugs that
have been on the market for years continue to increase in price.
One of the most well-known examples is Mylan's increase of the
price of EpiPen from less than $100 in 2007 to more than $600 in 2016.
Another example is the ever-increasing price of insulin. Sanofi
increased the price of a vial of Lantus from $88.20 in 2007 to $307.20
in 2017. And those are just a small sample of price increases.
Why don't we see price decreases for drugs that have been on the
market for years without new formulations or added benefit?
Answer. List prices do not generally decline largely owing to many
of the misaligned incentives that the administration's rebate safe
harbor proposal is designed to address. Specifically, rebate contracts
for commercial and Medicare Part D payers/PBMs are designed as set
percentages from the list price. Lowering list prices while maintaining
these same percentage discounts/rebates usually precludes the
commercial viability of reducing list prices.
We do in fact see price decreases for products that have been on
the market for years--extremely large ones. They occur at the time of
patent expiry, and often reduce prices by over 90 percent. This is
unlike any other part of the health care system we are aware of, where
prices drop massively after a specified period. If these massive one-
time price reductions occurred more gradually, it would be far more
obvious that prices were decreasing. Even putting this aside, net
prices on many products drop dramatically over time as competition from
new products increases. For instance, the average net price of our
anti-diabetes medicine Januvia is less today than it was when it was
launched in 2007.
pay for delay
Question. Pay for delay is a tactic that more and more branded drug
manufacturers have been using to stifle competition from lower-cost
generic manufacturers. This allows you to sidestep competition by
offering patent settlements that pay generic companies not to bring
lower-cost alternatives to market.
These ``pay-for-delay'' patent settlements benefit both brand-name
pharmaceutical companies by helping them avoid costly patent litigation
and general manufacturers by rewarding them a hefty sum to delay
entering the market with a cheaper drug alternative. However, these
deals do not benefit consumers. According to an FTC study, these
anticompetitive deals cost consumers and taxpayers $3.5 billion in
higher drug costs every year.
Does your company partake in pay-for-delay settlements?
Answer. Merck has not entered into patent settlement agreements
with generic companies to delay their entry past when it would
otherwise be lawful for them to enter the market. Merck has been party
to a number of patent settlement agreements that provide for generic
market entry prior to patent expiry, including some that have provided
some level of exclusivity for a limited time. These agreements allowed
generic products to enter the market earlier than would have otherwise
been the case. The FTC has not challenged as anti-competitive any of
these types of agreements involving Merck.
Question. Why would a pharmaceutical company enter into a pay-for-
delay agreement?
Answer. Parties enter into settlements of patent litigation for all
the same reasons parties settle other civil litigation. These include
allocation of risk in the dispute, avoidance of litigation costs, or
beneficial access to technology from cross-licensing of the litigant's
patents. Merck would be speculating as to why litigants would enter
into settlements with large unjustified reverse payments.
Question. Do you think these agreements stifle competition and
prevent generic alternatives to your branded medications?
Answer. Merck believes that the patent settlements it has made did
not stifle competition nor unlawfully prevent generic alternatives to
our patented medications.
Patent settlement agreements in which a brand settles cases in a
manner that allows a generic to enter the market prior to expiry of the
brand's patents could actually accelerate patient access to lower cost
alternatives. These settlements do not delay entry or cause the loss of
any lawful competition because entry prior to the expiry of these
patents would be unlawful infringement unless and until the generic
manufacturers prevailed in court.
Merck works within the statutory framework set by Hatch-Waxman and
BPCIA to protect its intellectual property. We believe that patent
holders have a valid right to enforce legitimate patents and that the
courts are an appropriate venue to resolve such disputes.
Our patents are a direct result of the investment we have made in
R&D. When others seek to commercialize our innovations, Merck has
engaged in litigation to enforce our patents.
Merck is a strong supporter of bringing more generics to the
market. It is important to remember that generics all started as a
branded medication. A period of patent protection is provided for all
new medicines as an incentive to research-based biopharmaceutical
companies for the costly and risky research that is undertaken to
develop them. Following the loss of patent protection, the medicines
become low-cost generics that are available for many years, often
decades into the future.
Merck is proud that more than 40 million Americans annually benefit
from our science in the form of generic medicines. Several of our
discoveries--including cholesterol-lowering, heart disease,
osteoporosis, and asthma treatments--are now widely available to a
patient as generics, including some for about $20 per year, bringing
billions of dollars in savings to consumers and the health care system.
drug rebate rule
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services'
(HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG) promulgated a new regulation to
remove regulatory safe harbor protections under the Anti-Kickback
Statute (AKS) for rebates on prescription drugs rebates paid by
manufactures to PBMs under Medicare Part D and for Medicaid managed
care organizations (MCOs). The OIG proposal attempts to ban most
rebates by eliminating their regulatory protections.
The rule is predicted to increase net drug costs in its early
years. The CMS actuaries estimate it would cost $196 billion over 10
years. Despite this high price tag, the beneficiary benefits are
limited. The proposed rule notes that under the CMS Actuary's analysis,
the majority of beneficiaries would see an increase in their total out-
of-pocket payments and premium costs; reductions in total cost sharing
will exceed total premium increases.
I wanted to ask a question about the administration's rebate rule,
which I understand that many of the drug manufacturers, and your main
trade association, strongly support. According to an analysis of the
rule by the Office of Actuaries at CMS, drug manufacturers are likely
to initially retain 15 percent of the current rebates as higher net
drug prices.
Given that estimate, can you provide the committee with any
assurances that prices will not increase under this proposed rule?
Answer. Over time, we expect that list prices will go down if the
misaligned incentives across the system are addressed. It is also
important to note that if the rule is implemented, Medicare
beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs will be reduced, independent of any
lowering of list prices, since their cost-sharing will be based on the
net price. Nonetheless, we believe the rebate rule will align
incentives in a way that will restrain list prices.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. According to an article recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, medical marketers spent nearly $30
billion dollars in 2016, up from $17 billion in 1997. Direct-to-
Consumer (DTC) advertising had the biggest percentage increase: from
$2.1 billion, or 11.9% of all medical marketing, in 1997 to $9.6
billion, or 32% of total spending, in 2016.
Can you please provide what your ratio of spending on sales and
marketing to research and development is today?
Answer. In 2018, Merck incurred $9.8 billion in research and
development costs globally, the vast majority of which was conducted in
the U.S. Since 2010, Merck has invested nearly $70 billion in R&D to
create new medicines and vaccines that address the greatest health
challenges of our time--including antimicrobial resistance, Ebola, HIV,
and cancer--to save and improve lives around the world. In 2018, Merck
spent about $2.3 billion in the U.S. market on direct marketing and
selling expenses. This number includes all sales and marketing
expenses, including creative development of resources and headcount
related to all marketing and sales activity in the U.S. market.
price-gouging
Question. Sanofi, as I understand it, has made a pledge to the
public to limit its price increases to the national health expenditures
growth projection.
Would your company commit to a cap on annual price increases as
part of your PhRMA membership criteria?
Answer. In July 2018, Merck pledged to not increase the average net
price across our portfolio by more than inflation annually.
Question. What policies would you propose to help ensure lower
launch prices for new drugs?
Answer. Merck approaches pricing from the perspective of value.
This approach looks at the value that a medicine provides through
multiple lenses with the goal of reflecting its benefit to patients and
to society, while at the same time paying an appropriate return on
invested capital to our investors, to ensure that we are able to
sustain R&D. While each individual situation varies based on factual
circumstances and market dynamics, generally, we consider:

Value provided to patients--to what extent does a new
medicine or vaccine establish a new standard of care that has
the potential to significantly extend and improve patient
lives?

Value provided to health-care systems--to what extent does a
new medicine or vaccine reduce the costs associated with
hospitalization and other costly complications of disease if
not appropriately (or optimally) treated?

Unmet need--does a new medicine or vaccine address a
critically unmet medical need, where few or no treatments
exist?

Access--what is the ability of various customers around the
world--including national, regional or local institutional
payers, physicians, employers and patients--to pay for our
products?

R&D sustainability--given the long-term risk and cost of
capital, can we appropriately compensate our investors to
ensure continued investment in the kind of risky and capital-
intensive research and development that will bring forward
medically important breakthroughs?

Competition--what are the costs of other treatments
currently on the market relative to the value provided by
Merck's products?
We believe the proper objective should be that launch prices
appropriately reflect the true value of the medicine and are not
distorted by any misaligned incentives in Medicare Part D or any other
sector. We believe the administration's proposed rebate safe harbor,
and similar changes in commercial plans, would address the misaligned
incentives in the marketplace that favor high list prices and high
rebates in competitive markets. In addition, addressing the misaligned
incentives for the 340B program would allow for more flexibility in
list prices.
transparency
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mentioned that the
current system of pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) back-end rebates do
not rarely results in a scenario where the PBM passes on savings to
consumers at the point of sale (POS). The administration recently
proposed a rule to eliminate the anti-kickback statute safe harbor
protections for these drug rebates.
Do you agree that greater transparency should be required to
understand how manufacturers and PBMs are negotiating prices and
rebates to ensure that savings are passed down to beneficiaries?
Answer. Yes. We believe there should be greater transparency of the
financial arrangements between manufacturers and PBMs. In particular,
we believe we must change the system to ensure that patients receive
the benefit of the significant rebates and discounts that manufacturers
like Merck pay to PBMs and plans. The administration's proposed rule is
a positive step in that direction.
Based on our initial assessment of the proposed rule, we believe
that it will remove misaligned incentives within the system, drive more
transparency in the system, and most importantly, lower beneficiaries'
out-of-pocket costs.
Question. Senator Thune asked if this administration rule would
lead you to lowering list prices. Both of you answered that you would
be likely to lower your prices. However, if this rule were finalized
tomorrow as proposed, would any of your companies be required to lower
the list price of any of your drugs?
Answer. Under the proposed rule, there is no requirement to lower
list prices. However, over time, we expect that our list prices will go
down if the misaligned incentives across the system are addressed. It
is also important to note that if the rule is implemented, Medicare
beneficiaries' out-of-pocket costs will be reduced, independent of any
lowering of list prices, since their cost-sharing will be based on the
net price. Nonetheless, we believe the rebate rule will align
incentives in a way that will restrain list prices.
pbms
Question. An Axios article from March 7, 2019 highlights the fact
that, while ``pharmaceutical companies put a lot of the blame for high
drug prices on pharmacy benefit managers,'' many large pharmaceutical
companies ``rely on PBMs to manage their own health-care benefits.''
In your role as an employer, does your company contract with a
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) to administer the prescription
drug benefits for your employees and negotiate lower drug costs on your
behalf?
For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the prescription
drug benefit for your employees, how do you utilize the rebates your
PBM negotiates to lower health care costs or drug costs for your
employee plans and what does your company do with that savings?
Specifically, do the savings go toward lowing premiums?
For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the prescription
drug benefit for your employees, does your PBM offer point-of-sale
rebates to your employees?
Answer. Merck offers a generous health care benefit for our 24,000
U.S. employees. There is no deductible for medications covered under
our pharmacy benefit, and employees never have to pay more than $50 for
a retail prescription for a covered medication, and in most cases pay
less. We contract with a PBM for management of the prescription drug
benefits for our employees, and the benefit does not offer point-of-
sale rebates to our employees. Merck uses savings generated by the PBM
on rebates to lower overall costs for employees while ensuring low out-
of-pocket costs.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. Please describe any policy changes you support that would
result in your company lowering the list prices of its drugs.
Answer. Over time, we expect that our list prices will go down if
the misaligned incentives across the system are addressed. Nonetheless,
we believe the rebate rule will align incentives in a way that will
restrain list prices.
As we stated when we reduced the list price of several of our
products in July 2018, we have continued to look for opportunities to
reduce our list prices. We think the proposed rule would help create
those opportunities, but it can't happen overnight. All of the players
in the ecosystem will need to adjust to the new model.
If the proposed rule is implemented as written, it would only apply
to our contracts with PBMs and health plans for Medicare Part D and
Managed Medicaid. If PBMs and health plans maintain the rebate model in
the commercial market, we would still have commercial contracts based
on rebates, which would be subject to the existing constraints to
lowering list price. We also would still need a mechanism to revalue
drug in the distribution channel in a financially viable manner.
Question. How much does your company's research and development
portfolio rely on taxpayer-funded research conducted by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)? How many of your company's products are
based, at least in part, on NIH research, and how many are the result
of research funded solely by your company?
Answer. The U.S. leads the world in biomedical research thanks to a
robust biomedical ecosystem comprised of important and unique
contributions from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), academic
institutions, and the biopharmaceutical industry. Historically, the
NIH's focus has been on basic biomedical science and research
concerning public health (including in the recent budget funding for
drug and alcohol abuse prevention, reducing health-care disparities,
and other important causes). Through this basic research, NIH seeks to
understand the fundamental biological processes and leverage that
understanding to determine which processes are involved in the
development and progression of disease. There is significant basic
research that in some respects contributes to all new medicines. Most
of this is considered ``pre-competitive'' since the individual
contributions are in themselves too small or too broad to lead directly
to a new therapy, which takes considerable work to invent and develop.
Merck also conducts basic research. However, where we use
intellectual property that others have created, we are diligent in
recognizing and agreeing on terms to use that property (including
financial compensation), which may include with agencies of the U.S.
government such as NIH. After this stage of basic research, our
company's further role is to then engage in the most risky and costly
part of discovery--to invent something that's never existed in the
history of the world that will alter the targets that come from basic
research and unlock treatments and cures for disease. This invention is
then followed by extensive clinical trial programs to demonstrate
safety and effectiveness.
On occasion, we will rely on work by government agencies that is
more advanced; however, we take the same approach of respecting
intellectual property rights and agreeing on terms of use of that
property. For example, Merck, along with Instituto Butantan, has
licensed certain rights from National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of NIH, for the development of live
attenuated tetravalent vaccines (LATV).
All parts of the ecosystem are needed to continue to lead in
biomedical research: the portion of NIH's entire $33 billion budget
that it devoted to biomedical research in 2017 as well as the $70
billion the biopharmaceutical industry spent in 2017--$10 billion of
which was spent by Merck--to invent and bring to market new treatments
and cures.
Question. In each of the last 5 years, how much has your company
spent on research and development versus the advertising and marketing
of your products?
Answer. In 2018, Merck incurred $9.8 billion in research and
development costs globally, the vast majority of which was conducted in
the U.S. Since 2010, Merck has invested nearly $70 billion in R&D to
create new medicines and vaccines that address the greatest health
challenges of our time--including antimicrobial resistance, Ebola, HIV,
and cancer--to save and improve lives around the world. In 2018, Merck
spent about $2.3 billion in the U.S. on direct marketing and selling
expenses. This number includes all sales and marketing expenses,
including creative development of resources and headcount related to
all marketing and sales activity in the U.S. market.
For the remaining years, we spent the following:

In 2017, Merck invested $10.3 billion in R&D and $2.5
billion in U.S. marketing and selling expenses.

In 2016, Merck invested $10.3 billion in R&D and $2.5
billion on U.S. marketing and selling expenses.

In 2015, Merck invested $6.8 billion in R&D and $2.4 billion
on U.S. marketing and selling expenses.

In 2014, Merck invested $7.3 billion in R&D and $2 billion
on U.S. marketing and selling expenses.
Question. During the hearing, you mentioned that your company would
be likely to lower the list prices of its drugs if the recent proposal
by the Trump administration to change the current system of rebates was
extended to the private market.
If the policy was extended to the private market, how large would
the list price reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
Answer. It is hard to predict an exact amount of list price
reduction if the rule were implemented as described. However, we
believe that removing the misaligned incentives from the system should
result in downward pressure on list prices. It is also important to
understand that different purchasers receive different levels of
discounts, based on the access provided for patients. So, there is not
a uniform ``rebate amount'' that could reduce the list price. Moreover,
we expect that the robust negotiations that occur today will continue
in the highly competitive Part D market, and we expect to realize the
same level of net price that we do today. In fact, we expect that there
could be additional pricing pressure under the new system, which could
lead to lower net prices.
Question. How will this proposal affect how your company sets the
list prices for new drug products?
Answer. Merck approaches pricing from the perspective of value.
This approach looks at the value that a medicine provides through
multiple lenses with the goal of reflecting its benefit to patients and
to society, while at the same time paying an appropriate return on
invested capital to our investors, to ensure that we are able to
sustain R&D. While each individual situation varies based on factual
circumstances and market dynamics, generally, we consider:

Value provided to patients--to what extent does a new
medicine or vaccine establish a new standard of care that has
the potential to significantly extend and improve patient
lives?

Value provided to health-care systems--to what extent does a
new medicine or vaccine reduce the costs associated with
hospitalization and other costly complications of disease if
not appropriately (or optimally) treated?

Unmet need--does a new medicine or vaccine address a
critically unmet medical need, where few or no treatments
exist?

Access--what is the ability of various customers around the
world--including national, regional or local institutional
payers, physicians, employers and patients--to pay for our
products?

R&D sustainability--given the long-term risk and cost of
capital, can we appropriately compensate our investors to
ensure continued investment in the kind of risky and capital-
intensive research and development that will bring forward
medically important breakthroughs?

Competition--what are the costs of other treatments
currently on the market relative to the value provided by
Merck's products?
We do not expect this approach to change based on the Trump
administration's proposed rule.
Question. If the proposal is finalized and not extended to the
private market, will your company make any list price reductions? If
so, how large would the reductions be relative to the size of the
rebates your company is currently providing?
Answer. We expect that the robust negotiations that occur today
will continue in the highly competitive Part D and commercial markets,
and we expect to realize the same level of net price that we do today.
In fact, we expect that there could be additional pricing pressure
under the new system, which could lead to lower net prices, but
predicting the size of any such reductions is difficult.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan
Question. In June of 2018, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission (MACPAC) unanimously recommended under Recommendation 1.1 in
their annual report to Congress that Congress remove the statutory
requirement that manufacturers blend the average manufacturer price
(AMP) of a brand drug and its authorized generic.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ MACPAC. ``Improving Operations of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program,'' https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Improving-
Operations-of-the-Medicaid-Drug-Rebate-Program.pdf.
This requirement created an unintended loophole. Rather than use
the price of the authorized generic, drug companies can sell its
authorized generic to a corporate subsidiary at an artificially lower
price and use that lower price to bring down the AMP, which in turn
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lowers the rebate obligation.
Does your company engage in this practice? Has your company ever
engaged in this practice in the past?
Answer. No. Merck does not engage in the practice of selling
authorized products to a subsidiary and then blending the pricing data
for the products. Merck does engage with third parties who act as our
authorized generic partners. Merck has disclosed the methodology used
to account for these transactions in AMP to CMS.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
Question. As a portion of your revenue, for what percentage of the
drugs in your portfolio do you offer no rebates? Based on the drugs in
your pipeline, do you foresee that portion growing? For those drugs is
your list price equal to your net price?
Answer. Since Merck's entire product portfolio is covered within at
least one government program that requires a mandated rebate or
discount (such as Medicaid, 340B, Federal Supply Schedule), there are
no Merck products that are not rebated or discounted. Merck also offers
voluntary rebates or discounts on many of its products. We would expect
similar rebates and discounts to be paid for our drugs in the pipeline,
barring fundamental changes in the marketplace.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you generate in US sales
revenue? Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, Merck incurred $9.8 billion on research and
development costs globally, the vast majority of which was conducted in
the U.S. Since 2010, Merck has invested nearly $70 billion in R&D to
create new medicines and vaccines that address the greatest health
challenges of our time--including antimicrobial resistance, Ebola, HIV,
and cancer--to save and improve lives around the world. In 2018, Merck
had $18.2 billion in U.S. sales revenue.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? What company functions do you consider to be included
in administration? Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, Merck incurred $9.8 billion in research and
development costs globally, the vast majority of which was conducted in
the U.S. Since 2010, Merck has invested nearly $70 billion in R&D to
create new medicines and vaccines that address the greatest health
challenges of our time--including antimicrobial resistance, Ebola, HIV,
and cancer--to save and improve lives around the world. In 2018, Merck
spent about $10.1 billion on marketing, selling, and administration
globally ($2.6 billion of which is directly attributed to the U.S.
market). This number includes all sales and marketing expenses,
including creative development of resources and headcount related to
all marketing and sales activity, as well as administrative expenses
associated with business support functions, including information
technology, human resources, facilities, finance, legal, and others.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
sales? What company functions do you consider to be included in sales?
Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, Merck incurred $9.8 billion on research and
development costs globally, the vast majority of which was conducted in
the U.S. Since 2010, Merck has invested nearly $70 billion in R&D to
create new medicines and vaccines that address the greatest health
challenges of our time--including antimicrobial resistance, Ebola, HIV,
and cancer--to save and improve lives around the world. In 2018, Merck
spent about $6.9 billion on direct marketing and selling expenses
globally ($2.3 billion of which is directly attributable to the U.S.
market). This number includes all sales and marketing expenses,
including creative development of resources and headcount related to
all marketing and sales activity in the U.S. market.
Question. Why do you advertise for the drugs you manufacture? What
factors do you consider in choosing which drugs you advertise?
Answer. Merck believes that direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertising
can be an important and helpful way to inform patients about diseases
that may be relevant to them and therapeutic options they may want to
discuss with their physician. Data demonstrate that DTC can have a
positive impact on patient health in terms of diagnosis, treatment, and
adherence to prescribed therapies. We recognize that DTC is one channel
amongst many to help educate patients. Print materials, telephone,
websites, and other channels are also used to provide more in-depth
information to patients. The ultimate decision to prescribe a product
for any specific patient remains with the physician following
discussion with their patient.
Merck adheres to FDA regulations and guidelines governing DTC
promotion and has a long-standing policy to voluntarily submit new DTC
broadcast advertising campaigns to FDA for pre-review. Merck also
follows the PhRMA Guiding Principles for DTC Advertisements About
Prescription Medicines. We are currently considering what additional
information we can make available to consumers to ensure that they can
make informed health care decisions.
______
Prepared Statement of Richard A. Gonzalez,
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, AbbVie Inc.
I am Richard Gonzalez, and I am the chairman and chief executive
officer of AbbVie, a company dedicated to developing new innovative
medicines for some of healthcare's most challenging diseases, such as
cancer, Alzheimer's, viral infections, and auto-immune diseases. Since
our inception in 2013, AbbVie has invested approximately $50 billion in
pursuit of that goal. However, because we are tackling medicine's most
challenging problems, solutions do not come easily or without
significant risk. Where we have succeeded, we have been able to provide
cures for fatal diseases like hepatitis C and significantly alter the
disease progression for certain cancers, lessening the burden of
illness on patients and the health-care system. This is what the 30,000
employees of AbbVie are dedicated to doing.
We agree that access to lifesaving medicines is a critical issue
and we look forward to sharing our perspectives with you. There is no
one solution to this complex issue, but AbbVie is open to working with
the committee on how we can commit our resources to better partner in
your efforts to address pharmaceutical pricing and access. AbbVie and
the rest of our industry must play a role in solving these issues and
be prepared to work together with the insurance industry, the
administration and you to find a better path forward for American
patients.
My remarks today will focus on one aspect of this inquiry--the
Medicare Part D benefit design, which even after pharmaceutical list
prices are lowered, still contributes to making innovative therapies
cost-prohibitive for Medicare patients. In general, the Medicare Part D
program has worked well. Its market-based structure and utilization of
formularies encourages competitive price discounts that have yielded
significant savings to the government since the Part D benefit was
established in 2006. However, despite these cost savings, Part D
patients' out-of-pocket costs have significantly increased. Some would
blame that solely on high drug prices, and we agree that price should
certainly be part of the discussion. But it's also important to
acknowledge that science has enabled us to advance the standard of care
far beyond what was possible when the Part D benefit was designed.
Many of today's specialty medicines offer major advances in
treating or curing serious chronic or life-threatening conditions and
save significant amounts of money for the health-care system by
decreasing overall health-care costs, yet these therapies are also
costly. Due to the structure of the Part D benefit design, patients are
charged out-of-pocket costs on a medicine's list price which does not
reflect the
market-based rebates that Medicare receives. We are encouraged by the
proposed rule that would reflect manufacturer discounts in patients'
Part D out-of-pocket payments. This is an important step in the right
direction, but we believe more must still be done to help Part D
patients.
Let me give you a recent real-world example that demonstrates the
challenge with the current Part D benefit design and why the focus
solely on list prices does not fully address the access challenges. An
uncured hepatitis C infection leads to downstream medical costs for
surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation for patients who progress to
needing a liver transplant or having liver cancer. Today we can cure
hepatitis C with drugs. This cure is highly cost-effective for the
overall health-care system.
In 2017, AbbVie launched Mavyret, a highly effective cure for HCV.
At the time, the list prices for the competitive alternatives were as
high as $94,500 for their most commonly prescribed treatment duration.
We launched Mavyret at a list price that is 72 percent lower. But even
though we cut the list price of an HCV cure for most patients by 72
percent, Medicare Part D patients' out-of-pocket obligations are still
too high for many patients to access this medicine.
We believe it is important that discussions about access and
affordability include a focus on how to alleviate Medicare Part D out-
of-pocket burdens above and beyond just lowering list prices. We are
prepared to step up and discuss how companies like ours can shoulder
more of the burden of a patient's out-of-pocket expenses, as we do in
other areas covered by commercial insurance. Additionally, we believe
the discussion should also include the possibility of Medicare Part D
beneficiaries being able to purchase insurance (as they do in other
parts of the Medicare program) to cover more of their out-of-pocket
expenses.
We believe AbbVie, the rest of the pharmaceutical industry and
insurance providers should come together with the administration and
you to work toward solutions that make life-changing medicines more
affordable to Part D beneficiaries. I can assure you AbbVie is
committed to doing its part, and we look forward to working with you.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Richard A. Gonzalez \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Please note that these responses were prepared by and are from
AbbVie Inc.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' proposed
rule, ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates
Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees,'' envisions that drug manufacturers will offer up-front
discounts rather than the back-end rebates that are now commonly
provided. Some observers argue that a 1996 court case called into
question whether manufacturers could offer up-front discounts,
resulting in today's rebate-based system. I've heard differing opinions
as to whether the issues related to the initial court case are still
relevant. If the HHS proposed rule is finalized, can you assure the
Committee that your company will offer up-front discounts? If not, why?
Please describe how you expect your company to respond to the HHS
proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor protection for back-end rebates
in Medicare Part D that is referenced above if it is finalized.
Assuming you are confident that antitrust laws do not prevent your
company from offering up-front discounts, specifically, do you envision
that your company lowers the list price of a drug to the current after-
rebate net price, offer discounts equal to the current rebate amount,
or a combination of both?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclud[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health-care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified, and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
Question. To what extent are the back-end rebates your company
currently offers contingent on the amount of market share realized for
your drugs as a result of Part D plan formulary placement and other
techniques?
Answer. AbbVie does not have market-share based arrangements.
Question. Please provide a breakdown of percentage of sales that go
to each payer (including Medicare, Medicaid, private pay, other) and a
similar percentage by volume of the total number of each drug compared
to total volume. Please provide this data for the most recent year
available.
Answer. In 2018, on a U.S. dollars basis approximately 68 percent
of AbbVie's U.S. net sales were to commercial payers and approximately
32 percent were to government payers. AbbVie does not maintain this
information on a volume basis across all products. For Humira, AbbVie's
top product for sales, on a volume basis in the U.S. approximately 68
percent of Humira sales were to commercial payers and approximately 32
percent were to government payers. But on a U.S. dollars basis,
approximately 83 percent of Humira sales were to commercial payers and
only approximately 17 percent were to government payers.
Question. Do your companies hire consultants or lobbyists to
promote products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committees? To whom do you disclose advocacy activities surrounding
State Medicaid programs, if at all?
Answer. AbbVie does not hire consultants or lobbyists to promote
products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committees. We
adhere to individual State's laws and regulations with respect to
advocacy disclosures.
Question. Please describe how the costs of patient assistance
programs are accounted for within your company's financial statements.
Please also describe the types of market information, such as
prescribing and use patterns, that your company collects from different
types of patient assistance programs and patient hub services.
Answer. The AbbVie Patient Assistance Program, which provides free
drug to eligible individuals, falls under the administration portion of
SG&A. AbbVie's commercial co-pay assistance costs are deducted from
gross sales.
The information that AbbVie collects through its patient support
services varies by products but may include demographic information,
diagnosis codes and prescription information, insurance information,
and claim information. AbbVie collects a more limited set of this data
through its Patient Assistance Program in order to assess patients for
eligibility and distribute medication to patients.
Question. Please provide a list of all contributions since January
1, 2014, that your company has made to any tax exempt organizations
working on issues related to drugs within your product lines, including
but not limited to patient groups, disease awareness groups, medical or
professional societies, universities or hospitals, industry
associations or leagues. for each contribution, please provide the name
of the organization that received the donation, the date the donation
was made, the amount of the donation, and a description of the purpose
of the contribution (i.e., was the contribution for the general fund, a
specific purpose to a specific program, or continuing medical
education). Please also note whether the contribution was unrestricted
or restricted; if it was restricted, please explain all restrictions.
Finally, if your company maintains a foundation or other separate
charitable arm, please provide the name of all such entities, and list
all donations made from that entity or entities.
Answer. Attached as Exhibit 1 to this response is a list of all
contributions AbbVie has made in the following categories from January
1, 2014 through December 31, 2018: (1) charitable donations to non-
profit organizations; (2) donations for patient education and disease
state diagnosis, treatment, and awareness; (3) educational grants; (4)
fellowships and scholarships; and (5) sponsorships of non-profit
organizations' events.
The AbbVie Foundation is a separate non-profit entity that makes
charitable donations and grants. Attached as Exhibit 2 is a list of all
charitable donations and grants made by The AbbVie Foundation from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
Question. Pay-for-delay agreements cost consumers and taxpayers
billions in higher drug costs every year. The FTC has gone after drug
companies that enter into these settlements where the brand pays the
generic company to keep its lower cost alternative off the market. I'm
the lead Republican sponsor of S. 64, the ``Preserve Access to
Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act,'' which would help put an end
to these deals.
Do you agree that these pay-off agreements keep drug costs high for
patients because they delay competition?
Has your company ever entered into these kinds of settlements with
a generic company?
Answer. ``Pay-for-delay'' is not a self-defining phrase. With
respect to the term ``pay,'' patent litigation settlements, like all
litigation settlements, involve compromise in which both sides believe
they are getting value from the resolution. There is no definition
explaining the circumstances under which that value would implicate the
term ``pay'' in ``pay-for-delay'' for purposes of these questions. And
with respect to ``delay'' virtually all patent settlements provide for
the generic competitor to enter the market before the expiration of the
patent at issue. So if the alternative resolution of a patent lawsuit
would be the innovator company continuing to enforce its patent until
expiration, then such a settlement, no matter what value is exchanged,
would actually accelerate competition, not delay it.
Question. Do you support the pay-for-delay bill?
Answer. AbbVie supports the goals of the Preserve Access to
Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act and would likely support the
bill upon clarification that enforcement only applies to agreements
after the date of enactment.
rebate traps/walls
Question. I'm increasingly concerned about the effect of so-called
``rebate traps'' or ``rebate walls'' on patients' access to quality,
lower-cost medicine. I understand there is ongoing litigation
challenging these practices as anti-competitive.
Does your company engage in the bundling of rebates over multiple
products? If so, why? And what benefit does the consumer gain from
that?
Does your company view these practices as anticompetitive or
harmful to patients' access to quality, lower cost medicine?
Answer. Rebates are a form of price competition that results from
the aggressive negotiations that occur between health plans (and their
representative PBMs) and pharmaceutical companies to provide patients
with access to medicines and treatments that can best help patients
manage their medical conditions.
Question. If a policy were adopted to eliminate rebates, or to
require that rebate savings be passed on to the consumer, would that in
and of itself solve the issue of rebate ``traps'' and ``walls''? And
would consumers benefit from such a policy?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclud[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified, and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
drug pricing
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider regulatory costs or compliance? If so, how specifically do
those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least
one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. AbbVie does not consider regulatory costs or compliance
when considering the list price of a medicine.
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider the risk of liability or litigation? If so, how specifically
do those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at
least one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. AbbVie does not consider the risk of liability or
litigation when considering the list price of a medicine.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. What role do you see value-based arrangements (VBAs)
playing in the effort to reduce prescription drug costs? What potential
do these arrangements have to find the ``sweet spot'' between
controlling costs to patients and encouraging innovation of new drugs?
How can VBAs help lower what patients pay out-of-pocket?
Can Congress do more to allow for and encourage the use of VBAs?
Answer. Value-based arrangements can be an effective and market-
based solution to managing overall health-care costs when driven by
patient outcomes. Studies have found that 38 percent of payers with
outcomes-based contracts experience improved patient outcomes and 33
percent experience plan health-care cost savings. Additionally, plans
with outcomes-based contracts have been found to have a 28 percent
lower patient co-payment. All of these factors work towards moving
payment for prescription medicines away from volume-based approaches to
value-based models in a manner that appropriately balances patient
access with the appropriate use of medications to lower overall health-
care costs.
At AbbVie, we believe all our products provide value to patients
and the larger health-care system and are interested in the
possibilities that could arise through value-based contracting. To
further foster value-based arrangements, we support the reforms
included in the Patient Affordability, Value and Efficiency (PAVE) Act,
introduced by Senators Cassidy (R-LA) and Warner (D-VA).
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. We continue to hear that rebates negotiated off of the
list price of a drug are both good and bad.
Pharmacy benefit managers and plans have argued that rebates are
used to lower premiums across the board and that it is the best way to
seek a price concession on otherwise expensive drugs.
Your industry argues that these payers are insisting on higher
rebates that can only be achieved by raising list prices.
But patients often lose under this system, with out of pocket costs
being tied to list price. Insulin patients appear to be routinely
impacted by this perversity in the system.
Please explain to the committee how your company would reduce list
prices if rebates were no longer a part of the equation?
What assurance can you provide that you would in fact lower your
prices?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclud[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified, and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
Question. What actions should be taken to ensure that patients are
actually seeing the benefits of lower out-of-pocket costs?
Answer. Providing discounts to the patient at the point of sale is
an effective way of ensuring that patients can see lower out-of-pocket
costs. However, this is just the start. AbbVie believes that more must
be done.
The Medicare Part D benefit design contributes to making innovative
therapies cost-prohibitive for Medicare patients because patients are
charged out-of-pocket costs based on a medicine's list price, which
does not reflect the rebates that Medicare receives.
AbbVie believes it is important to alleviate the burdens that
patients face due to Medicare Part D out-of-pocket costs. AbbVie
supports solutions like a patient out-of-pocket cap in Part D and
smoothing patient out-of-pocket payments over a full year, so patients
have some predictability with respect to their out-of-pocket costs.
In addition, AbbVie is prepared to step up and discuss how
companies like ours can shoulder more of the burden of a patient's out-
of-pocket expenses.
As policymakers consider the impact of addressing out-of-pocket
costs in Medicare Part D, questions may arise around whether it will
lead to unnecessary utilization and wasteful spending. for specialty
medicines, increased utilization should not be misunderstood as
unnecessary or wasteful. Part D plans have tools, like step therapy
requirements for patients to first try lower cost alternatives before a
specialty medicine would be covered and prior authorization
requirements before a specialty medicine would be covered, to manage
the utilization of the majority of higher cost specialty medicines.
These tools ensure patients try a less costly medication first and have
met the clinical criteria for taking the specialty drug prescribed and
serve the function that an out-of-pocket cost obligation on patients
might serve to prevent unnecessary use.
Question. If rebates are driving high list prices for drugs as drug
manufacturers' claim, why do you think that Part B drugs, which have no
PBM rebates, are also seeing significant price increases? Whose fault
is that?
Answer. Manufacturers do offer rebates on Part B products in the
commercial market. Those rebates are included in the calculation of the
Part B Average Sales Price (ASP) and are therefore reflected in the
price Medicare pays for Part B drugs. AbbVie does, however, recognize
that increased competition in Part B could lead to additional savings
and welcomes the opportunity to engage in policy discussions that seek
to increase competition in Part B.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Michael B. Enzi
Question. The Food and Drug Administration's drug review process is
known to many as the ``gold standard'' for evaluating medical products.
I've long thought that it is critical that we maintain public
confidence in their ability to ensure that drugs are safe and
effective. There is a perception among some, however, that biosimilars
might not be as safe as their reference products. That perception can
undermine patient and provider confidence. Do you believe that when FDA
approves a biosimilar, providers can be confident that it is safe and
effective?
Answer. Consistent with the US regulatory scheme for biosimilars,
we recognize that FDA-approved biosimilars are highly similar to the
reference product with no clinically meaningful differences.
Unlike small molecule generics, however, biosimilars do not contain
the identical active ingredient as their reference products and
biosimilars are not substitutable at the pharmacy for the reference
drug absent an FDA designation of interchangeability. As FDA has
acknowledged, multiple exposures to slightly different biologics can
prime the immune system to recognize subtle differences in structural
features between products, triggering or increasing the overall immune
response. Consequently, a finding of interchangeability must be
supported by additional data demonstrating that the biosimilar is
``expected to produce the same clinical result in any given patient,''
and that there is no risk to patients associated with alternating or
switching between the biosimilar and the reference product. There is no
requirement that two biosimilars found to be interchangeable with a
single reference product must show that it is safe and effective to
switch between the two interchangeable biosimilars, even though in
practice this is likely to happen in the marketplace if biosimilars are
treated like generic drugs. Different biosimilar products each found
interchangeable with a single reference product will have subtle
structural differences from each other. Indeed, there may be more
structural differences--or different types of structural differences--
between the two biosimilar products than between either biosimilar and
the reference product. As such, without clinical data assessing the
effects of switching between two biosimilars of the same reference,
there is no evidence to scientifically justify interchangeability or
automatic substitution between them. AbbVie has raised this concern
with FDA at a 2018 Part 15 Hearing held by the agency on the subject of
biosimilarity and interchangeability.
These fundamental distinctions between small molecule and biologic
medicine regulation should not change the perception that FDA-approved
biosimilars are safe and effective, but they are central to any
understanding of the biologics market and the appropriate use of these
complex products.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
re-evaluating business strategies in foreign countries
Question. Since taking office, President Trump has made reducing
drug prices one of his highest priorities--and has repeatedly spoken
about his frustration with the U.S. subsidizing the costs of
pharmaceuticals for the rest of the world. He has gone so far as to
issue proposals, like the International Pricing Index (IPI) Model, in
an attempt to bring down prescription drug prices.
With the increased scrutiny of the industry and of the drug supply
chain as a whole in the United States, have any of your companies re-
evaluated your business strategy in foreign countries?
If not, then why?
If a proposal, like IPI, were implemented, would it force your
companies to potentially ``walk away from the negotiating table when
other countries demand low prices subsidized by America's seniors,'' as
HHS Senior Advisor for Drug Pricing Reform John O'Brien has said?
Answer. The focus on U.S. versus ex-U.S. prices for pharmaceuticals
creates an erroneous impression that medicines are the major driver of
U.S. health care cost growth--ignoring that medicines account for a
small share of overall health spending. Many countries impose price
controls and restrict access to medicines in order to contain costs.
That is not the system we have here in the United States; nor should it
be. The U.S. fosters innovation and leads the world in drug discovery
and development with PhRMA members conducting nearly 80 percent of
their R&D in the United States. Importing or referencing price controls
used in other countries in the U.S. would challenge the innovation
model in a country the size of the U.S.
The U.S. relies on its competitive marketplace to manage costs,
while encouraging the development of new therapies. Because of the
ecosystem that exists in the U.S., patients enjoy access to innovative
medicines far earlier than patients in countries with centralized price
controls. Furthermore, most crosscountry comparisons focus solely on
the list prices of medicines and exclude from calculations the steep
discounts that are required in U.S. public programs such as Medicaid
and the rebates negotiated by insurers and pharmacy benefit managers in
Medicare Part D and the commercial market. In addition, these
comparisons often only include the list prices of brand-name medicines
even when lower-cost generic versions are available and widely used.
Instead of referencing price, AbbVie recommends policymakers focus
on reforms that address foreign freeloading in new trade agreements or
increasing enforcement of current agreements. We support enhancements
to trade agreements to balance share of investment costs. The United
States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), while not yet implemented,
contains improvements in intellectual property protections as well as
provisions requiring transparency in pricing and reimbursement
mechanisms. These elements are critical to ensuring trading partners
like Mexico and Canada appropriately value innovation, allowing
innovative biopharmaceutical companies to continue bringing new
medicines to the market.
Question. What are some of your ideas on how we can ensure
Americans aren't shouldering the full cost of pharmaceuticals?
Answer. Providing discounts to the patient at the point of sale is
an effective way of ensuring that patients can see lower out-of-pocket
costs. However, this is just the start. AbbVie believes that more must
be done.
The Medicare Part D benefit design contributes to making innovative
therapies cost-prohibitive for Medicare patients because patients are
charged out-of-pocket costs based on a medicine's list price, which
does not reflect the rebates that Medicare receives.
AbbVie believes it is important to alleviate the burdens that
patients face due to Medicare Part D out-of-pocket costs. AbbVie
supports solutions like a patient out-of-pocket cap in Part D and
smoothing patient out-of-pocket payments over a full year, so patients
have some predictability with respect to their out-of-pocket costs.
In addition, AbbVie is prepared to step up and discuss how
companies like ours can shoulder more of the burden of a patient's out-
of-pocket expenses.
As policymakers consider the impact of addressing out-of-pocket
costs in Medicare Part D, questions may arise around whether it will
lead to unnecessary utilization and wasteful spending. for specialty
medicines, increased utilization should not be misunderstood as
unnecessary or wasteful. Part D plans have tools, like step therapy
requirements for patients to first try lower cost alternatives before a
specialty medicine would be covered and prior authorization
requirements before a specialty medicine would be covered, to manage
the utilization of the majority of higher cost specialty medicines.
These tools ensure patients try a less costly medication first and have
met the clinical criteria for taking the specialty drug prescribed and
serve the function that an out-of-pocket cost obligation on patients
might serve to prevent unnecessary use.
foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
Question. President Trump and Secretary Azar have both repeatedly
described their frustrations with ``foreign freeloading'' of U.S. drugs
in the last year.
``When foreign governments extort unreasonably low prices from U.S.
drug makers, Americans have to pay more to subsidize the enormous cost
of research and development. . . . It's unfair and it's ridiculous, and
it's not going to happen any longer.''
Do you agree that because of foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems, U.S. patients and innovators are shouldering the
burden for financing medical advances?
How do foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement systems affect
our prescription drug costs?
Are foreign governments taking note of the concerns being raised by
the Trump administration and have they responded in any way?
Has there been any noticeable change in any of our trade agreements
since these concerns have been raised by the Trump Administration?
Answer. The focus on U.S. versus ex-U.S. prices for pharmaceuticals
creates an erroneous impression that medicines are the major driver of
U.S. health-care cost growth--ignoring that medicines account for a
small share of overall health spending. Many countries impose price
controls and restrict access to medicines in order to contain costs.
That is not the system we have here in the United States; nor should it
be. The U.S. fosters innovation and leads the world in drug discovery
and development with PhRMA members conducting nearly 80% of their R&D
in the United States. Importing or referencing price controls used in
other countries in the U.S. would challenge the innovation model in a
country the size of the U.S.
The U.S. relies on its competitive marketplace to manage costs,
while encouraging the development of new therapies. Because of the
ecosystem that exists in the U.S., patients enjoy access to innovative
medicines far earlier than patients in countries with centralized price
controls. Furthermore, most crosscountry comparisons focus solely on
the list prices of medicines and exclude from calculations the steep
discounts that are required in U.S. public programs such as Medicaid
and the rebates negotiated by insurers and pharmacy benefit managers in
Medicare Part D and the commercial market. In addition, these
comparisons often only include the list prices of brand-name medicines
even when lower-cost generic versions are available and widely used.
Instead of referencing price, AbbVie recommends policymakers focus
on reforms that address foreign freeloading in new trade agreements or
increasing enforcement of current agreements. We support enhancements
to trade agreements to balance share of investment costs. The United
States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), while not yet implemented,
contains improvements in intellectual property protections as well as
provisions requiring transparency in pricing and reimbursement
mechanisms. These elements are critical to ensuring trading partners
like Mexico and Canada appropriately value innovation, allowing
innovative biopharmaceutical companies to continue bringing new
medicines to the market.
medicaid closed formulary proposals
Question. In an attempt to bring down drug costs, various states
have been exploring whether to exclude certain drugs from its Medicaid
program. for example, the state of Massachusetts' recently asked CMS
for permission to create a closed formulary where the state Medicaid
program would pick at least one drug per therapeutic class. CMS denied
their waiver request citing violation of federal law, but this proposal
does bring up important questions on how to contain drug prices in
state Medicaid programs.
If the principles of the Medicare Part D program--including the
necessary patient protections--were applied to state Medicaid programs,
do you think it lower drugs costs while ensuring access to patients?
Answer. Medicaid patients currently have broad access to medicines
with nominal co-pay amounts in exchange for steep mandatory rebates
provided by manufacturers. While the question does not specify what
``principles of the Medicare Part D program'' or ``necessary patient
protections'' are proposed to be applied to State Medicaid programs,
depending on the specific details that might be proposed, exclusionary
formularies could upset this broad patient access in Medicaid without
achieving corresponding savings over the already-existing steep
mandatory rebates.
medicaid ``best price''
Question. In the Trump administration's Blueprint, they suggested
that because drug manufactures have to give Medicaid the ``best price''
on drugs, there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers--both government and commercial--than what is already offered
under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Does the Medicaid ``best price'' requirement encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices?
What, if any, changes would you suggest we make to the program?
Answer. AbbVie has not found that best price requirements have
created incentives in the system to increase initial prices.
outcomes-based contracts
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you highlight your
support of outcomes-based contracts and how we need to be shifting our
system toward that approach.
How will these contracts lower drug costs for patients in both the
near term and long-term?
How will they lower overall health-care costs for our Federal
programs?
What have the preliminary results looked like so far?
Answer. Value-based arrangements can be an effective and market-
based solution to managing overall health-care costs when driven by
patient outcomes. Studies have found that 38 percent of payers with
outcomes-based contracts experience improved patient outcomes and 33
percent experience plan health-care cost savings. Additionally, plans
with outcomes-based contracts have been found to have a 28 percent
lower patient co-payment. All of these factors work towards moving
payment for prescription medicines away from volume-based approaches to
value-based models in a manner that appropriately balances patient
access with the appropriate use of medications to lower overall health-
care costs.
At AbbVie, we believe all our products provide value to patients
and the larger health care system and are interested in the
possibilities that could arise through value-based contracting. To
further foster value-based arrangements, we support the reforms
included in the Patient Affordability, Value and Efficiency (PAVE) Act,
introduced by Senators Cassidy (R-LA) and Warner (D-VA).
transparency/point of sale
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you express your
support for the Trump Administration's proposal to allow manufacturers
to provide PBMs up-front discounts that are passed onto patients at the
point-of-sale.
Do you feel like this proposal will make the transactions within
the drug supply chain more transparent?
If so, would this transparency bring down drug costs--overall and
for specialty drugs?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclud[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the Administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
the relationship between wholesalers and manufacturers
Question. When talking about the pharmaceutical supply chain, a lot
of focus has been placed on the Pharmacy Benefit Manager. But there's
another side of the equation that I'd like to ask about.
How do wholesalers negotiate pricing with manufacturers?
What impact does this have on drug costs?
What incentives or disincentives do they have to contain price
increases?
Answer. Wholesalers provide efficiencies in the distribution of
products for manufacturers, pharmacies and providers. They track supply
needs and maintain inventory levels consistent with patient need. They
also provide manufacturers with data and information related to both
historical purchasing patterns and projected future need, allowing
manufacturers to more accurately predict future supply needed in the
market to determine production needs. Wholesalers are also a ``one-stop
shop'' for sourcing medications and in some cases provide payer
contracting efficiencies through their Pharmacy Services Administrative
Organizations. This allows pharmacies to gain access to payer networks
efficiently, without negotiating with individual payers.
Manufacturers pay bona fide fees to wholesalers cover the costs of
the services described above.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
proposed rebate rule
Question. As has been done in many other settings, drug
manufacturers said during the hearing that one reason list prices for
drugs are high is that pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) demand
larger and larger rebates in order for the drug to receive favorable
placement on a formulary. You and your colleagues who testified during
the hearing stated if the Administration's proposal on changes to the
anti-kickback safe harbor for pharmaceutical rebates took effect, your
company would likely lower list price.
Like many Oregonians, I am skeptical drug manufacturers would
voluntarily lower their prices. Therefore, would you support
legislation that would (1) make similar changes the administration has
put forward related to Part D and Medicaid managed care, (2) change the
rebate system in a similar way to the proposal for the commercial
market, and (3) require drug makers to lower the list price of their
drugs equal to the amount of rebates provided today?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclud[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health-care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified, and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
medicaid drug rebate program
Question. The Medicaid Drug Rebate Program (MDRP) requires
manufacturers to provide a basic rebate and an additional inflationary
rebate for both brand and generic drugs. The inflationary rebate is an
increasingly substantial part of total rebates due in large part to
large increases in drug prices that exceed inflation. Under current
law, this inflationary rebate is capped at 100 percent of Average
Manufacturer Price (AMP). This is the case even when manufacturers
continue to raise their prices well above inflation.
Please provide a list of all of your pharmaceutical products that
have reached the Medicaid AMP rebate cap in any of the 20 quarters from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
For each drug listed in response to question 1, please also provide
a list of which quarters and years each drug hit the cap.
Answer.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRODUCT NAME
NDC 11
QTR/YEAR of AMP CAPs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Androgel 1%, 2.5 G Unit
00051-8425-30
Q1 2015
Dose, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Androgel 1%, 5.0 G Unit
00051-8450-30
Q1 2015
Dose, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Androgel 1.62% 2.5Gm Unit
00051-8462-30
Q2 2017, Q1 2018-Q3 2018
Dose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Androgel 1.62% 1.25Gm Unit
00051-8462-31
Q2 2017, Q1 2018-Q3 2018
Dose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Androgel 1.62% Pump
00051-8462-33
Q2 2017, Q1 2018-Q3 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin, Filmtab Tablets,
00074-2586-60
Q3 2016-Q4 2016
500 Mg, 60'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin XL, Filmtab Tab,
00074-3165-11
Q1 2014-Q4 2015
500 Mg, 10
10'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin XL 500Mg(1
14)
00074-3165-14
Q1 2014-Q4 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin XL, Filmtab Tabs,
00074-3165-41
Q1 2014-Q4 2015
500Mg, 4
14'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin XL, Filmtab
00074-3165-60
Q1 2014-Q4 2015
Tablets, 500 Mg, 60'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin OS, 250Mg/5Ml,
00074-3188-13
Q2 2014-Q3 2014, Q1 2016-
100ML
Q2 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin OS 250Mg/5Ml, 50ML
00074-3188-50
Q2 2014-Q3 2014, Q1 2016-
Q2 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biaxin Filmtab Tablets,
00074-3368-60
Q1 2014, Q3 2014, Q1 2015-
250 Mg, 60'S
Q3 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 120
00074-3045-30
Q1 2014-Q3 2014
Mg, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 120
00074-3045-90
Q1 2014-Q3 2014
Mg, 90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 180
00074-3061-30
Q1 2014
Mg, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 180
00074-3061-90
Q1 2014
Mg, 90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 240
00074-3062-30
Q1 2014
Mg, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 240
00074-3062-90
Q1 2014
Mg, 90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 300
00074-3063-30
Q1 2014
Mg, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 300
00074-3063-90
Q1 2014
Mg, 90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 360
00074-3064-30
Q1 2014-Q2 2014
Mg, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 360
00074-3064-90
Q1 2014-Q2 2014
Mg, 90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA , Tablets, 420
00074-3069-30
Q1 2014
Mg, 30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cardizem LA, Tablets, 420
00074-3069-90
Q1 2014
Mg, 90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depacon 500Mg (100Mg/1ML)
00074-1564-10
Q1 2016, Q4 2016-Q4 2017
10
5ML SDV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakene 250Mg 100Cap
00074-5681-13
Q1 2014, Q3 2014-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakene OS 250Mg/5ML,
00074-5682-16
Q3 2014-Q4 2018
16Oz
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote ER 250Mg 10
10Tab
00074-3826-11
Q1 2015, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote ER 250Mg 100Tab
00074-3826-13
Q1 2015, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote, Sprinkle
00074-6114-11
Q1 2015-Q4 2018
Capsule, 125 Mg, 10-10
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote Sprinkle Capsule,
00074-6114-13
Q1 2015-Q4 2018
125Mg, 100
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote 125Mg 100Tab
00074-6212-13
Q1 2014, Q3 2014-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote 250Mg 100Tab
00074-6214-13
Q1 2014, Q3 2014-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote 250Mg 500Tab
00074-6214-53
Q1 2014, Q3 2014-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote 500Mg 100Tab
00074-6215-13
Q1 2014, Q3 2014-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote 500Mg 500Tab
00074-6215-53
Q1 2014, Q3 2014-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote ER 500Mg 10X10Tab
00074-7126-11
Q4 2014-Q1 2015, Q1 2017-
Q3 2017, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote ER 500Mg 100Tab
00074-7126-13
Q4 2014-Q1 2015, Q1 2017-
Q3 2017, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Depakote ER 500Mg 500Tab
00074-7126-53
Q4 2014-Q1 2015, Q1 2017-
Q3 2017, Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira 40Mg/0.8ML (2
00074-3799-02
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Syringes)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira Ped Crohns Starter
00074-3799-03
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Pack, 40Mg
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira Ped Crohns Starter
00074-3799-06
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Pack, 40Mg
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira 40Mg/0.8 ML (2
00074-4339-02
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Pens)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira, Crohn's, 40Mg/0.8
00074-4339-06
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
ML (6 Pens)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira, Psoriasis, 40Mg/
00074-4339-07
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
0.8ML (4 Pens)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira, Single Dose
00074-6347-02
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Syringe, 10 Mg/0.2ML
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Humira 20Mg/0.4ML (2
00074-9374-02
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Syringes)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
K-Tab, Filmtabs, 8Meq,
00074-3058-41
Q3 2018
600Mg, 100Ct
------------------------------------------------------------------------
K-Tab, Filmtabs, 8Meq,
00074-3058-46
Q3 2018
600Mg, 1000Ct
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Marinol 2.5 Mg Capsules,
00051-0021-21
Q2 2016
60'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Marinol 5 Mg Capsules,
00051-0022-21
Q3 2018
60'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Marinol 10 Mg Capsules,
00051-0023-21
Q2 2014, Q3 2017
60'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mavik, Tablets, 1 Mg,
00074-2278-13
Q4 2014, Q2 2015
100'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Niaspan, Tablets, 500 Mg,
00074-3074-90
Q1 2014, Q2 2015, Q1 2016-
90'S
Q3 2016, Q1 2017-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Niaspan, Tablets, 750 Mg,
00074-3079-90
Q1 2014, Q4 2014, Q2 2015-
90'S
Q2 2016, Q4 2016-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Niaspan, Tablets, 1000 Mg,
00074-3080-90
Q1 2014, Q1 2015-Q2 2015,
90'S
Q1 2016-Q3 2016, Q1 2017-
Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Niaspan, Tablets, 500Mg,
00074-3265-90
Q4 2017-Q4 2018
90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Niaspan, Tablets, 750Mg
00074-3274-90
Q1 2018-Q4 2018
90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Niaspan, Tablets, 1000Mg
00074-3275-90
Q4 2017-Q4 2018
90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prometrium 100 Mg
00032-1708-01
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Capsules, 100'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prometrium 200 Mg
00032-1711-01
Q2 2016-Q4 2018
Capsules, 100'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Simcor 500Mg/20Mg, 90Tab
00074-3312-90
Q3 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Simcor 1000Mg/20Mg, 90Tab
00074-3455-90
Q1 2014, Q3 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tarka ER 2Mg/180Mg, 100Tab
00074-3287-13
Q2 2015-Q4 2015, Q2 2016-
Q4 2016, Q2 2017-Q4
2017, Q2 2018-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tarka 1Mg/240Mg, 100Tab
00074-3288-13
Q2 2015-Q4 2015, Q2 2016-
Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tarka ER 2Mg/240Mg, 100Tab
00074-3289-13
Q1 2014, Q2 2015-Q4 2015,
Q2 2016-Q4 2016, Q2 2017-
Q4 2017, Q2 2018-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tarka ER 4Mg/240Mg, 100Tab
00074-3290-13
Q1 2014, Q1 2015-Q3 2015,
Q1 2016-Q2 2016, Q4 2016-
Q2 2017, Q4 2017-Q3 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tricor, Tablets, 145Mg,
00074-3189-90
Q3 2018
90Ct Btl
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tricor, Tablets, 48 Mg,
00074-6122-90
Q4 2014-Q1 2015
90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tricor, Tablets, 145 Mg,
00074-6123-90
Q3 2018
90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trilipix, Delayed Release
00074-3161-90
Q2 2017-Q4 2017, Q2 2018-
Cap, 45Mg 90Ct
Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trilipix, Delayed Release
00074-9189-90
Q3 2018-Q4 2018
Cap, 135Mg 90'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trilipix, Delayed Release
00074-9642-90
Q3 2014-Q4 2014, Q2 2015-
Cap, 45Mg 90'S
Q3 2015, Q1 2016, Q3
2016-Q4 2016, Q2 2017-Q4
2017, Q2 2018-Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zemplar, Capsules, 2 Mcg,
00074-4314-30
Q3 2014-Q1 2015, Q3 2015-
30'S
Q4 2015, Q2 2016-Q4
2016, Q2 2017, Q4 2017-
Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zemplar, Capsules, 4 Mcg,
00074-4315-30
Q2 2014-Q4 2015
30'S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Zemplar, Capsules, 1 Mcg,
00074-4317-30
Q4 2014, Q2 2015, Q4
30'S
2015, Q2 2016, Q1 2018-
Q4 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
medicaid drug rebate program compliance
Question. I am concerned about recent reports and legal settlements
surrounding drug manufacturers' failure to comply fully with the
requirements of the MDRP. for example, an analysis by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services office of Inspector General
found that between 2012 and 2016 taxpayers may have overpaid by as much
as $1.3 billion for 10 potentially misclassified drugs. That is why I
introduced the Right Rebate Act with Chairman Grassley to prevent drug
manufacturers from manipulating Medicaid to increase their profits.
However, I continued to be concerned about oversight and manufacturer
compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Accordingly, please describe the following:
Your company's current compliance plan and procedures used to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program including internal audits or other checks you use to identify
compliance vulnerabilities.
Answer. AbbVie has established and maintains a comprehensive
compliance plan and procedures to ensure MDRP compliance, the core
components of which include policies and procedures relating to MDRP
issues, routine internal and external monitoring and auditing, and a
dedicated governance team to monitor and address any potential MDRP
issues.
Question. Any past or ongoing issues of non-compliance.
Answer. We are not aware of past or ongoing issues of non-
compliance with MDRP legal requirements.
Question. Any corrective actions taken to address identified
problems or issues of noncompliance with the MDRP and how such steps
were communicated to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Answer. We are not aware of past or ongoing issues of non-
compliance with MDRP legal requirements.
Question. Any steps taken to improve compliance and ensure that all
Medicaid drug rebates owed to the Federal Government and the States are
paid in full.
Answer. AbbVie conducts periodic reviews of its compliance plan and
updates its policies, procedures, and monitoring plans as needed to
ensure the company's continued implementation of MDRP legal
requirements.
bonus payments tied to specific drugs
Question. I am concerned by the potential for employee financial
incentives to encourage high launch prices and price increases for
prescription drugs.
Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to sales or
revenue targets of a single product your company sells? Has it ever
been? If yes, please state the product or products to which your
salary, bonus or other compensation was tied.
Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to either revenue
or net income of the company as a whole? Has it ever been? If yes,
please explain what assumptions about price increases are used when the
compensation committee sets revenue or net income goals. Does the
compensation committee provide any guidance to executives in regards to
the amount of revenue that the company will generate from price
increases versus volume growth?
Answer. To determine Mr. Gonzalez's 2018 annual incentive
compensation (sometimes referred to as a bonus), net revenues, income
before taxes, and Humira sales were three of several quantitative
financial metrics that were considered in addition to qualitative
factors. At most, a single quantitative financial metric had the
potential to impact up to 3 percent of Mr. Gonzalez's total
compensation, subject to additional qualitative and relative analyses.
No other compensation element, beyond the annual incentive
compensation, includes Humira sales, revenue, or net income as a
performance metric. While some specific details have differed somewhat,
the foregoing has generally been true in prior years as well.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. When new products enter the market, do drug companies set
high initial rebates and then provide deep rebates in order to gain
access to insurance plan's formularies?
Answer. Over the last 2 years, AbbVie has brought Mavyret and
Orilissa to patients. Mavyret is for the treatment of adults with
chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection across all major genotypes,
and Orilissa is the first and only oral gonadotropin-releasing hormone
antagonist specifically developed for women with moderate to severe
endometriosis pain. Mavyret was introduced with a list price below
competitive alternatives and Orilissa was introduced at a list price
below the current standard of care.
Rebates are a form of price competition that results from the
aggressive negotiations that occur between health plans (and their
representative PBMs) and pharmaceutical companies to provide patients
with access to medicines and treatments that can best help patients
manage their medical conditions. Plans/PBMs create formularies to list
brand and generic medicines.
Question. If CMS finalizes the rebate rule, do you anticipate
future products entering the market with significantly lower initial
list prices?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclud[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the Administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
Question. What are your recommendations for lowering prices for the
40 percent of drugs that do not offer rebates in Medicare Part D?
Answer. A majority of the discussion about the cost of prescription
drugs has been focused on list prices. We agree that price should be
part of the discussion, however we also know that solutions targeting
list price alone are not enough. Our experience in launching a low list
price HCV medicine made it clear to AbbVie and patients that list price
reductions will not always address patient affordability and access.
Providing discounts to the patient at the point of sale is an
effective way of ensuring that patients can see lower out-of-pocket
costs. However, this is just the start. AbbVie believes that more must
be done.
The Medicare Part D benefit design contributes to making innovative
therapies cost-prohibitive for Medicare patients because patients are
charged out-of-pocket costs based on a medicine's list price, which
does not reflect the rebates that Medicare receives.
AbbVie believes it is important to alleviate the burdens that
patients face due to Medicare Part D out-of-pocket costs. AbbVie
supports solutions like a patient out-of-pocket cap in Part D and
smoothing patient out-of-pocket payments over a full year, so patients
have some predictability with respect to their out-of-pocket costs.
In addition, AbbVie is prepared to step up and discuss how
companies like ours can shoulder more of the burden of a patient's out-
of-pocket expenses.
As policymakers consider the impact of addressing out-of-pocket
costs in Medicare Part D, questions may arise around whether it will
lead to unnecessary utilization and wasteful spending. for specialty
medicines, increased utilization should not be misunderstood as
unnecessary or wasteful. Part D plans have tools, like step therapy
requirements for patients to first try lower cost alternatives before a
specialty medicine would be covered and prior authorization
requirements before a specialty medicine would be covered, to manage
the utilization of the majority of higher cost specialty medicines.
These tools ensure patients try a less costly medication first and have
met the clinical criteria for taking the specialty drug prescribed and
serve the function that an out-of-pocket cost obligation on patients
might serve to prevent unnecessary use.
Question. In the health insurance plans that you offer your
employees, do you ask your insurers to pass through the full
manufacturer rebates to the beneficiaries?
Answer. AbbVie's benefit plans are structured to ensure employees
share in the cost of their prescription drugs but are also able to
access and afford their medicines, with the goal of maximizing
prescription drug adherence.
Currently our maximum co-pays and out-of-pocket maximums ensure
patient access and allow us to utilize rebates to reduce premiums. Our
benefit includes a deductible and 25-percent co-pay for prescription
medicines that is capped at $125 for a 30-day supply. For mail order or
specialty pharmacy, there is a 20-percent co-pay that is capped at $250
for a 90-day supply. Additionally, our benefit plans include an annual
out-of-pocket maximum. Our prescription drug adherence levels are high
year over year across many disease states.
To increase transparency, members receive a receipt at retail or
via mail/specialty pharmacies that reflects their share of the
discounted price of the drug.
AbbVie has considered the impact of passing through rebates to
employees and have found a minimal impact on employee out-of-pocket
expenses for all medicines, including specialty. We have found that it
would only reduce employee spending if the rebate reduced the co-
payment obligation below $125 for drugs filled at retail or $250 for
mail order or specialty drugs.
Employees who would benefit the most in this scenario would be
those in high deductible health plans before they meet their
deductible, however it could slow the time in which they would reach
their deductible.
While we have found that providing rebates at point of sale is most
beneficial to enrollees whose benefit design does not include a maximum
co-pay and therefore may not be beneficial to AbbVie employees, we are
continuing to assess the impact in a manner that ensures we can
maintain the current employee costsharing levels in our benefit design
that drive adherence.
Question. The systems for pricing and distributing drugs are opaque
and difficult to understand. What are your recommendations for
increasing transparency in how your companies set the list prices for
drugs, and for improving transparency in the supply chain for
prescription drugs? Would you support federal standards for
transparency in setting the list prices for drugs?
Answer. AbbVie supports transparency that is accurate, timely,
comprehensive and meaningful to patients as they make better-informed
decisions about their health care. This includes broad transparency
across the entire health-care system and consistent requirements,
including for all entities in the drug supply chain, rather than a
narrow focus on one individual sector. It is also important that any
new transparency requirements are prospective and balanced with
appropriate protections for confidential, proprietary information so as
not to undermine competition in the marketplace. As Congress considers
approaches to address transparency at the Federal level, AbbVie
welcomes further discussion on this important topic.
Question. In nearly every sector of the health-care industry,
Medicare, Medicaid, employers, and insurers are moving away from fee-
for-service payments to reimbursements based on value and performance.
Prescription drugs and medical devices were the glaring exceptions to
this trend until recently. How many of your drugs are included in
valuebased contracts and how many patients are benefiting from them?
How do these valuebased contracts work to lower drug prices for both
patients and taxpayers?
Answer. Value-based arrangements can be an effective and market-
based solution to managing overall health-care costs when driven by
patient outcomes. Studies have found that 38 percent of payers with
outcomes-based contracts experience improved patient outcomes and 33
percent experience plan health-care cost savings. Additionally, plans
with outcomes-based contracts have been found to have a 28 percent
lower patient co-payment. All of these factors work towards moving
payment for prescription medicines away from volume-based approaches to
value-based models in a manner that appropriately balances patient
access with the appropriate use of medications to lower overall health-
care costs.
At AbbVie, we believe all our products provide value to patients
and the larger health care system and are interested in the
possibilities that could arise through value-based contracting. To
further foster value-based arrangements, we support the reforms
included in the Patient Affordability, Value and Efficiency (PAVE) Act,
introduced by Senators Cassidy (R-LA) and Warner (D-VA).
Question. Last year, Senator Portman and I did an investigation on
the pricing of an opioid overdose reversal drug called EVZIO,
manufactured by Kaleo. Kaleo increased the price of EVZIO from $575 in
2014 to $4,100 in 2017. We found that the best price Medicare was able
to get for EVZIO, about $4,000, was much higher than the price other
federal programs and private insurers were able to get. It seemed that
Kaleo was able to get this higher price of $4,000 from Medicare by
helping doctors fill out paperwork showing that the drug was medically
necessary, even though there are cheaper alternatives on the market. As
a result of the investigation, Kaleo announced it will bring a generic
version of the drug to market at only $168 per pack. Are any of your
companies providing medical necessity paperwork to doctors in order to
get your drugs covered by Medicare?
Answer. Unlike the scenarios raised in this question, AbbVie does
not have a practice of completing medical necessity sections on any
reimbursement forms, purporting to make medical necessity
determinations that should be made by physicians, or submitting medical
necessity forms to payors on behalf of patients or physicians.
Question. In 2017, the Rand Corporation estimated that biosimilar
drugs, which are competitors to complex, biologic drugs, could save the
United States more than $50 billion over the next decade. Some of you
have also argued that increasing the use of biosimilar drugs would help
lower drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers. What is delaying the
uptake of biosimilar drugs in the United States? What policies do you
recommend to increase the development of biosimilar drugs?
Answer. AbbVie believes that FDA's current, patient-centered and
science-based approach to the development of standards governing the
approval of biosimilars--including interchangeable biosimilars--helps
to build a sustainable biosimilar market as patients and health care
providers become more exposed to, and comfortable with, these products.
The agency's approach best ensures the approval of quality, safe, and
effective biosimilar products--products that will instill confidence
among patients and prescribers. A robust and competitive biologic
marketplace cannot survive without this stakeholder confidence and
support.
Any policies regarding the biologics market must take into
consideration the fundamental differences between small molecule
generics and biosimilars. Consequently, competition between biosimilars
and their reference products will necessarily more closely resemble
brand-to-brand competition. A key principle for encouraging appropriate
market competition for biological products, then, is ensuring a level
playing field for all biologic products. Artificially favoring either
biosimilars or innovator biologics in coverage or reimbursement creates
market inefficiencies by reducing incentives to compete on price.
Moreover, policies designed to artificially drive usage of either the
biosimilar or the reference biologic risk confusing stakeholders
regarding the clear regulatory distinctions between biosimilars and
small-molecule generics. Robust competition should therefore be driven
by an increasing number of innovator and biosimilar products competing
to treat disease at the lowest possible cost.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
Question. The United States is one of the only countries in the
world to allow prescription drug manufacturers to advertise directly to
consumers through magazines, billboards, radio, and television
commercials. While I will not argue that it is beneficial to educate
consumers about an unfamiliar disease and encourage them to seek
medical help, most commercials from all of your companies recommend
asking about a specific brand name drug, not a medical condition.
Furthermore, even if your advertisements follow all FDA rules and list
medication side effects, they also almost always list these while a
smiling, apparently healthy person is walking on a beach.
Researchers say that this type of imagery, combined with viewing
hours of drug commercials each month, leads consumers to underestimate
the risks associated with medications. for the past decade, studies
have shown that aggressive direct-toconsumer advertising is associated
with rising drug prices and an increase in inappropriate drug
prescriptions.
Since researchers have concluded that consumers are
misunderstanding the benefits and risks described in your ads, what
further policies could help you and your colleagues ensure that you are
educating patients in a clear manner?
Answer. We believe it is unlikely that DTC advertising would lead
to an ``increase in inappropriate prescriptions'' for AbbVie's largely
specialty-product portfolio. Both commercial insurance and Part D plans
have tools, like step therapy requirements for patients to first try
lower cost alternatives before a specialty medicine would be covered
and prior authorization requirements before a specialty medicine would
be covered to manage the utilization of the majority of higher cost
specialty medicines. These tools ensure patients try a less costly
medication first and have met the clinical criteria for taking the
specialty drug prescribed.
Further, we believe that consumers understand the benefits and
risks described in AbbVie's advertisements. AbbVie goes beyond the FDA
regulations to ensure its advertising it accurate, truthful, not
misleading, and reflects an appropriate balance between the risks and
benefits of the drugs. This includes complying with PhRMA's voluntary
principles on direct to consumer advertising.\2\ Some of the key
principles addressing the issues of educating patients in a clear
manner include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See http://phrmadocs.phrma.org/files/dmfile/PhRMA--Guiding--
Principles_2018.pdf.

Companies that choose to feature actors in the roles of
health-care professionals in a DTC television or print
advertisement that identifies a particular product should
acknowledge in the advertisement that actors are being used.
Likewise, if actual health-care professionals appear in such
advertisements, the advertisement should include an
acknowledgment if the health-care professional is compensated
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
for the appearance.

DTC television advertising that identifies a product by name
should clearly state the health conditions for which the
medicine is approved and the major risks associated with the
medicine being advertised.

DTC television and print advertising should be designed to
achieve a balanced presentation of both the benefits and the
risks associated with the advertised prescription medicine.
Specifically, risks and safety information, including the
substance of relevant boxed warnings, should be presented with
reasonably comparable prominence to the benefit information, in
a clear, conspicuous and neutral manner, and without
distraction from the content. In addition, DTC television
advertisements should support responsible patient education by
directing patients to health care professionals as well as to
print advertisements and/or websites where additional benefit
and risk information is available.

All DTC advertising should respect the seriousness of the
health conditions and the medicine being advertised.
AbbVie believes these are important principles that all
pharmaceutical advertisements should follow. Our approach of listening
to, and learning from, consumers, caregivers, physicians and other
health-care professionals continues to confirm our belief that
accurate, balanced and timely information about our prescription
medicines and the conditions they treat is an essential component of
our commitment to putting patient health first.
pharmaceutical companies continue to raise prices
Question. As you are well aware, high prescription drug prices are
the number one concern for Americans and their families. According to
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the average
American spends around $1,208 annually on prescription drugs. There
have been several instances where brand name or even generic drugs that
have been on the market for years continue to increase in price.
One of the most well known examples is Mylan's increase of the
price of EpiPen from less than $100 in 2007 to more than $600 in 2016.
Another example, is the everincreasing price of insulin. Sanofi
increased the price of a vial of Lantus from $88.20 in 2007 to $307.20
in 2017. And those are just a small sample of price increases.
Why don't we see price decreases for drugs that have been on the
market for years without new formulations or added benefit?
Answer. Price often does decrease for drugs that have been on the
market for years. The U.S. has a robust and well-functioning system
with fast entry of generic medicines following the expiration of patent
and market exclusivities for brand medications. When generics medicines
enter the market price reductions can be dramatic. In fact, GAO has
found that prices are typically reduced by 20 percent for each new
generic entrant to the market. From 2005 to 2013 prices of medicines
commonly used to prevent cardiovascular disease dropped 92 percent. The
daily cost of the top 10 therapeutic classes of medicines most commonly
used by Medicare Part D enrollees dropped from $1.50 to $0.77 from 2006
to 2013.
In addition to dramatic decreases in price, generic uptake is swift
in the U.S. When a generic version of a medicine becomes available for
the first time, it captures an average of three-quarters of the market
within 3 months. Some generics captures as much as 90 percent in that
same time period. Utilization is also the highest in the U.S. when
compared to uptake in other markets, such as the UK, France, Japan,
Germany, and Australia. According to the 2018 Medicare Trustees Report,
the generic utilization rate for Part D beneficiaries has steadily
increased each year, from 75 percent in 2010 to 88 percent in 2017.
Competition is also robust among branded products. From 2005 to
2011, the time only one medicine was available in its class declined
from a median of 10 years in the 1970s to close to 2 years from 2005-
2011. Half of second medicines were approved within 2.3 years and one
quarter were approved within just 4 months. These competitive forces
lead to manufacturers offering discounts. An analysis by IQVIA found
that net prices for brands continued to increase more slowly than
invoice prices from 2013 to 2016, with average price increases for
brands at 9.2 percent (down from 12 percent in 2015) and net price
growth increases at 3.5 percent. For the same year, the analysis found
that rebates, discounts, and other price concessions offset price
growth for brand medicines by 62 percent.
pay for delay
Question. Pay for delay is a tactic that more and more branded drug
manufacturers have been using to stifle competition from lower-cost
generic manufacturers. This allows you to sidestep competition by
offering patent settlements that pay generic companies not to bring
lower-cost alternatives to market.
These ``pay-for-delay'' patent settlements benefit both brand-name
pharmaceutical companies by helping them avoid costly patent litigation
and general manufacturers by rewarding them a hefty sum to delay
entering the market with a cheaper drug alternative. However, these
deals do not benefit consumers. According to an FTC study, these
anticompetitive deals cost consumers and taxpayers $3.5 billion in
higher drug costs every year.
Does your company partake in pay-for-delay settlements?
Why would a pharmaceutical company enter into a pay-for delay
agreement?
Do you think these agreements stifle competition and prevent
generic alternatives to your branded medications?
Answer. ``Pay-for-delay'' is not a self-defining phrase. With
respect to the term ``pay,'' patent litigation settlements, like all
litigation settlements, involve compromise in which both sides believe
they are getting value from the resolution. There is no definition
explaining the circumstances under which that value would implicate the
term ``pay'' in ``pay-fordelay'' for purposes of these questions. And
with respect to ``delay'' virtually all patent settlements provide for
the generic competitor to enter the market before the expiration of the
patent at issue. So if the alternative resolution of a patent lawsuit
would be the innovator company continuing to enforce its patent until
expiration, then such a settlement, no matter what value is exchanged,
would actually accelerate competition, not delay it.
drug rebate rule
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services'
(HHS) office of Inspector General (OIG) promulgated a new regulation to
remove regulatory safe harbor protections under the Anti-Kickback
Statute (AKS) for rebates on prescription drugs rebates paid by
manufactures to PBMs under Medicare Part D and for Medicaid managed
care organizations (MCOs). The OIG proposal attempts to ban most
rebates by eliminating their regulatory protections.
The rule is predicted to increase net drug costs in its early
years. The CMS actuaries estimate it would cost $196 billion over 10
years. Despite this high price tag, the beneficiary benefits are
limited. The proposed rule notes that under the CMS Actuary's analysis,
the majority of beneficiaries would see an increase in their total out-
of-pocket payments and premium costs; reductions in total cost sharing
will exceed total premium increases.
I wanted to ask a question about the administration's rebate rule,
which I understand that many of the drug manufacturers, and your main
trade association, strongly support. According to an analysis of the
rule by the Office of Actuaries at CMS, drug manufacturers are likely
to initially retain 15 percent of the current rebates as higher net
drug prices.
Given that estimate, can you provide the committee with any
assurances that prices will not increase under this proposed rule?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclude[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the Administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. According to an article recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, medical marketers spent nearly $30
billion dollars in 2016, up from $17 billion in 1997. Direct-to-
Consumer (DTC) advertising had the biggest percentage increase: from
$2.1 billion, or 11.9 percent of all medical marketing, in 1997 to $9.6
billion, or 32 percent of total spending, in 2016.
Can each of you please provide what your ratio of spending on sales
and marketing to research and development is today?
Answer. AbbVie spends more on research and development than on
global sales, marketing, and promotion costs. The global sales,
marketing, and promotion spend in 2018 across all AbbVie products was
$4.24 billion. This is less than the $5.26 billion AbbVie spent on
research and development in 2018. And AbbVie's research and development
spend does not include acquired inprocess research and development
($424 million in 2018) or money invested externally for technology,
pharmaceutical compounds, or acquisitions. for example, AbbVie acquired
Pharmacyclics for $20.8 billion in 2015 and Stemcentrx for $6.4 billion
in 2016. The acquisition of both companies enhanced AbbVie's pipeline,
research and development, and clinical programs.
price-gouging
Answer. Sanofi, as I understand it, has made a pledge to the public
to limit its price increases to the national health expenditures growth
projection.
Would your company commit to a cap on annual price increases as
part of your PhRMA membership criteria?
Answer. With respect to the question's proposed collective
agreement by PhRMA members to cap annual price increases, we note that
in 1993, PhRMA (then known as PMA, the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Association) sought review of such a proposal from the Antitrust
Division of the Department of Justice. The Department of Justice opined
that the proposed agreement for PhRMA members to collectively agree to
limit their price increases would be per se unlawful under federal
antitrust laws, even though the proposal was made ``in response to
concerns about controlling health care costs.'' (Oct. 1, 1993 letter
from Anne K. Bingaman, Assistant U.S. Attorney General, available at
https://www.justice.gov/atr/response-pharmaceutical-manufacturers-
associationsrequest-business-review-letter (``The PMA proposal is an
arrangement among competitors that limits individual pricing decisions
on its face. . . . An agreement among independent competitors that
interferes with free and open price competition by restraining
individual pricing decisions is a per se violation of the Sherman
Act.'').) The Department of Justice said it ``intend[ed] to bring suit
to challenge the program if PMA and its members go forward with its
proposal.'' AbbVie could not support a proposal that the Department of
Justice is on record as saying is unlawful and against which it would
file suit to block.
As for individual action, the same Department of Justice opinion
discussed above noted that, while collective agreements among
competitors raised antitrust violations, an individual company's
decision to limit its own price increases would not be problematic.
AbbVie in January 2017 became one of the first pharmaceutical companies
to commit to limiting increases of its list prices. AbbVie committed to
not more than one, single-digit price increase annually. AbbVie has
abided by that commitment.
Question. What policies would you propose to help ensure lower
launch prices for new drugs?
Answer. A majority of the discussion about the cost of prescription
drugs has been focused on list prices. We agree that price should be
part of the discussion, however we also know that solutions targeting
list price alone are not enough. Our experience in launching a low list
price HCV medicine made it clear to AbbVie and patients that list price
reductions will not always address patient affordability and access.
Providing discounts to the patient at the point of sale is an
effective way of ensuring that patients can see lower out-of-pocket
costs. However, this is just the start. AbbVie believes that more must
be done.
The Medicare Part D benefit design contributes to making innovative
therapies cost-prohibitive for Medicare patients because patients are
charged out-of-pocket costs based on a medicine's list price, which
does not reflect the rebates that Medicare receives.
AbbVie believes it is important to alleviate the burdens that
patients face due to Medicare Part D out-of-pocket costs. AbbVie
supports solutions like a patient outof-pocket cap in Part D and
smoothing patient out-of-pocket payments over a full year, so patients
have some predictability with respect to their out-of-pocket costs.
In addition, AbbVie is prepared to step up and discuss how
companies like ours can shoulder more of the burden of a patient's out-
of-pocket expenses.
As policymakers consider the impact of addressing out-of-pocket
costs in Medicare Part D, questions may arise around whether it will
lead to unnecessary utilization and wasteful spending. for specialty
medicines, increased utilization should not be misunderstood as
unnecessary or wasteful. Part D plans have tools, like step therapy
requirements for patients to first try lower cost alternatives before a
specialty medicine would be covered and prior authorization
requirements before a specialty medicine would be covered, to manage
the utilization of the majority of higher cost specialty medicines.
These tools ensure patients try a less costly medication first and have
met the clinical criteria for taking the specialty drug prescribed and
serve the function that an out-of-pocket cost obligation on patients
might serve to prevent unnecessary use.
transparency
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mentioned that the
current system of pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) back-end rebates
rarely results in a scenario where the PBM passes on savings to
consumers at the point of sale (POS). The administration recently
proposed a rule to eliminate the anti-kickback statute safe harbor
protections for these drug rebates.
Do you agree that greater transparency should be required to
understand how manufacturers and PBMs are negotiating prices and
rebates to ensure that savings are passed down to beneficiaries?
Answer. AbbVie supports price transparency across all stakeholders
that is accurate, timely, comprehensive, and meaningful to patients as
they make better-
informed decisions about their health care. This includes broad
transparency across the entire health-care system and consistent
requirements, including for all entities in the drug supply chain,
rather than a narrow focus on one individual sector. It is also
important that any new transparency requirements are prospective and
balanced with appropriate protections for confidential, proprietary
information so as not to undermine competition in the marketplace.
pbms
Question. An Axios article from March 7, 2019 highlights the fact
that, while ``pharmaceutical companies put a lot of the blame for high
drug prices on pharmacy benefit managers,'' many large pharmaceutical
companies ``rely on PBMs to manage their own health-care benefits.''
In your role as an employer, does your company contract with a
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) to administer the prescription
drug benefits for your employees and negotiate lower drug costs on your
behalf?
For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the prescription
drug benefit for your employees, how do you utilize the rebates your
PBM negotiates to lower health-care costs or drug costs for your
employee plans and what does your company do with that savings?
Specifically, do the savings go toward lowing premiums?
For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the prescription
drug benefit for your employees, does your PBM offer point-of-sale
rebates to your employees?
Answer. AbbVie does use a PBM to manage pharmacy benefits for its
employees in the U.S. AbbVie's benefit plans are structured to ensure
employees share in the cost of their prescription drugs but are also
able to access and afford their medicines, with the goal of maximizing
prescription drug adherence.
Currently our maximum co-pays and out-of-pocket maximums ensure
patient access and allows us to utilize rebates to reduce premiums. Our
benefit includes a deductible and 25-percent co-pay for prescription
medicines that is capped per prescription at $125 for a 30-day supply.
For mail order or specialty pharmacy, there is a 20-percent co-pay that
is capped per prescription at $250 for a 90-day supply. Additionally,
our benefit plans include an annual out-of-pocket maximum. Our
prescription drug adherence levels are high year over year across many
disease states.
To increase transparency, members receive a receipt at retail or
via mail/specialty pharmacies that reflects their share of the
discounted price of the drug.
AbbVie has considered the impact of passing through rebates to
employees and have found a minimal impact on employee out-of-pocket
expenses for all medicines, including specialty. We have found that it
would only reduce employee spending if the rebate reduced the co-
payment obligation below $125 for drugs filled at retail or $250 for
mail order or specialty drugs.
Employees who would benefit the most in this scenario would be
those in high deductible health plans before they meet their
deductible, however it could slow the time in which they would reach
their deductible.
While we have found that providing rebates at point of sale is most
beneficial to enrollees whose benefit design does not include a maximum
co-pay and therefore may not be beneficial to AbbVie employees, we are
continuing to assess the impact in a manner that ensures we can
maintain the current employee cost-sharing levels in our benefit design
that drive adherence.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. Please describe any policy changes you support that would
result in your company lowering the list prices of its drugs.
Answer. A majority of the discussion about the cost of prescription
drugs has been focused on list prices. We agree that price should be
part of the discussion, however we also know that solutions targeting
list price alone are not enough. Our experience in launching a low list
price HCV medicine made it clear to AbbVie and patients that list price
reductions will not always address patient affordability and access.
Providing discounts to the patient at the point of sale is an
effective way of ensuring that patients can see lower out-of-pocket
costs. However, this is just the start. AbbVie believes that more must
be done.
The Medicare Part D benefit design contributes to making innovative
therapies cost-prohibitive for Medicare patients because patients are
charged out-of-pocket costs based on a medicine's list price, which
does not reflect the rebates that Medicare receives.
AbbVie believes it is important to alleviate the burdens that
patients face due to Medicare Part D out-of-pocket costs. AbbVie
supports solutions like a patient out-of-pocket cap in Part D and
smoothing patient out-of-pocket payments over a full year, so patients
have some predictability with respect to their out-of-pocket costs.
In addition, AbbVie is prepared to step up and discuss how
companies like ours can shoulder more of the burden of a patient's out-
of-pocket expenses.
As policymakers consider the impact of addressing out-of-pocket
costs in Medicare Part D, questions may arise around whether it will
lead to unnecessary utilization and wasteful spending. for specialty
medicines, increased utilization should not be misunderstood as
unnecessary or wasteful. Part D plans have tools, like step therapy
requirements for patients to first try lower cost alternatives before a
specialty medicine would be covered and prior authorization
requirements before a specialty medicine would be covered, to manage
the utilization of the majority of higher cost specialty medicines.
These tools ensure patients try a less costly medication first and have
met the clinical criteria for taking the specialty drug prescribed and
serve the function that an out-of-pocket cost obligation on patients
might serve to prevent unnecessary use.
Question. How much does your company's research and development
portfolio rely on taxpayer-funded research conducted by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)? How many of your company's products are
based, at least in part, on NIH research, and how many are the result
of research funded solely by your company?
Answer. The NIH performs important basic research that helps
scientific understanding. However, AbbVie spends its own money to do
the vast majority of its drug development and clinical trial work,
relying on the more than 8,000 people in research and development to
understand complex diseases and advance medicine. for the eleven AbbVie
drugs sold in the United States that have been approved since 2000, and
the two AbbVie drugs currently under review by the FDA, only two
received funding from the NIH for drug discovery. One of those drugs,
Orilissa, was developed by Neurocrine. Neurocrine received NIH funding
for drug development prior to AbbVie's collaboration with Neurocrine.
For the second, Kaletra, AbbVie's predecessor Abbott Laboratories
received an NIH discovery grant as part of an effort by the NIH to
encourage collaborative research among pharmaceutical manufacturers and
university research centers on protease inhibitors and to explore their
potential to treat HIV, a then uncontrollable and fatal disease. This
grant contributed to the development of one of the two active
ingredients in the drug. This grant, however, represented less than 1
percent of the total funding for Kaletra, with more than 99 percent of
the funding coming from Abbott.
In addition, for AbbVie's two oncology drugs--Venclexta and
Imbruvica--AbbVie has worked cooperatively with the National Cancer
Institute to conduct certain clinical trials. To date, these
cooperative trials have not resulted in any FDA approved indications
for these drugs.
Question. In each of the last 5 years, how much has your company
spent on research and development versus the advertising and marketing
of your products?
Answer. In each of the last four years, AbbVie has spent more on
research and development than it has on sales and marketing.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AbbVie Research
$3.297 billion
$4.285 billion
$4.385 billion
$5.007 billion
$5.259 billion
and PDevelopment
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asset Impairments
.................
.................
.................
.................
$5.070 billion
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reported Research
$3.297 billion
$4.285 billion
$4.385 billion
$5.007 billion
$10.329 billion
and Development
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acquired in-
$352 million
$150 million
$200 million
$327 million
$424 million
process
Presearch and
development
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Global Sales and
$3.652 billion
$3.800 billion
$3.674 billion
$3.830 billion
$4.239 billion
PMarketing
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Sales and marketing includes the cost of AbbVie personnel in the sales and marketing field, related overhead,
the cost to develop marketing and advertising materials, and the cost of placing advertisements.
Question. During the hearing, you mentioned that your company would
be likely to lower the list prices of its drugs if the recent proposal
by the Trump administration to change the current system of rebates was
extended to the private market.
If the policy was extended to the private market, how large would
the list price reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
How will this proposal affect how your company sets the list prices
for new drug products?
If the proposal is finalized and not extended to the private
market, will your company make any list price reductions? If so, how
large would the reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
Answer. There has been significant discussion over the past several
months about proposals to eliminate rebates from Medicare Part D,
Medicaid, and the commercial market culminating in the administration's
publication of a proposed rule to ``expressly exclud[e] from safe
harbor protection under the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS) rebates on
prescription drugs paid by manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers
(PBMs), Part D plans, and Medicaid managed care organizations. The
proposal would create a new safe harbor protecting discounts offered to
patients at the pharmacy counter. Finally, the proposal would create
new safe harbor protection for fixed fee services arrangements between
manufacturers and PBMs.''
AbbVie is encouraged by the goals of the proposed rule to ensure
manufacturer discounts are reflected in and reduce patient cost sharing
under Part D. While we believe the rule is an important step in the
right direction, we also believe more should be done to help reduce the
out-of-pocket cost burden on Medicare Part D patients.
As for what the elimination of rebates might mean to the overall
health care system or pharmaceutical companies, it is premature to
comment on these items until the administration's rule is finalized,
implementation timelines are solidified, and there are specific details
regarding how a new system without rebates will be structured and
function.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan
Question. In June of 2018, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission (MACPAC) unanimously recommended under Recommendation 1.1 in
their annual report to Congress that Congress remove the statutory
requirement that manufacturers blend the average manufacturer price
(AMP) of a brand drug and its authorized generic.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ MACPAC. ``Improving Operations of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program,'' https://www.macpac.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2018/06/Improving-
Operations-of-the-Medicaid-Drug-Rebate-Program.pdf.
This requirement created an unintended loophole. Rather than use
the price of the authorized generic, drug companies can sell its
authorized generic to a corporate subsidiary at an artificially lower
price, and use that lower price to bring down the AMP, which in turn
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lowers the rebate obligation.
Does your company engage in this practice? Has your company ever
engaged in this practice in the past?
Answer. AbbVie does not engage in this practice and has not engaged
in this practice in the past. AbbVie only distributes, and has only
distributed, authorized generic versions of certain of its branded
products through authorized generic distribution and/or supply
agreements with third-parties that are wholly unrelated to AbbVie,
meaning a third-party entity that is not an affiliate or subsidiary of
AbbVie or otherwise owned by, controlled by, or under common control
with, in whole or in part, AbbVie. Those agreements are negotiated by
AbbVie and the third-party at arms-length and in good faith.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
Question. As a portion of your revenue, for what percentage of the
drugs in your portfolio do you offer no rebates? Based on the drugs in
your pipeline, do you foresee that portion growing? for those drugs is
your list price equal to your net price?
Answer. All of AbbVie's on-market medicines have some rebating/
discounting in one or multiple channels and we anticipate all of our
pipeline medicines will be similar.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you generate in US sales
revenue? Please include specific figures.
Answer. AbbVie spent $5.26 billion in research and development in
2018. AbbVie's research and development spend does not include acquired
in-process research and development ($424 million in 2018) or money
invested externally for technology, pharmaceutical compounds or
acquisitions. For example, AbbVie acquired Pharmacyclics for $20.8
billion in 2015 and Stemcentrx for $6.4 billion in 2016. In 2018, the
net revenues for products AbbVie sells in the United States was $21.52
billion. This includes revenues that are split with Janssen for
Imbruvica. While AbbVie's U.S net revenues are higher than its research
and development expense, AbbVie's global net income since it became an
independent company in 2013 is less than the over $50 billion it has
invested in that same time period to bring drugs to market.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? What company functions do you consider to be included
in administration? Please include specific figures.
Answer. AbbVie spends more on research and development than on
global sales, marketing, and promotion costs. The global sales,
marketing, and promotion spend in 2018 across all AbbVie products was
$4.24 billion. This is less than the $5.26 billion AbbVie spent on
research and development in 2018. And AbbVie's research and development
spend does not include acquired inprocess research and development
($424 million in 2018) or money invested externally for technology,
pharmaceutical compounds or acquisitions. for example, AbbVie acquired
Pharmacyclics for $20.8 billion in 2015 and Stemcentrx for $6.4 billion
in 2016. However, adding the $3.16 billion spent in administration,
which includes overhead costs such as corporate human resources,
corporate finance, corporate ethics and compliance, corporate legal,
and corporate information technology, as well as other expenses such as
charitable donations, AbbVie spent a total of $7.4 billion in selling,
marketing, promotion, and administrative expenses (SG&A).
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
sales? What company functions do you consider to be included in sales?
Please include specific figures.
Answer. AbbVie spends more on research and development than on
global sales, marketing, and promotion costs. The global sales,
marketing, and promotion spend in 2018 across all AbbVie products was
$4.24 billion. This is less than the $5.26 billion AbbVie spent on
research and development in 2018. And AbbVie's research and development
spend does not include acquired in-process research and development
($424 million in 2018) or money invested externally for technology,
pharmaceutical compounds or acquisitions. for example, AbbVie acquired
Pharmacyclics for $20.8 billion in 2015 and Stemcentrx for $6.4 billion
in 2016.
Sales and marketing includes the cost of AbbVie personnel in the
sales and marketing field, related overhead, the cost to develop
marketing and advertising materials, and the cost of placing
advertisements.
Question. Why do you advertise for the drugs you manufacture? What
factors do you consider in choosing which drugs you advertise?
Answer. Our goal in advertising is to provide those living with the
conditions that our drugs treat with the best information possible so
they can have an informed discussion with their health-care provider.
For many patients DTC ads are an important source of information about
new medicines, and advertising also plays an important role in raising
awareness of diseases, removing stigma from certain conditions, and
encouraging discussions with their health-care providers.
______
Exhibit 1
Grants Donations Report--2014
(Parentheses represent refunds of previously disclosed payments)
Updated as of 3/31/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recipient
Payment Amount
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
100 Black Men of Atlanta,
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
A and R Educational Group,
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
LLC
A Runners Love
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Academia Medica Del
$(240.57)
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$(309.06)
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$8,800.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$8,900.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$(1,539.53)
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academy of Managed Care
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmacy
Advances in Cosmetic and
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Dermatology, Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Dermatology, Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Dermatology, Inc.
Advances in Targeted
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Therapies
Advocate Health and
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Hospitals Corporation
AIDS Drug Assistance
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Programs Advocacy
Association
AIDS Drug Assistance
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Programs Advocacy
Association
AIDS Drug Assistance
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Programs Advocacy
Association
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$125,000.00
Charitable Donations
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$7,500.00
Charitable Donations
AIDS Project Los Angeles
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Alaska Kidney Patients
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Association
Albert Einstein College of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva
University
Albert Einstein College of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva
University
Albert Einstein College of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine, Division of
Dermatology Attending
Association
Albert Einstein Healthcare
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Network
Albert Einstein Healthcare
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network
Alchemy Communications
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Group, LLC
Alliance Foundation for
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Education in
the Health Professions
Alzheimer's Association
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Academy of
$(8,842.31)
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education, Inc.
American Academy of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education, Inc.
American Academy of
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Neurology Foundation
American Academy of
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Physician Assistants
American Academy of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Physician Assistants
American Academy of Urology
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute--AANI
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Laboratory Animal Science
Foundation
American Association for
$500,000.00
Charitable Donations
the Study of Liver
Diseases
American Association for
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
the Study of Liver
Diseases
American Association for
$500,000.00
Charitable Donations
the Study of Liver
Diseases
American Association for
$137,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
the Study of Liver
Diseases
American Association of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
American Association of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
American Association of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Kidney Patients
American Association of
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Kidney Patients
American Association of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmaceutical Scientists
American Brain Tumor
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Chemical Society
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
American College of
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Pharmacology
American College of
$321,900.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Endocrinology
American College of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Laboratory Animal Medicine
American College of
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physicians Foundation
American College of
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physicians Foundation
American College of
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physicians Foundation
American College of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
American College of
$200,000.00
Fellowships and
Rheumatology
Scholarships
American College of
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
American College of
$2,000,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology Research and
Education Foundation
American College of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Veterinary Pathologists
American
$303,800.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American Health Resources
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
American Kidney Fund
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
American Liver Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
American Liver Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$127,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$106,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
American Liver Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Medical Group
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Medical Group
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Medical Group
$5,050.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Medical Group
$5,050.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Medical Group
$5,050.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Medical Group
$5,050.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Medical Group
$5,050.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Nephrology Nurses
$2,500.00
Fellowships and
Association
Scholarships
American Neurological
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Pancreatic
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Association
American Pancreatic
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Pancreatic
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, Inc., Georgia
Chapter
American Physiological
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
American Skin Association
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Society for
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
American Society for Mens
$27,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health, The
American Society for Mens
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health, The
American Society for Mens
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health, The
American Society for
$23,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Microbiology
American Society for
$23,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Microbiology
American Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Andrology
American Society of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Oncology
American Society of
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Clinical Rheumatologists
American Society of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Society of
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hematology
American Society of
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Nephrology
American Statistical
$4,225.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Thyroid
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, Inc.
American Uroligical
$12,300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Northeastern
Section
American Urological
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$70,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education and
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Foundation
American Urological
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship ,
Association Inc. Southeast
Section
American Urological
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc. North
Central Section
American Urological
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc. Western
Section
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, Mid-Atlantic
Section, Education Fund,
Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, New England
American Urological
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, New York
Section
American Urological
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, South Central
Section
Americas Committee for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Treatment And Research In
Multiple Sclerosis
Anesthesia Patient Safety
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Angel Wings Foundation
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ann & Robert H. Lurie
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Children's Hospital of
Chicago
Annenberg Center for Health
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Arthritis Foundation
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$28,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Central, Pennsylvania
Chapter
Arthritis Foundation New
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
England
Arthritis Foundation,
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$175,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$65,000.00
Patient Support
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$17,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$259,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$175,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Chapter
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$35,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$12,500.00
Charitable Donations
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$3,000.00
Charitable Donations
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$1,000.00
Patient Support
Lakes Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
West Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$28,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
West Region
Arthritis Foundation, Great
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
West Region
Arthritis Foundation,
$21,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Massachusetts Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$1,853.94
Patient Support
Massachusetts Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Massachusetts Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Massachusetts Chapter
Arthritis Foundation, Mid
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Atlantic Region
Arthritis Foundation, Mid
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Atlantic Region
Arthritis Foundation, Mid
$1,000.00
Patient Support
Atlantic Region
Arthritis Foundation, South
$14,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Chapter
Arthritis Foundation, South
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
Texas Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Southern California
Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
Southern California
Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
Southern California
Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Southern California
Chapter
Arthritis Foundation,
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Wisconsin Chapter
Arthritis Patient Services
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Patient Services
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$28,000.00
Educational Grants
Asociacion de Reumatologos
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
de Puerto Rico
Asociacion Nacional de
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Tecnicos de Farmacia, Inc.
Asociacion Puertorriquena
$1,200.00
Corporate Sponsorship
de Ayuda al Paciente de
Psoriasis
Association of Dermatology
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Administrators And
Managers
Association of Nurses in
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
AIDS Care, Chicago Chapter
Association of Physicians
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Pakistani-Descent of
North America
Balm In Gilead Inc.
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Baylor College of Medicine
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Baylor University Medical
$67,716.00
Educational Grants
Center
Baylor University Medical
$29,340.00
Educational Grants
Center
Beth Israel Deaconess
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Department of Medicine
Scholarships
Foundation
Beth Israel Deaconess
$(1,948.24)
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Beth Israel Deaconess
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
Billings Clinic
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Bioconnections, LLC
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Biophysical Society
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Blank Children's Hospital
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Board of Regents of the
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Wisconsin
System
Board of Trustees of the
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
University of Illinois
Board of Trustees of The
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
University of Illinois,
Scholarships
The
Board of Trustees of The
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
University of Illinois,
Scholarships
The
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$1,200.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boston Society, Inc.
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boston Society, Inc.
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boston University School of
$124,943.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Brigham and Women's
$(50,000.00)
Fellowships and
Hospital, Inc.
Scholarships
Brigham and Women's
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital, Inc.
Scholarships
California Rheumatology
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alliance
California Separation
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Science Society
California Society of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health System Pharmacists
California Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health System Pharmacists
California Society of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health System Pharmacists
Campaign for Public Health
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Cancer and Leukemia Group B
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cancer Molecular
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Therapeutics
Case Western Reserve
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
University
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Central Florida Pharmacy
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Council, Inc.
Central Ohio Parkinson
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Society DBA National
Parkinson Foundation
Central and Southeast Ohio
Chelsea Hutchinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation The
Children and Arthritis,
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Inc.
Children's Digestive Health
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
and Nutrition Foundation
Scholarships
Children's Digestive Health
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
and Nutrition Foundation
Children's Digestive Health
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
and Nutrition Foundation
Scholarships
Children's Digestive Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
and Nutrition Foundation
Children's Hospital Medical
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Center
Children's Hospital Medical
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Center
Scholarships
Children's Hospital Medical
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Center
Children's Oncology
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Services Inc.
Chimp Haven
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Dudley Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chronic Liver Disease
$211,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$211,670.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$1,300,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$(1,340.00)
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clinic
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$4,500.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$(2,033.31)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$385,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$132,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$(2,638.82)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation,
The
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$209,000.00
Educational Grants
CME Incite, LLC
$(175,000.00)
Educational Grants
Coalition for Prevention of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Colorectal Cancer in
Puerto Rico
Coalition on Positive
$125,000.00
Patient Support
Health Empowerment
Colegio Medicos-Cirujanos
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
P.R
Com & Co Sarl
$3,550.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Initiatives
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Complete Conference
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Management
Complete Conference
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Management
Complete Conference
$(75,000.00)
Educational Grants
Management
Complete Conference
$(75,000.00)
Educational Grants
Management
Consortium of Multiple
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Continuing Educational
$(703.13)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Educational
$362,500.00
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Educational
$(210.66)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Educational
$(258.18)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Educational
$(1,696.48)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Medical
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Education Outfitters, LLC
Continuous Renal
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Replacement Therapies,
Inc. (CRRT)
Cornell University, Weill
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical College
Cornerstone Health, Inc.
$(3,664.00)
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Health, Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Health, Inc.
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Health, Inc.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Health, Inc.
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Creighton University
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Crohn's and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$350,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$9,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$6,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$9,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$6,200.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$4,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$(3,095.00)
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$3,500.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation of America
Scholarships
Crohn's and Colitis
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohn's and Colitis
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Curatio CME Institute
$(100,000.00)
Educational Grants
Cystic Fibrosis--Reaching
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Out Foundation
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation--
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Research,
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research,
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research,
$9,000.00
Patient Support
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research,
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research,
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research,
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research,
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Dade County Medical
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
Dallas fort Worth Business
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Group on Health
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Decatur General Hospital
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Dermatology Education
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Dermatology Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Diversity And Leadership
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Duke University
$6,550.00
Educational Grants
Duke University
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Duke University
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Duke University
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Duke University
$(3,061.96)
Educational Grants
Educational Review Systems
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
AIDS Foundation
Elsevier, Inc.
$70,000.00
Educational Grants
Employers Health Colition
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Endocrine Education, Inc
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Nurses Society
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Endocrine Society, The
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Society, The
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Endometriosis Association
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Engineering Conferences
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
International
Enzyme Mechanisms
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Conference
Epilepsy Foundation
$80,000.00
Charitable Donations
ERA-Eurocongress, Ltd.
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
ERA-Eurocongress, Ltd.
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Escuela De Medicina De
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ponce
Escuela De Medicina De
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ponce
European Society for
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatological Research
European Society for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Oncology
Excel Continuing Education
$8,225.00
Educational Grants
Excellence in Rheumatology
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education, LLC
Facing Our Risk of Cancer
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Empowerement
Facing Our Risk of Cancer
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Empowerement (FORCE)
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of Clinical
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Societies
Federation of Clinical
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Societies
Federation of Clinical
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Societies
Florida Academy of
$8,300.00
Educational Grants
Physician Assistants
Florida Health Care
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Foundation for Anesthesia
$20,000.00
Fellowships and
Education and Research
Scholarships
Foundation for Biomedical
$120,000.00
Charitable Donations
Research
Foundation for Indiana
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
University of Pennsylvania
Foundation for Indiana
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
University of Pennsylvania
Foundation for Men's
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health, Inc
Foundation for the National
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institutes of Health
Friends of Prentice
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Friends of the St. Louis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University Liver Center
Fundacion Puertorriquena De
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Pacientes Con
Endometriosis
Gastrointestinal Health
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation, Inc.
Gastrointestinal Health
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation, Inc.
Gastrointestinal Health
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation, Inc.
Gastro-Intestinal Research
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Gastro-Intestinal Research
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Gastro-Intestinal Research
$6,600.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Gastro-Intestinal Research
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Gateway for Cancer Research
$6,000.00
Charitable Donations
Gay City Health Project
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Georgia ObGyn Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Georgia Prostate Cancer
$4,000.00
Patient Support
Coalition, The
Georgia Society of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgery
Gilda's Club Chicago
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Gilda's Club New York City
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Globalization of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmaceutics Education
Network
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Grupo de Apoyo de Ninos y
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Adolescentes con
Reumatologia
Gynecologic Oncology Group,
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
The
$7
$23,000.00
Educational Grants
Haymarket Center-Health
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Education
Haymarket Medical Education
$243,190.00
Educational Grants
Health Sciences Foundation
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
dba South East AHEC
Healthcare Businesswomen's
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
Healthcare Financial
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Management Association
Hep C Connection
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Hep C Connection
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Hep C Connection
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hepatitis C Association
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Hepatitis C Mentor and
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Support Group, The
Hepatitis Education Project
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
HIV Treaters Medical
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association of Puerto Rico
Hope Foundation, The
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Housing Works, Inc.
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Howard Brown Health Center
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Howard Center Inc.
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Howard University Hospital
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Hubbard Street Dance
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Chicago
Human Growth Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
IDSA Education and Research
$10,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
Imedex, LLC
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Impact Education, LLC
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Indiana Chamber of Commerce
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indiana Chamber of Commerce
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indiana University
$2,500.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Induniv Research
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Infectious Diseases Society
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
of America
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Foundation
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Foundation
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Foundation
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Foundation
Innovation Development
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute, Inc.
Institute for Medical and
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Nursing Education, Inc.
Integrated Benefits
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute, Inc.
Integrated Medical
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Integrated Medical
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Integrated Medical
$35,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Interfaith House
$2,000.00
Charitable Donations
Intermountain Dermatology
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
International AIDS Society--
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International AIDS Society--
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International AIDS Society--
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International Alliance for
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Biologicals
International Association
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Physicians in AIDS Care
International Association
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
of Physicians in AIDS Care
International Chemical
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Biology Society
International Pelvic Pain
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Society
International Psoriasis
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council, The
International Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council, The
International Society for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Antiviral Research
International Society for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Publication
Professionals
International Society for
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
the Study of Xenobiotics
International Society of
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Nephrology
International Society of
$40,000.00
Charitable Donations
Nephrology
International Society of
$175,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nephrology
Jefferson Medical College
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
at Thomas Jefferson
University
Jefferson Medical College
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
at Thomas Jefferson
University
Jefferson Medical College
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
at Thomas Jefferson
University
John Hopkins University
$(1,706.15)
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University
$(60,000.00)
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
School of Medicine
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins University
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Joint Township District
$4,064.00
Patient Support
Memorial Hospital
Joint Township District
$(1,508.00)
Patient Support
Memorial Hospital
JWC Covenant, Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Kansas University
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Neurological Foundation
Kansas University
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Neurological Foundation
Kelsey Research Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Kenes International Ltd.
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Kidney Disease Improving
$40,128.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Global Outcomes
KnowledgePoint360 Group,
$94,785.30
Corporate Sponsorship
LLC
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,460.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$795.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$345.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,760.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,145.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$615.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,160.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,115.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,380.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$4,260.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,070.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,650.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,395.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,380.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,290.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$996.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$825.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$804.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$4,455.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$945.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$690.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,530.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,335.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,065.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$975.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$825.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$720.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$510.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,365.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,185.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,110.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,095.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$855.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$765.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,230.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,185.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,110.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$960.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$300.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,230.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$720.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$570.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,035.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$990.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$810.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$705.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$705.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,095.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$255.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,470.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,275.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,230.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,095.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$585.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,890.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,380.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,185.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$975.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,190.00
Patient Support
Lake County Haven
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Large Urology Group
66,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Practice Association
Latinos Salud, Inc.
$7,500.00
Charitable Donations
Legacy Counseling Center
$7,500.00
Charitable Donations
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Society, The
Leukemia Research
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Life Sciences Foundation
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Life Sciences Foundation
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Life Sciences Foundation
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Linking Leaders, LLC
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Liver Institute and
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation for Education
and Research
Living Beyond Breast Cancer
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Living Beyond Breast Cancer
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Living Beyond Breast Cancer
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Loma Linda University
$1,200.00
Fellowships and
School of Medicine
Scholarships
Malecare
$12,000.00
Patient Support
Marsha Rivkin Center for
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Ovarian Cancer Research
Massachusetts General
$25,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital
Scholarships
Massachusetts Institute of
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Technology
Massachusetts Institute of
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Technology
Massachusetts Institute of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Technology
Massachusetts Prostate
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Coalition, Inc.
May We Help
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
May We Help
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
May We Help
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Mayo Clinic
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical College of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Wisconsin
Medical College of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Wisconsin
Medical Learning Institute
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$(90,000.00)
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicinal and Bioorganic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Chemistry Foundation, The
Medscape, LLC
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$740,500.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$471,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$37,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$155,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape, LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Memorial Hermann Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Memphis Business Group on
$4,820.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Mercer County Joint
$2,646.00
Patient Support
Township Community
Hospital dba Mercer Health
Methodist Hospital, The
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michael J. Fox Foundation
$32,000.00
Educational Grants
Michael J. Fox Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michael J. Fox Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan Council of Nurse
$1,200.00
Educational Grants
Practitioners
Michigan Institute of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Urology
Mid Atlantic Business Group
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Mid-America Coalition on
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Care
Miles for Cystic Fibrosis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Mississippi Kidney
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Missouri Hepatitis C
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Alliance
Missouri Hepatitis C
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Alliance
Montana Association of
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Care Purchaser
Mount Sinai School of
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medicine
Scholarships
Mount Sinai School of
$240,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Movement Disorder Society,
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
The
Movement Disorder Society,
$234,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
The
National Academy of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences
National Academy of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Sciences
National Academy of
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Sciences
National AIDS Treatment
$300,000.00
Charitable Donations
Advocacy Project
National Alliance of State
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
and Territorial AIDS
Directors
National Association for
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Education
National Association of
$11,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chain Drug Stores, Inc.
National Association of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physicians
National Association of
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physicians
National Association of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
School Nurses, Inc.
National Commission on
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Correctional Health Care
National Committee for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Quality Assurance
National Committee for
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Quality Assurance
National Committee for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Quality Assurance
National Committee for
$125,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Quality Assurance
National Comprehensive
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$(1,492.41)
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Network
National Foundation for the
$500,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
National Foundation for the
$37,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
National Hispanic Council
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
on Aging
National Jewish Health
$151,840.00
Educational Grants
National Jewish Health
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
National Kidney Foundation
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Louisiana, Inc.
National Kidney Foundation
$3,000.00
Patient Support
of Northeast New York
National Kidney Foundation,
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
National Kidney Foundation,
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
National Kidney Foundation,
$333,333.33
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
National Medical
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
National Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
National Pancreas
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Pancreas
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
National Pancreas
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Parkinson
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation, Inc.
National Parkinson
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation, Inc.
National Parkinson
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation, Inc.
National Psoriasis
$125,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$500,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$125,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Society for
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cutaneous Medicine
NephCure Foundation
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Neuro Community Foundation
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
New England Baptist
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hospital
New Jersey Association for
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Biomedical Research
New York Academy of
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences
New York Academy of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences
New York Academy of
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Sciences
New York Medical College,
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
office of Continuing
Medical Education
New York State Rheumatology
$17,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
New York University School
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
New York University School
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
of Medicine
Scholarships
New York University School
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
New York University School
$5,800.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
New York University School
$55,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
New York University School
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
New York University School
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Nicole Jarvis MD Parkinsons
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Research Foundation
NL Communications, Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications, Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications, Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
No AIDS Task force
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
North American Center for
$252,250.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$124,975.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$318,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$475,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$99,500.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Center for
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
North American Society for
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Pediatric
Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition
North Carolina Rheumatology
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
North Dakota Academy of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Physician Assistants
Northeast Business Group on
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Northwest Arthritis and
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Osteoporosis Institute
Northwest Kidney Centers
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northwest Kidney Centers
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northwest Urological
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Northwestern Lake forest
$984.00
Charitable Donations
Hospital
Northwestern University
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Northwestern University
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Northwestern University
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Northwestern University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern University
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Northwestern University
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Northwestern University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern University
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Ohio Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
Ohio Gastroenterology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Oregon Health & Science
$800.00
Educational Grants
University
Osteoarthritis Research
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Society International
Pacific Dermatologic
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
PACK Health, LLC
$135,875.00
Educational Grants
Pancreas Club, The
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$147,600.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network, Inc.
Parkinson Association of
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
the Rockies
Parkinson Foundation of the
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
National Capital Area
Parkinson Research
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Parkinson Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Parkinson Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Parkinson Study Group
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinson Support Group of
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Upstate NY dba NPF Greater
Rochester
Parkinson's Action Network
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Parkinson's Action Network
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Parkinson's Action Network
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Parkinson's Disease
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Parkinson's Disease
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Parkinsons Resources of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Oregon
Parkinsons Resources of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Oregon
Parkinson's Unity Walk
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinsons Voice Project
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Partners HealthCare System
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Partnership for a Drug Free
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
America
Patient Empowerment Network
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Network
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Pediatric IBD Foundation
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Peer Health Communications,
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Pennsylvania Prostate
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Coalition
Pennsylvania Society of
$11,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
Pennsylvania State
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
University
Pennsylvania State
$456,750.00
Educational Grants
University
Pennsylvania State
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University
Pharmaceutical Care
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Management Association
Pharmaceutical Care
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Management Association
Pharmaceutical Research and
$200,000.00
Charitable Donations
Manufacturers of America
Foundation
Pharmacy Quality Alliance
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy Quality Alliance
$12,500.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy Times office of
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Professional
Education
Pharmacy Times office of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Professional
Education
Physicians Education
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource
Pittsburgh Magazine
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Postgraduate Institute for
$245,035.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Potomac Center for Medical
$(550.00)
Educational Grants
Education
President and Fellows of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Harvard College
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Primary Care Network, Inc.
$142,375.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education, Inc.
$100,110.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education, Inc.
$148,780.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education, Inc.
$482,600.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education, Inc.
$138,850.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education, Inc.
$(769.00)
Educational Grants
Prime Education, Inc.
$315,393.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology, Inc.
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology, Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology, Inc.
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Pri-Med Institute, LLC
$77,500.00
Educational Grants
Princeton University,
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Trustees
Scholarships
Project Inform, Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Project Inform, Inc.
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Projects In Knowledge, Inc.
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Projects In Knowledge, Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Prostate Cancer Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rodin Group
Prostate Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute
Prostate Cancer Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute
Prostate Conditions
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education Council
Prostate Health Education
$15,000.00
Patient Support
Network
Prostate Health Education
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Network
Prostate Health
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
International
Puerto Rico Association of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Puerto Rico Association of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Purdue University
$83,890.00
Educational Grants
Purdue University
$400,000.00
Educational Grants
Purdue University
$450,000.00
Educational Grants
Rector & Visitors of the
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Virginia
Regents of the University
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
of California, The
Scholarships
Regents of the University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of California, The
Regents of the University
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of California, The
Regents of the University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of California, The
Regents of the University
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
of California, The
Regents of the University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of California, The
Regents of the University
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Michigan
Research America
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology Alliance of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Louisiana
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$74,225.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Richmond University Medical
$1,100.00
Educational Grants
Center
Robert Michael Educational
$70,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute, LLC
Robert Michael Educational
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute, LLC
Rush University Medical
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rush University Medical
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Center
Rush University Medical
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rutgers, The State
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Rutgers, The State
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Rutgers, The State
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Rutgers, The State
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Sacramento Valley Society
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Health System
Pharmacists
Safety Pharmacology Society
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Saint Anthony Hospital
$3,410.00
Patient Support
Foundation
Saint Louis University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
San Francisco AIDS
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
San Juan Bautista Medical
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Schneps Publications Inc.
$695.00
Corporate Sponsorship
DBA Queens Courier
Scripps Health
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Sexual Medicine Society of
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
North America, Inc.
Sexual Medicine Society of
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
North America, Inc.
Shanti Project, Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Skin Disease Education
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Skin Disease Education
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Skin Disease Education
$42,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Skin Disease Education
$46,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Smart Ride, The
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Smith Wholesale Drug
$9,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Company
Sociedad Pr Endocrinologia
$(7,500.00)
Educational Grants
Y Diabetologia
Sociedad Puertorriquena
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Pediatria
Society for Neuroscience
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuroscience,
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Chicago Chapter
Society for Surgery of The
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alimentary Tract
Society of Dermatology
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Society of Toxicologic
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pathology
Society of Toxicology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
South Carolina Alliance of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Plans
Southern California Society
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Gastroenterologists
Southern California Society
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Gastroenterology
Southern Illinois
$3,000.00
Fellowships and
University School of
Scholarships
Medicine
Spondylitis Association of
$40,000.00
Patient Support
America
Spondylitis Association of
$19,084.50
Educational Grants
America
St. Francis Hospital and
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
State of Maryland
$(1,308.80)
Educational Grants
State of Maryland
$45,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
State University of Iowa
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
States United for
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Biomedical Research
Super Jake Foundation, The
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Teratology Society
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Test positive Aware Network
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Test positive Aware Network
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Association of Health
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Plans
Texas Urological Society
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
The Endocrine Society
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
The Hitchcock Foundation
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
The Reginald and Dionne
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Smith Foundation, Inc.
The Reginald and Dionne
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Smith Foundation, Inc.
Tides Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Tides Center
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Tides Center
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Trinitas Regional Medical
$1,800.00
Educational Grants
Center
Triple Step Toward the Cure
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Trustees of the University
$69,742.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Trustees of the University
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Tufts Medical Center
$(3,825.00)
Educational Grants
Tufts Medical Center
$4,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Tufts University
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Twine Clinical Consulting
$158,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Prosthetics Clinic
Scholarships
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Prosthetics Clinic
Scholarships
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
Ultimate Medical Academy
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Group, LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$(125,000.00)
Educational Grants
Med Learning Group, LLC
United States Adult Cystic
$6,000.00
Educational Grants
Fibrosis Association, Inc.
United Way of Central
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Massachusetts
Universidad De Puerto Rico
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Universidad De Puerto Rico
$6,325.00
Educational Grants
University Health Services
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
at Stony Point, Inc.
University Health Services
$150,111.40
Educational Grants
at Stony Point, Inc.
University Hospital of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Brooklyn
University of Alabama at
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Birmingham
Scholarships
University of California
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University of California--
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
San Francisco
University of California--
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
San Francisco
University of California--
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
San Francisco
University of California
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Berkeley
University of California
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Irvine
Scholarships
University of Chicago
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$28,961.64
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Chicago
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$204,525.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Research Foundation
University of Cincinnati
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University of Cincinnati
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$2,542,080.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University of Cincinnati
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Connecticut
$12,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Florida
$142,709.00
Educational Grants
University of Florida
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Florida
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
University of Illinois
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
University of Illinois
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
University of Louisville
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
University of Louisville
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Research Foundation
University of Louisville
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Research Foundation
University of Louisville
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Research Foundation
University of Maryland
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Baltimore Foundation
University of Massachusetts
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Medical School
University of Miami
$112,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Michigan
$(254.37)
Educational Grants
University of Minnesota
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
University of Minnesota,
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Regents
University of Minnesota,
$(160.43)
Corporate Sponsorship
Regents
University of Mississippi
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
University of Nebraska
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
University of Nebraska
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
University of Nebraska
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
University of New Mexico
$142,150.00
Educational Grants
Health Sciences Center,
Department of Pediatrics
Neonatology Division
University of North
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Carolina at Chapel Hill
Scholarships
University of North
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of Notre Dame
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Pittsburgh
$1,500.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Pittsburgh
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Pittsburgh
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Rochester
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Rochester
$4,225.00
Educational Grants
University of Rochester
$(1,207.00)
Educational Grants
University of South Florida
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Health Professions
Conferencing Corporation
University of Southern
$180,000.00
Educational Grants
California
University of Southern
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
California
University of Southern
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
California
University of Texas Health
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Science Center at San
Antonio
University of Texas Health
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Science Center at San
Antonio
University of Texas Health
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Science Center at San
Antonio
University of Texas M.D.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Anderson Cancer Center
University of Texas M.D.
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Anderson Cancer Center
University of Utah
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Utah
$2,200.00
Educational Grants
University of Washington
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Washington
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Wisconsin
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Medical Foundation
University of Wisconsin
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Systems
University of Wisconsin
$(500.00)
Corporate Sponsorship
Systems
University of Wisconsin-
$(1,857.88)
Educational Grants
Madison
University of Wisconsin-
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Madison
Urological Association of
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania
Urology Center of Colorado
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Us Too International
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Us Too International
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Us Too International
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Us Too International
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Us Too International
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Valley Children's Hospital
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Foundation
Venice Family Clinic
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Veritas Institute for
$(50,000.00)
Educational Grants
Medical Education, Inc.
Vindico Medical Education
$337,509.00
Educational Grants
Virginia Commonwealth
$2,100.00
Patient Support
University, School of
Medicine
Wake forest University
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Washington Hospital Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Corporation
Washington Rheumatology
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alliance
Washington State Urology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Washington University in
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
St. Louis
Wayne State University
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
We Care in Inflammatory
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Bowel Disease
West Penn Allegheny Health
$6,000.00
Educational Grants
System, Inc.
West Penn Allegheny Health
$(5,905.00)
Fellowships and
System, Inc.
Scholarships
West Virginia University
$2,220.00
Charitable Donations
Western States Pharmacy
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Conference for Pharmacy
Residents Fellowships and
Preceptors
Why Me, Inc.
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
WINGS Program Inc.
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Wisconsin Dairyland Chapter
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Healthcare Information
and Management Systems
Society
Wisconsin Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Wishes And Dreams for
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis
Worcester Regional Research
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Bureau, Inc.
World Endometriosis
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Research Foundation
World Endometriosis Society
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
World Endometriosis Society
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
World Health
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Communications, Ltd.
World Parkinson Coalition
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
World Senior Games
$5,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Yale University School of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Yale University School of
$(10,000.00)
Educational Grants
Medicine
Yale University School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Young Survival Coalition
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Zero, The Project to End
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Prostate Cancer
Zero, The Project to End
$210,800.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Prostate Cancer
Zero, The Project to End
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Prostate Cancer
Zero, The Project to End
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grants Donations Report--2015
(Parentheses represent refunds of previously disclosed payments)
Updated as of 4/30/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recipient
Payment Amount
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Runner's Love
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Academia Medica Del Sur
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$9,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$14,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$9,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Medica Del Sur
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Academia Puertorriquena De
$8,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Neurologia
Academy of Managed Care
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmacy
Advances in Cosmetic and
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Dermatology Inc.
Adventist Hlth System--
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Sunbelt Inc.
Advocate Health & Hospitals
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Corporation
Aids Drug Assistance
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Programs Advocacy Asoc
AIDS Action Committee
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$125,000.00
Charitable Donation
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Dermatology Society
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany Medical Center
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany Medical Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Albert Einstein Colg of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine Div of
Dermatology Attending Asoc
Albert Einstein Colg of
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva Univ
Albert Einstein Med Ctr.
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Alliance for Clinical
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Trials in Oncology
Foundation
Alliance for Safe Biologic
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicines
Alliance Foundation for
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Education In
The Health Professions
American Academy of
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Medical
Education
American Academy of
($37,982.00)
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$40,000.00
Charitable Donation
Dermatology
American Academy of
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$200,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of Family
$38,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phys
American Academy of Family
$38,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phys
American Academy of
$38,500.00
Educational Grants
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Neurology Institute
American Assoc for Lab
$20,000.00
Charitable Donation
Animal Scnc Foundation
American Assoc for The
$50,000.00
Charitable Donation
Study of Liver Diseases
American Assoc for The
$500,000.00
Charitable Donation
Study of Liver Diseases
American Assoc for The
$130,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Study of Liver Diseases
American Assoc of Phys of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indian Origin Arkansas
American Assoc of Phys of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indian Origin Arkansas
American Assoc of Phys of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indian Origin Arkansas
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Laboratory Animal Science
New England Branch
American Association of
$18,940.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
American Association of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
American Association of
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
American Association of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
American Association of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmaceutical Scientists
American Association of
$3,150.00
Charitable Donation
Pharmaceutical Scientists
American Autoimmune Related
$46,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Autoimmune Related
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Autoimmune Related
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Autoimmune Related
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Autoimmune Related
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Brain Tumor
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Cancer Society
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Chem Socty
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chem Socty
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
American Chem Socty
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chem Socty
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Colg of
$355,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Endocrinology
American Colg of Lab Animal
$50,000.00
Charitable Donation
Medicine
American Colg of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Obstetricians And
Gynecologists District 1
American College of
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Pharmacology
American College of
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Gastroenterology
American College of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
American College of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Healthcare Executives
Wisconsin Chapter
American College of
$2,000,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
American College of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Veterinary Pathologists
American Drug Utilization
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Review Society Adurs
American Enterprise
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute
American
$153,517.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$427,536.66
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$133,200.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$43,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American Kidney Fund
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Legion
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Legion National
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Headquarters
American Liver Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
($10,000.00)
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Foundation
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Medical Group
$24,700.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Neurological
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Pancreatic
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, Inc.
American Pancreatic
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Pancreatic
$15,000.00
Charitable Donation
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$5,350.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Parkinson Disease
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
American Peptide Society
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
American Pharmacists
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Society for Mens
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
American Society of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Andrology
American Society of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Oncology
American Society of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Oncology
American Society of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Oncology
American Society of
$9,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Clinical Rheumatologists
American Society of Health
$23,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
System Pharmacists
American Socty of
$95,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hematology
American Socty of
$2,550.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hematology
American Socty of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hematology
American Socty of
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hematology
American Statistical
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Thyroid
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Association, Inc.
American Uroligical Asoc
$11,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northeastern Section
American Urological Asoc
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
American Urological Asoc
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc. North Ctrl Section
American Urological Asoc
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc. Western Section
American Urological Asoc
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
New York Section
American Urological Asoc
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
South Ctrl Section
American Urological
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Urological
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Urological
$37,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Urological
$41,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Urological
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
American Urological
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Association Education And
Research, Inc.
Americans for Medical
$110,000.00
Charitable Donation
Progress Educational Found
Americares Foundation, Inc.
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Anesthesia Patient Safety
$15,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Annenberg Center for Health
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Science
Annenberg Center for Health
$140,000.00
Educational Grants
Science
Annenberg Center for Health
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Science
Annenberg Center for Health
$641,628.00
Educational Grants
Science
Annenberg Center for Health
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Science
Annenberg Center for Health
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Science
Annenberg Center for Health
($5,000.00)
Educational Grants
Science
Arizona United Rheum
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alliance Aura
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$12,500.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$175,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation, Inc.
$259,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Patient Services
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Patient Services
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Asco Cancer Foundation
$50,000.00
Charitable Donation
Asco Cancer Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Asco Cancer Foundation
($689.37)
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Asociacion De Hematologia Y
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oncologia Medica De Puerto
Rico
Asociacion De Reumatologos
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
De Puerto Rico
Asociacion De Salud
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Primaria De Puerto Rico,
Inc.
Asociacion Pr De
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterologia
Asociacion Pr De
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterologia
Asociacion Pr De
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterologia
Asociacion Puertorriquena
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
De Ayuda Al Paciente De
Psiorasis
Asociacion Puertorriquena
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
De Medicina Fisica Y
Rehabilitacion
Asociacion Puertorriquena
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
De Medicina Fisica Y
Rehabilitacion
Aspen Cancer Conference,
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
Association for Assessment
$5,000.00
Charitable Donation
And Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Care
International
Association of Physician
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assistants In Oncology
Inc.
Association of Women in
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
Association of Women in
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
At Point of Care, LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Autoimmune Advocacy
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alliance
Baehr Challenge Ltd.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Baehr Challenge Ltd.
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Balm In Gilead Inc.
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Baylor College of Medicine
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Baylor College of Medicine
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Baylor Health Care System
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Foundation
Scholarships
Baylor Univ Med Ctr.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Beth Israel Deaconess
$35,000.00
Fellowships or
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$25,000.00
Fellowships or
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Bioconnections LLC
$125,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Board of Trustees of The
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
University of Illinois
Scholarships
Board of Trustees of The
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
University of Illinois
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Borland Groover Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boston Univ School of
$70,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Boston Univ School of
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Boston Univ School of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Boston Univ School of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicine
Boston Univ School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Boston University Mdcn
($3,402.40)
Educational Grants
Psychtry
Brandeis University
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
Breast Friends
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Business Hlth Coalition
$3,300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Butler University
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
California Association for
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nurse Practitioners
California Healthcare
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute
California Life Sciences
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
California Life Sciences
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
California Socty of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology & Dermatology
Surgry
Cancer Care
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
($2,500.00)
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Molecular
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Therapeutics Research
Association
Capital Meeting Planning
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
Caribe Gyn, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Casa Lake County
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Catholic Charities of The
$8,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Archdiocese of Chicago
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
($4,000.00)
Educational Grants
Central Florida Pharmacy
$15,000.00
Patient Support
Council
Central Savannah River Area
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Csra Parkinson Support
Group
Chicago Help Initiative
$7,500.00
Charitable Donation
Childhood Arthritis And
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology Research
Alliance Carra
Children And Arthritis,
$4,500.00
Charitable Donation
Inc.
Childrens Digestive Hlth
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
And Nutrition Foundation
Scholarships
Childrens Digestive Hlth
($40,000.00)
Fellowships or
And Nutrition Foundation
Scholarships
Childrens Digestive Hlth
$56,000.00
Educational Grants
And Nutrition Foundation
Childrens Digestive Hlth
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
And Nutrition Foundation
Childrens Digestive Hlth
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
And Nutrition Foundation
Chimp Haven, Inc.
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Chronic Liver Disease
$1,000,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$364,315.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$1,513,875.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
($2,700.00)
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
($9,044.17)
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
($9,045.00)
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$27,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Society, Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Society, Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Society, Inc.
Cincinnati Childrens
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital
Cincinnati Childrens
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hospital Medical Center
Pulmonary Medicine
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
$50,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Cleveland Clinic Minority
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Men's Health Center
Cleveland Clnc Educational
($542.72)
Educational Grants
Foundation The
Cleveland Clnc Educational
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation The
Cleveland Clnc Educational
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation The
Cleveland Clnc Educational
($6,109.89)
Educational Grants
Foundation The
Cleveland Clnc Educational
($1,147.40)
Educational Grants
Foundation The
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Options, LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Cll Global Research
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cll Global Research
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Coalition for Prevention of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Colorectal Cancer In
Puerto Rico
Coalition for Prevention of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Colorectal Cancer In
Puerto Rico
Colegio De Medicos
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Cirujanos De Puerto Rico
Columbia Univ Med Ctr
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
Community Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Health And Men's
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Promotion Summit
Community Initiatives
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Initiatives
$57,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Initiatives
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Complete Conference Mgmt
($916.00)
Educational Grants
Connect1D
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Connecticut Academy of
$1,700.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Connecticut Advocates for
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinsons Inc.
Connecting To Cure Crohns
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
And Colitis
Consortium of Multiple
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Continuing Education
$400,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
($1,972.99)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
($5,392.00)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
($723.11)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
($3,353.94)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
$439,195.00
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
($1,553.15)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
($1,523.00)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Continuing Education
($567.24)
Educational Grants
Alliance, LLC
Cope Coalition On Positive
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Empowerment
Cope Coalition On Positive
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Empowerment
Core Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cornell University Weill
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Cornell Medical College
Cornell University Weill
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Cornell Medical College
Cornerstones Health Inc.
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstones Health Inc.
($20,375.00)
Educational Grants
Cornerstones Health Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Crape Myrtle Festival
$300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Creighton University
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Crohn's and Colitis
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$1,200,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$180,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
($265.00)
Educational Grants
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$50,160.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$100,000.00
Fellowships or
Foundation of America,
Scholarships
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$32,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Crohn's and Colitis
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America,
Inc.
Culinary Care
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Curatio Cme Inst
($3,261.00)
Educational Grants
Curatio Cme Inst
($180.00)
Educational Grants
Curatio Cme Inst
($50,000.00)
Educational Grants
Curatio Cme Inst
($8,855.73)
Educational Grants
Cure CF
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$500,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$100,000.00
Charitable Donation
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$750,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$16,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fund Emily's Entourage
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Dallas Fort Worth Business
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Group on Health
Dava Oncology LP
$95,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Dermatology Education
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Dermatology Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Dermatology Foundation
$135,000.00
Charitable Donation
Dermatology Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Nurses
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
Dermatology Nurses
$23,270.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Dermatology Nurses
$25,850.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Desert Aids Project Inc.
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Digestive Disease Week
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Digestive Disease Week
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Digestive Health Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Duke University
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Duke University
($780.00)
Educational Grants
Duke University Medical
$10,000.00
Fellowships or
Center
Scholarships
East Hawaii IPA
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Efficient Collaborative
$28,100.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Retail Marketing
Eicosanoid Research
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
El Centro Regional Medical
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Center Foundation
El Centro Regional Medical
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Center Foundation
Elsevier Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Emory University
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Emory University
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Emory University
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Emory University School of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Employers Health Coalition
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Endocrine Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Endocrine Society
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Endometriosis Foundation of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
America
Epilepsy Foundation
$15,000.00
Charitable Donation
Erie Family Health Center
$5,000.00
Sponsorship
Corporate
Escuela De Medicina De
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Ponce
Escuela De Medicina San
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Juan Bautista
Scholarships
Evergreen Foundation of
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Western New York
Excellence In Rheumatology
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education LLC
Facing Our Risk of Cancer
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Empowerement Force
Federation of American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Societies for Experimental
Biology
Federation of Clinical
$18,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Societies
Federation of Clinical
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Societies
Florida Health Care
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Florida Health Care
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Florida Society of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
Focus Medical
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Communications LLC
Food Outreach
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
force--Facing Our Risk of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Emp
Foundation for Anesthesia
$15,000.00
Fellowships or
Education And Research
Scholarships
Foundation for Arthritis
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Treatment
Foundation for The National
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institutes of Health
Foundation for Veterans
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Care
Foundation of Consortium of
$8,000.00
Charitable Donation
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
Cmsc
Foundcare Inc.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundcare Inc.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Friends of Cancer Research
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Friends of Parkinsons
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Friends of Prentice
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Fundacion De Investigacion
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastro Intestinal Research
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Gastro Intestinal Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Gastrointestinal And Liver
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Association of The
Americas Inc.
Gateway for Cancer Research
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
General Hospital
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Corporation
Georgia Dermatology
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Georgia Dermatology
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Georgia Health Sciences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Georgia Prostate Cancer
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Coalition
Georgia Society of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology And
Dermatologic Surgery
Gilda's Club Chicago
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Global Academy for Medical
$72,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$72,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$72,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Alliance for Patient
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Access
Global Alliance for Patient
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Access
Global Alliance for Patient
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Access
Global Alliance for Patient
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Access
Global Healthy Living
$24,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Global Healthy Living
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Gospel Heritage Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Great Lakes Chapter of The
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Society for
Pharmacology And
Experimental Therapeutics
Group of Research And
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assessment of Psoriasis
And Psoriatic Arthritis
Grupo De Apoyo De Ninos Y
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Adolescentes Con
Reumatologia
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Heals of The South, Inc.--
$5,000.00
Charitable Donation
Hepatitis Education
Awareness And Liver
Support
Health Action Council Ohio
$3,780.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Healthcare 21 Business
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Healthcare 21 Business
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Healthcare Financial
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Management Association
Hfma
Heather Robidoux
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Heb Grocery Company LP
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hep C Connection
$75,000.00
Patient Support
Hep C Connection
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hepatitis Education Project
$75,000.00
Charitable Donation
Hepatitis Education Project
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Herbert Kosten Pancreatic
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Charitable Fund
Hitchcock Foundation
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Hiv Treaters Med Asoc of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Puerto Rico
HMP Communications LLC
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Honor Health Virginia G
$800.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Piper Cancer Center
Hope Foundation The
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Houston Area Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Howard Brown Health Center
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Howard Hanna Children's
$10,000.00
Charitable Donation
Free Care Fund
Hubbard Street Dance
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Chicago
Hughes Healthcare
$177,550.00
Educational Grants
Disparities Group
Human Growth Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Human Growth Foundation
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Humboldt--Del Norte County
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Socty
Hyacinth Aids Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illinois African American
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Illinois African American
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Imedex, LLC
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Imedex, LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex, LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Indiana University
$4,100.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Infant Welfare Society of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donation
Chicago
Infectious Diseases Society
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
of America
Infectious Diseases Society
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
of America
Integrated Benefits
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute Inc.
Integrated Benefits
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute Inc.
Integrated Medical
$35,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Integrated Medical
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Integrated Medical
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Integrated Medical
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Interfaith House
$2,000.00
Charitable Donation
International Aids Socty--
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International Aids Socty--
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International Aids Socty--
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International Asoc for The
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Study of Lung Cancer IASLC
International Association
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Providers of Aids Care
International Association
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Providers of Aids Care
International Chinese
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Statistical Association
International Dermatology
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Outcome Measures
International Foot And
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ankle Foundation
International League of
$20,000.00
Charitable Donation
Association for
Rheumatology
International Liver
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Transplantation Society
International Liver
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Transplantation Society
International Medical Corps
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
International Psoriasis
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council
International Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council
International Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council
International Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council
International Society for
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
The Study of Xenbiotics
International Society of
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Biopharmaceutical
Statistics
International Society of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Heterocyclic Chemistry
Iowa Pharmacy Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
of Medicine
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Univ School
($5,646.02)
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$46,213.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
JWC Covenant, Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
JWC Covenant, Inc.
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
JWC Covenant, Inc.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Kansas University Endowment
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Keck Medical Center of USC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Kelsey Research Foundation
$35,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Ken Zebrowski Memorial Walk
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Kidney Disease Improving
$200,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Global Outcomes
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,365.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$615.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$720.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,275.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,365.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,365.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,040.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,365.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$945.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,320.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$3,600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,800.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,245.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$4,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,220.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,160.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,605.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,040.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,455.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,650.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,365.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$360.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$876.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,110.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,470.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,715.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,140.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,770.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,485.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,455.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,335.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,095.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,380.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,215.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$975.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$945.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$825.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,140.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,730.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,065.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$990.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,980.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,610.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,650.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,190.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$855.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,785.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$276.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,680.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$510.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,335.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,650.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$630.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$990.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,020.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,275.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,395.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$315.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,290.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,275.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$510.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$315.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,035.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$240.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,065.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$660.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$810.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,020.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,400.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$465.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,410.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$825.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$444.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$645.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,185.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,320.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,160.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,740.00
Patient Support
Lake County Haven
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Large Urology Group
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Practice Association
Large Urology Group
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Practice Association
Large Urology Group
$66,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Practice Association
Large Urology Group
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Practice Association
Leading Edge US LLC
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Leukemia Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Leukemia Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Leukemia Research
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Life Sciences Foundation
$30,000.00
Charitable Donation
Los Angeles Urological
$8,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Louisiana State Univ Hlth
($9,779.71)
Fellowships or
Scnc Ctr
Scholarships
Louisiana State Univ Hlth
$1,200.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Scnc Foundation
Lupus Research Inst Inc.
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Magellan Health Services
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Main Line Health, Inc.
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Map International
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Maryland Dermatologic Socty
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Massachusetts Biotechnology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council
Massachusetts Institute of
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
Technology
Massachusetts Institute of
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
Technology
Massachusetts Prostate
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Coalition
Massachusetts Public Health
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Massachusetts Public Health
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Massachusetts Society for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Research
Max Foundation
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medina Community Clinic
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Med-IQ, LLC
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Med-IQ, LLC
$156,924.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$205,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$190,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Memorial Hermann Foundation
$35,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Memphis Business Group on
$5,120.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Memphis Business Group on
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Men Educating Men, Inc.
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Mercer County Joint Twnshp
($336.00)
Educational Grants
Commty Hosp Dba Mercer
Hlth
Mercer County Joint Twnshp
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Commty Hosp Dba Mercer
Hlth
Methodist Hosp The
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Mexican American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Legislative Leadership
Foundation
Michael J Fox Foundation
$69,500.00
Educational Grants
Michael J Fox Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michael J Fox Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michael J Fox Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan Parkinson
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Michigan Rheumatism Society
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Mid Atlantic Business Group
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Heatlh
Midwest Business Group on
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Midwest Pediatric Endocrine
$6,300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Military officers
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association of America
Family Initiative
Minnesota Urological
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Mississippi
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology Society
Mississippi
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology Society
Missouri Hepatitis C
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance
Missouri Hepatitis C
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance
Missouri Hepatitis C
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Alliance
Montefiore Medical Center
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Montefiore Medical Center
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Montefiore Medical Center
($10,457.00)
Educational Grants
Mount Sinai School of
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Movement Disorder Socty The
$172,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Movement Disorder Socty The
$111,230.00
Educational Grants
Movement Disorder Socty The
$184,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Multiple Myeloma Research
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
My Gut Instinct Inc.
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
National Academy of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Nurse
Practitioners
National Academy of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Nurse
Practitioners
National AIDS Treatment
$150,000.00
Patient Support
Advocacy Project
National AIDS Treatment
$300,000.00
Charitable Donation
Advocacy Project
National Alliance of Mental
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illness Michigan
National Alliance of Mental
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illness Oregon
National Alliance of Mental
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illness Washington
National Alliance of State
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
And Territorial Aids
Directors
National Alliance of State
$75,000.00
Charitable Donation
And Territorial Aids
Directors
National Animal Interest
$20,000.00
Charitable Donation
Alliance
National Association of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Latino Elected & Appointed
officials Educational Fund
National Black Leadership
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Commission on AIDS
National Black Leadership
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Commission on AIDS
National Black Leadership
$14,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Commission on AIDS
National Coalition for
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer
National Coalition for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer
National Comprehensive
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$7,196.32
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
($1,824.00)
Educational Grants
Cancer Network, Inc.
National Family Caregivers
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
National Foundation for
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Celiac Awareness
National Hispanic Council
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
on Aging
National Kidney Foundation
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
National Minority Quality
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
forum Inc.
National Minority Quality
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
forum Inc
National Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
National Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
National Multiple Sclerosis
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
National Pancreas
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$75,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
National Pancreas
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Pancreas
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Pancreas
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Pancreas
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Patient Advocate
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Inc.
National Psoriasis
$30,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Society for
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$125,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$135,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cutaneous Medicine
Nationwide Childrens Hosp
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Natl Commission On
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Correctional Hlth Care
Natl Committee for Quality
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assurance
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$40,000.00
Charitable Donation
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$25,000.00
Charitable Donation
Ntwrk
Natl Multiple Sclerosis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Socty Greater Illinois
Chapter
Nebraska Gut Club
$600.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Neuro Challenge Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Neuropathy Action
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
New Jersey Association for
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Biomedical Research
New Mexico Parkinsons
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Disease Coalition
New York Academy of
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Sciences
New York State Rheumatology
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
New York Univ School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
New York Univ School of
($40,000.01)
Fellowships or
Medicine
Scholarships
New York Univ School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Nicole Jarvis Md Parkinsons
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Research Foundation
Nl Communications Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Nl Communications Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Nl Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Nl Communications Inc.
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
North American Ctr for
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Ctr for
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Ctr for
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Ctr for
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Ctr for
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Ctr for
$39,500.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Ctr for
$88,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
Northeast Business Group on
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Northeast Business Group on
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health
Northwest Arthritis and
$120,000.00
Educational Grants
Osteoporosis Institute
Northwest Arthritis and
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Osteoporosis Institute
Northwest Kidney Centers
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northwest Kidney Centers
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northwest Parkinson's
$4,500.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Northwest Parkinson's
$550.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Northwestern University
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Northwestern University
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Northwestern University
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Norton Healthcare
$1,200.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Novation LLC
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nyu Langone Medical Center
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ochsner Clinic Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ohio Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
Ohio Gastroenterology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Oklahoma State Urological
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Oncology Nursing Society
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
One Health Research
$50,000.00
Charitable Donation
Oregon Health And Science
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University
Oregon Health And Science
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
University
Oregon Health And Science
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University
Oregon Health And Science
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University
Oregon State University
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Orthopaedic Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Pacific Dermatologic
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Pacific Dermatologic
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Pancreas Club The
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$200,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network
Park Nicollet Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Alliance Inc.
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Alliance Inc.
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson And Movement
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson Association of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama
Parkinson Association of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
The Carolinas
Parkinson Association of
$8,000.00
Patient Support
The Rockies
Parkinson Council
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Foundation of
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oklahoma
Parkinson Foundation of
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oklahoma
Parkinson Foundation of The
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
National Capital Area
Parkinson Foundation of The
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
National Capital Area
Parkinson Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Western Pennsylvania
Parkinson Institute
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Society of
$250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Greenville Area
Parkinson Support Group of
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Upstate NY
Parkinson Voice Project
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinsons Action Network
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Parkinsons Action Network
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Parkinsons Action Network
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Parkinsons Action Network
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Parkinsons And Movement
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Disorder Foundation
Parkinson's Disease
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease Research
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Parkinson's Resources of
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Oregon
Parkinson's Resources of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oregon
Partnership for A Drug-Free
$50,000.00
Charitable Donation
America
Patient Access Network
$3,000,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$5,000,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$5,000,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$250,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$387,500.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$400,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$500,000.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Patient Empowerment Network
$9,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Network
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Network
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Network
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Pediatric Endocrinology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nursing Society
Pediatric Ibd Foundation
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pediatric Specialists of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Virginia LLC
Pennsylvania Biotechnology
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Pennsylvania Prostate
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Cancer Coalition
Pennsylvania Society of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastroenterology
Pennsylvania State Univ
$135,000.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
($3,067.00)
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
($9,660.00)
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
($32,062.00)
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Philadelphia Dermatological
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Philadelphia Fight
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Philadelphia Fight
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phmcy Quality Alliance
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Phrmct Care Mgmt Asoc
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phrmct Care Mgmt Asoc
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phrmct Care Mgmt Asoc
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phrmct Care Mgmt Asoc
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physicians' Education
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource, LLC
Physicians' Education
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource, LLC
Pikes Peak Habitat for
$2,500.00
Charitable Donation
Humanity
Premier Cares Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Premier Cares Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
President and Fellows of
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Harvard College
President and Fellows of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Harvard College
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Prime Education, Inc.
$198,011.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education, Inc.
$400,000.00
Educational Grants
Project Inform Inc.
$75,000.00
Patient Support
Project Inform Inc.
$75,000.00
Charitable Donation
Prostate Cancer Education
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Council
Prostate Cancer Foundation
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chicago
Prostate Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute
Prostate Cancer Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Institute
Prostate Health Education
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Network, Inc.
Prostate Health Education
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Network, Inc.
Prostate Health
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
International
Prostate Health
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
International
Protein Society
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Puerto Rico Academy of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Family Physician
Puerto Rico Community
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Network for Clinical
Research On Aids Inc.
Puerto Rico
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Association
Puerto Rico
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Association
Purdue University
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Purdue University
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Purdue University
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
PVI Peerview Institute for
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Education
PVI Peerview Institute for
($207.00)
Educational Grants
Medical Education
Quinsigamond Community
$500.00
Charitable Donation
College
Rectors And Visitors of The
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Virginia
Regents of The University
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
of California
Scholarships
Regents of The University
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
of California
Regents of The University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of California
Regents of The University
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
of California
Regents of The University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of California
Regents of The University
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
of California
Regents of The University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of California
Regents of The University
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
of Michigan
Regents of The University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Michigan
Regents of The University
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Michigan
Regents University of
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
California Los Angeles
Scholarships
Regents University of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
California Los Angeles
Regents University of
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
California Los Angeles
Scholarships
Regents University of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
California Los Angeles
Respiratory Health
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association of
Metropolitan Chicago
Respiratory Health
$4,050.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association of
Metropolitan Chicago
Rheumatism Society of The
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
District of Columbia
Rheumatism Society of The
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
District of Columbia
Rheumatology Alliance of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Louisiana
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$29,700.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rhode Island Pharmacy
$600.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Riverside Medical Clinic
$7,500.00
Patient Support
Charitable Foundation
Robert Michael Educational
$236,065.00
Educational Grants
Institute LLC
Robert Michael Educational
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute LLC
Robert Michael Educational
$275,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute LLC
Robert Michael Educational
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute LLC
Rock Hlth Inc.
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rush University Medical
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rush University Medical
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rutgers University
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation
Rutgers, The State
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Rutgers, The State
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Rutgers, The State
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Rutgers, The State
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
University of New Jersey
Safety Pharmacology Society
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Saint Francis Hospital And
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Saint Louis University
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hospital
Scientists Center for
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Animal Welfare
Scott And White Healthcare
$300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Scripps Health
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Research Institute
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Research Institute
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Sexual Medicine Society of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
North America
Sexual Medicine Society of
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
North America
Shanti Project Inc.
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Smart Ride The
$25,000.00
Corporate
Sponsorship
Sociedad Dermatologica De
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Puerto Rico
Sociedad Dermatologica De
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Puerto Rico
Sociedad Endocrinologia
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Metabolismo Y Diabetes Del
Sur
Sociedad Puertorriquena De
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Endocronologia Y
Diabetologia
Sociedad Puertorriquena De
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Endocronologia Y
Diabetologia
Sociedad Puertorriquena De
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pediatria
Sociedad Puertorriquena De
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pediatria
Sociedad Puertorriquena De
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pediatria
Society for Investigative
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
Society for Leukocyte
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Biology
Society for Mucosal
$16,398.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Immunology
Society for Neuroscience
($2,500.00)
Educational Grants
Society for Neuroscience
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuroscience
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Translational
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Oncology
Society of Dermatology
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Society of Dermatology
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Society of Dermatology
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Society of Gastroenterology
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Nurses & Associates
Society of Neuro Oncology
$16,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society of Nuclear Medicine
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society of Toxicologic
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pathology
Socty of Toxicology
$2,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Somos El Futuro, Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
South Carolina Alliance of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Plans
Southern Illinois
($711.12)
Fellowships or
University
Scholarships
Spondylitis Association of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
America
Spondylitis Association of
$19,000.00
Educational Grants
America
Spondyloarthritis Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
And Treatment Network
Spartan
St. Christophers Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
for Children
St. Lukes Regional Medical
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Center
St. Luke's-Roosevelt
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital Center
Take A Breather Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Tampa Bay Latin American
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical Society
Team Fox North Texas
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Tennessee Rheumatology
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Teratology Society
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Test Positive Awareness
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network
Texas Liver Inst The
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Osteopathic Medical
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Texas Urological Society
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Thomas Jefferson University
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical College
Thomas Jefferson University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical College
Thomas Jefferson University
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medical College
Torrington Area Parkinsons
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Support Group
Trustees of The University
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Twine Clinical Consulting
$411,950.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Med Academy Med
($3,550.00)
Educational Grants
Learning Grp LLC
United States Adult Cystic
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Fibrosis Association
Univ Hlth Srvc At Stony
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Point Inc.
Univ of Colorado Denver
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Caribe, Inc.
University At Buffalo
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
Foundation Inc.
University of Alabama At
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Birmingham
Scholarships
University of California--
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
San Francisco
University of California
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Berkeley
University of California
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Irvine
University of Chicago
($75,000.00)
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$7,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$157,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
($4,249.00)
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
($3,746.25)
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University of Chicago
$400,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
University of Chicago
($13,195.00)
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
($25,000.00)
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
($50,000.00)
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
($25,000.00)
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$2,081,222.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Cincinnati
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Connecticut
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
University of Connecticut
$12,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
University of Florida
$125,875.00
Educational Grants
University of Florida
($5,709.00)
Educational Grants
University of Florida
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
University of Florida
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Foundation Inc.
Scholarships
University of Illinois
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University of Illinois
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
University of Louisville
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Research Foundation, Inc.
University of Maryland
$5,500.00
Educational Grants
University of Maryland
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Baltimore
University of Maryland
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
Baltimore Foundation
University of Massachusetts
$2,500.00
Charitable Donation
Med School
University of Miami
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Miami
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Miami
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Department of Dermatology
University of Minnesota
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
University of Minnesota
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
University of Minnesota
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
University of Missouri Dept
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Neurology
University of Nebraska Med
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Ctr
University of Nebraska Med
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ctr
University of Nebraska Med
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Ctr
University of Nebraska Med
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Ctr
University of North
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Carolina At Chapel Hill
Scholarships
University of North
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Carolina At Chapel Hill
University of Pittsburgh
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Pittsburgh
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Pittsburgh
$2,250.00
Educational Grants
University of Pittsburgh
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Pittsburgh
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Rochester,
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Center for Experiential
Scholarships
Learning
University of South Florida
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Hlth Professions
Conferencing Corporation
University of South Florida
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth Professions
Conferencing Corporation
University of South Florida
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth Professions
Conferencing Corporation
University of Southern
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
California
University of Southern
($17,026.00)
Educational Grants
California
University of Southern
($2,974.00)
Educational Grants
California
University of Southern
$71,800.00
Fellowships or
California
Scholarships
University of Texas Hlth
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Scnc Ctr At San Antonio
University of Texas Hlth
$135,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Scnc Ctr At San Antonio
University of Texas Hlth
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Scnc Ctr At San Antonio
University of Texas
($100,000.00)
Educational Grants
Southwestern Med Ctr
University of The
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Philippines Med Alumni
Socty In America Nevada
University of Toledo
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Utah
$40,000.00
Fellowships or
Scholarships
Urological Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Urological Association of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physician Assistants
Urology Center of Colorado
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
US Pain Foundation, Inc.
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
US Pain Foundation, Inc.
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
US Pain Foundation, Inc.
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Us Too International Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Us Too International Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Us Too International Inc.
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
USMD Health System
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Van Andel Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute
Vanderbilt University Med
$25,000.00
Fellowships or
Ctr
Scholarships
Vanderbilt University
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Vindico Medical Education
$146,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Vindico Medical Education
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Vindico Medical Education
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Virginia Commonwealth Univ
$1,250.00
Charitable Donation
School of Medicine
Virginia Commonwealth Univ
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
School of Medicine
Wall Las Memorias
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Washington State Urology
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Washington University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Washington University
($1,248.95)
Fellowships or
Scholarships
WC Research Inc.
$8,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Webmd Global LLC
$430,600.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$1,165,500.00
Educational Grants
Well Project Inc.
$20,000.00
Charitable Donation
Western States Phmcy
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Conference for Phmcy
Residents Fellowships &
Preceptors
Wheaton Franciscan
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Healthcare Foundation
Wisconsin Academy of Phys
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assistants
Wisconsin Collaborative for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Healthcare Quality
Wisconsin Dairyland Chapter
$1,910.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of HIMSS
Wisconsin Medical Society
$450.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Wisconsin Rheumatology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Wishes And Dreams for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis
Wj Weiser And Associates
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Wj Weiser And Associates
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
World Parkinson Coalition
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
World Parkinson Coalition
$207,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Yale University
($10,000.00)
Educational Grants
Yale University
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Yale University
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Young Survival Coalition
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Zebrafish Disease Models
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Zero The End of Prostate
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer
Zero The End of Prostate
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer
Zero The End of Prostate
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer
Zero The End of Prostate
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grants Donations Report--2016
(Parentheses represent refunds of previously disclosed payments)
Report as of 3/31/2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recipient
Payment Amount
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
50 Hoops
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
A And R Educational Grp LLC
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
A Runners Love
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AAALAC International
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Academy of Managed Care
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phmcy
Academy of Managed Care
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phmcy
Academy of Managed Care
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phmcy
Academy of Managed Care
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phmcy
Academy of Managed Care
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phmcy
Advances in Cosmetic And
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Med Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic And
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Med Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic And
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Med Dermatology Inc.
Adventist Hlth System--
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Sunbelt Inc.
Adventist Hlth System--
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Sunbelt Inc.
Advocate Hlth And Hospitals
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Corporation
Advocate Hlth And Hospitals
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Corporation
Aesthetic Dermatology
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Symposia
AIDS Action Committee
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Aids Drug Assistance
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Programs Advocacy Asoc
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
($7,500.00)
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
AIDS Institute
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Institute
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Institute
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
AIDS Institute
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Asoc of Hlth Plans
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama Dermatology Socty
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
The
Albany Med Colg
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Albany Med Colg
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albert Einstein Colg of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine Div of
Dermatology Attending Asoc
Albert Einstein College of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva
University
Albert Einstein College of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva
University
Albert Einstein College of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva
University
Albert Einstein College of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva
University
Albert Einstein Hlthcr
$5,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk
Alliance for Aging Research
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alliance for Aging Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alzheimers Asoc
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Alzheimers Asoc
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Academy of
$40,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$13,550.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
($60,000.00)
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of Family
$15,500.00
Educational Grants
Phys
American Academy of
$9,290.00
Educational Grants
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$20,720.70
Corporate Sponsorship
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$24,700.00
Educational Grants
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$10,010.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Neurology Institute
Scholarships
American Academy of
$2,700.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$22,616.70
Corporate Sponsorship
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ophthalmology AAO
American Academy of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ophthalmology AAO
American Academy of Phys
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Assistants
American Assoc for Cancer
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$20,000.00
Fellowships and
Research
Scholarships
American Assoc for Cancer
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Cancer
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Assoc for Lab
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Animal Scnc Fdtn
American Assoc for The
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Study of Liver Diseases
American Assoc of Clinical
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrinologists New
Jersey Chapter
American Assoc of Clinical
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrinologists New
Jersey Chapter
American Assoc of Clinical
$328,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Endocrinologists New
Jersey Chapter
American Assoc of Phys of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indian Origin Arkansas
American Asosc of Phys of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indian Origin Arkansas
American Association for
$500,000.00
Charitable Donations
The Study of Liver
Diseases (AASLD
Foundation)
American Association of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmaceutical Scientists
American Brain Tumor Asoc
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Brain Tumor Asoc
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Brain Tumor Asoc
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Brain Tumor Asoc
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
American Brain Tumor Asoc
$7,000.00
Educational Grants
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Action Network
American Chem Socty
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chem Socty
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chem Socty
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chem Socty
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
American Childhood Cancer
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Organization
American Colg of Gastro
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Colg of Gastro
$15,640.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Colg of Gastro
$15,640.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Colg of Gastro
$15,640.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Colg of Gastro
$41,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Colg of Gastro
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
American Colg of Gastro
$500,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Colg of Gastro
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Colg of Lab Animal
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Medicine
American Colg of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Obstetricians And
Gynecologists
American Colg of
$32,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Obstetricians And
Gynecologists
American Colg of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Obstetricians And
Gynecologists District 1
American Colg of Rheumlgy
$2,000,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Research And Education
Fdtn
American Colg of Rheumlgy
$1,500,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Research And Education
Fdtn
American Colg of Toxicology
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American College of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
American College of
$95,000.00
Fellowships and
Rheumatology
Scholarships
American College of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American Drug Utilization
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Review Society Adurs
American Drug Utilization
$6,666.67
Corporate Sponsorship
Review Society Adurs
American Drug Utilization
$6,666.67
Corporate Sponsorship
Review Society Adurs
American Drug Utilization
$6,666.66
Corporate Sponsorship
Review Society Adurs
American Federation for Med
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
American Gastro Asoc Inst
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
American Gastro Asoc Inst
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
American Gastro Asoc Inst
$33,300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Kdny Fund
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Legion National
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Legion National
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Headquarters
American Liver Fdtn
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Fdtn
$246,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Fdtn
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Fdtn
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Fdtn
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Liver Fdtn
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
American Liver Foundation
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Med Asoc Fdtn
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Med Grp Asoc
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Military Partner
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
American Neuro Asoc
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
American Neuro Asoc
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
American Osteopathic Colg
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Dermatology
American Pancreatic Asoc
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
American Pancreatic Asoc
$15,000.00
Patient Support
American Pancreatic Asoc
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Parkinson Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Parkinson Disease
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association Arizona
Chapter
American Pharmacists Asoc
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Pharmacists Asoc
$13,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Red Cross of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Greater Chicago
American Red Cross of
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Greater Chicago
American Society for
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Experimental
Neurotherapeutics
American Socty for Matrix
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Biology
American Socty for Mens
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth The
American Socty for
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacology and
Experimental Thrpt The
Aspet
American Socty for
$5,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Reproductive Medicine
American Socty for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Reproductive Medicine
American Socty for
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Reproductive Medicine
American Socty of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Anesthesiologists
American Socty of Clinical
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Oncology
American Socty of
$52,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hematology
American Socty of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Socty of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Socty of
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hematology
American Socty of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Hematology
American Socty of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Socty of Nphro
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Socty of Nphro
$8,700.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Thyroid Asoc Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
American Thyroid Asoc Inc.
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Urological Asoc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Education and Research
Inc.
American Urological Asoc.
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education and Research
Inc.
American Urological Asoc.
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education and Research
Inc.
American Urological Asoc.
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Education and Research
Inc.
American Urological Asoc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Education and Research
Inc.
American Urological Asoc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Education and Research
Inc.
American Urological Asoc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn
American Urological Asoc
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Fdtn
American Urological Asoc
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc. North Ctrl Section
American Urological Asoc
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc. Southeast Section
American Urological Asoc
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc. Western Section
American Urological Asoc
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
South Ctrl Section
Americans for Med Progress
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Americares Foundation, Inc.
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Americares Foundation, Inc.
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Angel Fdtn
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Annenberg Center for Health
$750,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Annenberg Center for Health
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Sciences at Eisenhower
Arkansas State Rheumlgy
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Asoc
Arthritis Foundation
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$22,500.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$259,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Foundation
$175,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Arthritis Patient Srvc
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Arthritis Patient Srvc
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Patient Srvc
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Asco Cancer Fdtn
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Asco Cancer Fdtn
$60,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Asco Cancer Fdtn
$30,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Asco Cancer Fdtn
$28,000.00
Educational Grants
Asco Cancer Fdtn
$28,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Fdtn
$28,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Fdtn
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Fdtn
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Asoc De Enfermeria
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oncologica Y Hematologica
De Puerto Rico Inc.
Asoc De Reumatologos De
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Puerto Rico
Asoc Latina De Asistencia Y
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Prevencion Del Cancer De
Mama
Asoc of Univ Tech Managers
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Asociacion De Salud Publica
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
De Puerto Rico
Aspen Cancer Conference
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
Association of Women in
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
Association of Women in
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatology
Atlanta Dermatological Asoc
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Autoimmune Advocacy
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alliance
Baehr Challenge Ltd
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Balm In Gilead Inc.
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Baylor Colg Medicine Inf
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Dis
Scholarships
Baylor Colg Medicine Inf
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
Dis
Baylor Hlth Care System
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Fdtn
Scholarships
Baylor Scott And White
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Health
Baylor Univ Med Ctr
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Baylor Univ Med Ctr
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Baylor Univ Med Ctr
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Beth Israel Deaconess Med
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ctr
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess Med
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
Ctr
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess Med
$27,000.00
Fellowships and
Ctr
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess Med
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Ctr
Beth Israel Deaconess Med
($592.19)
Fellowships and
Ctr
Scholarships
Bexar County Physician
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assistant Society
Bioconnections LLC
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Black Hills Arthritis Asoc
$2,200.00
Educational Grants
Boomer Esiason Fdtn
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boomer Esiason Fdtn
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Borland Groover Fdtn
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boston Center for
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Independent Living
Boston Socty Inc.
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boston Socty Inc.
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Boston Univ Medcn Psychtry
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Boston Univ Medcn Psychtry
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Boston Univ Medcn Psychtry
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Boston Univ Medcn Psychtry
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Boston Univ Medcn Psychtry
($2,482.00)
Educational Grants
Boston Univ Medcn Psychtry
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Boston Univ Medcn Psychtry
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Brian Grant Fdtn The
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Brian Grant Fdtn The
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Brian Grant Fdtn The
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Brigham And Women's
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital, Inc.
Brigham And Women's
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital, Inc.
Scholarships
Bucks Montgomery Counties
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oncology Nursing Socty
Business Hlth Coalition
$3,300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn
California Assn Physcn Grps
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fnd
California Assn Physcn Grps
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fnd
California Chronic Care
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
California Inst of Tech
$5,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
California Issues forum
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
California Life Sciences
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
California Life Sciences
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
California Life Sciences
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
California Pacific Med Ctr
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn
California Rheumlgy
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alliance
California Socty of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology and
Dermatology Surgry
Cancer And Leukemia Grp B
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Fdtn
Cancer Awareness of Nevada
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Care
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Care
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Fdtn for New Mexico
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Molecular Thrpt
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research Inst
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Support Community
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Wellness Center
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Carden Jennings Publishing
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Carden Jennings Publishing
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Caribe Gyn
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Caring Ambassadors Program
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Caring Ambassadors Program
$200,000.00
Charitable Donations
Caring Ambassadors Program
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cascade AIDS Project
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
CE Outcomes LLC
$96,770.00
Educational Grants
Cedars--Sinai Med Ctr
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cedars--Sinai Med Ctr
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Center for Healthcare
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Innovation
Central Brain Tumor
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Registry of The United
States
Chesapeake Uro Asoc
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chesapeake Uro Asoc
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chicago Council On Scnc and
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Technologies
Chicago Council On Scnc and
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Technologies
Childrens Digestive Hlth
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
and Nutrition Fdtn
Childrens Digestive Hlth
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
and Nutrition Fdtn
Scholarships
Childrens Hosp Corporation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chimp Haven
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chronic Liver Disease Fdtn
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chronic Liver Disease Fdtn
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
Chronic Liver Disease Fdtn
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chronic Liver Disease Fdtn
($25,824.00)
Educational Grants
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Cincinnati Childrens Hosp
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medic
Scholarships
Cincinnati Childrens Hosp
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medic
Cleveland Clnc
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$57,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$50,000.00
Educational Grants--
Cleveland Clnc
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cleveland Clnc
($6,743.76)
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
($6,093.50)
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
($13,210.68)
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clnc Fdtn
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cleveland Clnc Fdtn
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$173,615.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$347,520.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$126,385.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
($75,000.00)
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Coalicion Para El Control
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
De Hepatitis En Puerto
Rico
Coalition for Prevention of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Colorectal Cancer In
Puerto Rico
Coalition On Positive
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Empowerment
Coalition On Positive
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Health Empowerment
Coalition On Positive
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Empowerment
Cockerell Educational
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Cold Spring Harbor Lab
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cold Spring Harbor Lab
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Colegio Medicos--Cirujanos
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Pr
Collegium Internationale
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Colorado Dietetic Asoc
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Colorado Gerontological
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Colorado Retina Asoc
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Columbia Univ Med Ctr
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Commty Fdtn
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Commty Fdtn
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Commty Liver Alliance
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Commty Liver Alliance
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Access National
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Network
Community Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Initiatives
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Initiatives
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Initiatives
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$9,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Community Liver Alliance
$19,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Complete Conference Mgmt
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Connecticut Advanced Nurse
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Practitioner Socty
Connecticut Advocates for
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinsons Inc.
Connecting To Cure Crohns
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
And Colitis
Consortium of Multiple
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Continuing Educational
($2,537.67)
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
($2,537.67)
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
($1,250.00)
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$99,440.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Cornell Univ Weill Med Colg
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Cornell Univ Weill Med Colg
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornell Univ Weill Med Colg
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Hlth Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Hlth Inc.
($3,750.00)
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Hlth Inc.
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Hlth Inc.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Hlth Inc.
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Hlth Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Creighton Univ
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Critical Path Inst
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Crohns And Colitis
$165,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Crohns And Colitis
$110,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns And Colitis
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns And Colitis
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns And Colitis
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$31,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$800.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$47,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$114,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation of America
Scholarships
Crohns and Colitis
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$80,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Ctrl Florida Phmcy Council
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
Ctrl Savannah River Area
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Csra Parkinson Support Grp
Curatio Cme Inst
($33,640.17)
Educational Grants
Cure CF
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Curepsp Inc.
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn--
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn--
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn--
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn--
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn--
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn--
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn--
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Albany
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Maryland Chapter
Cystic Fibrosis Fdtn
$5,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Maryland Chapter
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fund Emilys Entourage
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$750,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cystic Fibrosis Services
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dallas fort Worth Business
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Grp On Hlth
Danville D Elegance Fdtn
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dava Oncology Lp
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dava Oncology Lp
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
David A Winston Health
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Policy
Davis Phinney Fdtn
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Fdtn
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Fdtn
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Davis Phinney Fdtn
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Fdtn
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Fdtn
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Fdtn
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Education Fdtn
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Fdtn
$135,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology Fdtn
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Nurses Asoc
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology Nurses Asoc
$25,850.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Digestive Disease Week
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Digestive Disease Week
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Digestive Health Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Digestive Health Physicians
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Direct Relief
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
East Hawaii IPA
$8,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Elsevier Inc.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Employers Hlth Colition
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Endocrine Education Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Education Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Engineering Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
International
Enviormental Mutagen Socty
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Enzyme Mechanism Conference
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Epilepsy Association of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Central Florida
Epilepsy Fnd of North-
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Central Illinois Iowa and
Nebraska
Epilepsy Foundation of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Flordia Inc.
Epilepsy Foundation of
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan
Epilepsy Foundation of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan
Epilepsy Foundation of New
$17,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Jersey
Escuela De Medicina De
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Ponce
Escuela De Medicina De
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ponce
Event 360 Inc.
$8,330.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Excel Continuing Education
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Excellence in Gastro
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education LLC
Excellence in Rheumlgy
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education LLC
Family Med Ctr Bolingbrook
$13,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Family Med Ctr Bolingbrook
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn for Biomedical
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Research
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty
Federation of American
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty
Federation of Clinical
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Socty
Federation of Clinical
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Socty
Federation of Clinical
$12,500.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Socty
Florida Hlth Care Coalition
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Florida Socty of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Phys
Assistants Inc.
Florida Socty of Rheumlgy
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Focus Med Communications
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Force--Facing Our Risk of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Emp
Force--Facing Our Risk of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Emp
Foster Ocular Immunology
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Socty
Foundation for Veterans
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health Care
Foundation of Consortium of
$12,280.00
Fellowships and
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
Scholarships
CMSC
Foundation of Consortium of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
CMSC
Foundation of Consortium of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
CMSC
Friends of Cancer Research
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Friends of Parkinsons
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Friends of The St Louis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Univ Liver Ctr
Fund for Public Hlth In New
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
York
Fundacion Alfredo Ruiz
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fundacion Daledale Inc.
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fundacion De Esclerosis
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Multiple De Puerto Rico
Fundacion Puertorriquena De
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Enfermedades Reumaticas
Galien Foundation
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Galien Foundation
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastro--Intestinal Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn
Gastro--Intestinal Research
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn
Gastrointestinal And Liver
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Association of The
Americas Inc.
Gateway for Cancer Research
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Georgetown Univ Hosp Phmcy
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Georgia Dermatology Phys
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assistants
Georgia Doty Hiv &
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Hepatitis Commty Outreach
Inc.
Georgia Prostate Cancer
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Coalition The
Georgia Society of Clinical
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oncology
Georgia Socty of
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rhematology
Global Academy for Medical
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$76,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$36,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$54,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Education
Global Alliance for Medical
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Education
Global Alliance for Patient
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Access
Global Biological Standards
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Inst
Globalization of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pharmaceutics Education
Ntwrk
Good Grief
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Great Lakes Chapter of The
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
American Society for
Pharmacology And
Experimental Therapeutics
Gynecologic Oncology Grp
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
The
Gynecologic Oncology Grp
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
The
Gynecologic Oncology Grp
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
The
Haymarket Med Education
($2,553.09)
Educational Grants
Head for The Cure Fdtn
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Healthcare Business Women's
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
Healthcare Business Women's
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association, Inc.
Healthwell Fdtn
$507,000.00
Charitable Donations
Healthy Women
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Heart to Heart
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Inc.
Heart to Heart
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Inc.
Heb Grocery Company LP
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Henry ford Hlth System
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Henry M Jackson Fdtn
$5,559.67
Corporate Sponsorship
Henry M Jackson Fdtn
$5,559.67
Corporate Sponsorship
Henry M Jackson Fdtn
$5,559.66
Corporate Sponsorship
Henry M Jackson Fdtn
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Hep C Connection
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hep C Connection
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Hep C Connection
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hepatitis C Asoc
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Hepatitis Education Project
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Hepatitis Education Project
$24,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hepatitis Education Project
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hepatitis Foundation
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
International
Hepatitis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
International
Herbert Kosten Pancreatic
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Charitable Fund
Hidradenitis Suppurativa
$13,550.00
Charitable Donations
Fdtn
Hitchcock Fdtn
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Hitchcock Fdtn
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
HIV Treaters Med Asoc of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Puerto Rico
Hlthcr Financial Mgmt Hfma
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hmp Communications
$31,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hmp Communications
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hope Fdtn The
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Hope Healthcare Services
$600.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Houston Area Parkinson
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Houston Business Coalition
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
On Health
Howard Hanna Children's
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Free Care Fund
Hubbard Street Dance
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Chicago
Human Growth Fdtn
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Human Growth Fdtn
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Human Growth Fdtn
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Humboldt--Del Norte County
$1,100.00
Educational Grants
Med Socty
Humboldt--Del Norte County
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Socty
Ibd Remedy Inc.
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Illinois African American
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Illinois Socty of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Phys
Assistants
Illinois Socty of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology Phys
Assistants
Imedex LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$9,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
($838.00)
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Improve Care Now Inc.
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indian Medical Association
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of New England
Indiana Parkinson Fdtn
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Indiana Univ
($619.24)
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Indiana Univ Fdtn
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Fdtn
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Fdtn
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Fdtn
Innovation Development Inst
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Integrated Benefits Inst
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
Integrated Med Fdtn
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Interfaith House
$2,000.00
Charitable Donations
Intermountain Dermatology
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Socty
International Aids Socty--
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International Aids Socty--
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
USA
International Biometric
$4,925.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Socty Eastern North
American Region
International Chinese
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Statistical Asoc
International Dermatology
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Outcome Measures
International League of
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Asoc for Rheumlgy
International Medical Corps
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Organization
$145,000.00
Educational Grants
of Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International Organization
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
of Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International Parkinson And
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Movemen
International Socty for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Antiviral Research
International Socty for The
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Study of Xenobiotics
International Socty for The
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Study of Xenobiotics
International Socty of
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nphro
International Socty of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Psychiatric Genetics
Iraq and Afghanistan
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Veterans
ISMPP--International Socty
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
for Med
ISMPP--International Socty
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
for Med
Jefferson Med Colg At
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Thomas Jefferson Univ
Jefferson Med Colg At
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Thomas Jefferson Univ
Jefferson Med Colg At
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Thomas Jefferson Univ
John P Mcgovern Museum of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health And Medical Science
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
of Medicine
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$99,750.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$7,000.00
Fellowships and
of Medicine
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
JWC Covenant Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Kansas Univ Neuro Fdtn
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Kelsey Research Fdtn
$35,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Kentuckiana Health
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Collaborative
Kentucky Life Sciences
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Keystone Symposia
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,955.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$810.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$720.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$630.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,440.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,485.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$5,250.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$735.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$810.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$660.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,875.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$825.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$765.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$885.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,740.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$810.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$372.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,550.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,470.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,350.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,215.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,080.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$705.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$645.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$204.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$765.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,905.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$585.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$885.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$870.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$975.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,080.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,035.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$300.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$870.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,305.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$645.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,290.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,005.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$204.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,140.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$810.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$240.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,395.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,275.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$705.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,425.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$405.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,095.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$720.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$660.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$495.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,355.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,295.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$915.00
Patient Support
Lake County Haven
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Large Uro Grp Prct Asoc
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Large Uro Grp Prct Asoc
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Large Uro Grp Prct Asoc
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Large Uro Grp Prct Asoc
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Large Uro Grp Prct Asoc
$66,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Large Uro Grp Prct Asoc
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Lenox Hill Hosp
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Society
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation Inc.
Scholarships
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Inc.
Living Beyond Breast Cancer
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Living Beyond Breast Cancer
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Loyola Stritch School of
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine Div of
Dermatology
Lung Cancer Alliance
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Lungevity Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Lungevity Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Lupus and Allied Diseases
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Lymphoma Research
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$37,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Magee--Womens Research Inst
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
And Fdtn
Magellan Rx Mgmt Inc.
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Magic Fdtn
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Magic Fdtn
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Massachusetts Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
for Mental Health
Massachusetts Inst of Tech
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Massachusetts Prostate
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Coalition Inc.
Massachusetts Socty for Med
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
Massachusetts Socty for Med
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
Massachusetts Socty of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Clinical Oncologists
Max Foundation
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Mayo Clnc
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Mayo Clnc
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Mccourt Fdtn Inc.
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Me Strong Inc.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Med--LQ LLC
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Med--LQ LLC
$185,000.00
Educational Grants
Med--LQ LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Med--LQ LLC
$167,933.00
Educational Grants
Med Colg of Wisconsin
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Med Colg of Wisconsin
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Colg of Wisconsin
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Med Colg of Wisconsin
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Conference Planners
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Med Learning Inst
$180,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$72,015.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$70,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$65,380.00
Educational Grants
Med Learning Inst
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicinal And Bioorganic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Chemistry Fdtn The
Medscape LLC
$450,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$189,500.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$252,350.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$135,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$385,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$165,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$195,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$41,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
($2,000.00)
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$112,500.00
Educational Grants
Medstar Washington Hosp Ctr
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Meeting Designs LLC
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Memorial Sloan Kettering
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Ctr
Memphis Business Grp On
$5,120.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
Memphis Business Grp On
$5,120.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
Meridian Hospitals
$400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Corporation
Methodist Hosp The
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Metropolitan Chicago Breast
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer
Michael J Fox Fdtn
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michael J Fox Fdtn
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michael J Fox Fdtn
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michael J Fox Fdtn
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Michigan Parkinson
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Michigan Parkinson
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Michigan Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Michigan Rheumatism Socty
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan Rheumatism Socty
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan Rheumatism Socty
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan State Univ
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Michigan State Univ
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Midwest Business Grp On
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
Midwest Pediatric Endocrine
$6,300.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Socty
Miles for Cystic Fibrosis
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Miles for Cystic Fibrosis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Missouri Hepatitis C
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Alliance
Montana Asoc of Hlth Care
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Purchaser
Montefiore Med Ctr
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Montefiore Med Ctr
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Montefiore Med Ctr
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Mount Sinai School of
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Movement Disorder Socty The
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Movement Disorder Socty The
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Movement Disorder Socty The
$9,900.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ms Cure Fund, Inc.
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ms Cure Fund, Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Ms Cure Fund, Inc.
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Ms Views And News Inc.
$9,000.00
Educational Grants
Multiple Myeloma Research
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Fdtn Inc. The
Multiple Myeloma Research
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Fdtn Inc. The
Multiple Myeloma Research
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn Inc. The
Nashville Cares Inc.
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
National Alliance of Mental
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illness Flordia
National Alliance of Mental
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illness Michigan
National Alliance of Mental
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illness Tennessee
National Alliance of Mental
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Illness Washington
National Alliance of State
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
and Territorial AIDS
Directors
National Association of
$6,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hispanic Nurses
National Association of
$6,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hispanic Nurses
National Association of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Latino Elected & Appointed
officials Educational Fund
National Brain Tumor
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society (Nbts)
National Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Society (Nbts)
National Brain Tumor
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society, Inc
National Coalition for
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer
National Comprehensive
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Cancer Network
National Hemophlia
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
National Minority Quality
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
forum Inc.
National Ms Society Upper
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Midwest Chapter
National Multiple Sclerosis
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society
National Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Minnesota
National Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Minnesota
National Parkinson
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Minnesota
National Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation Minnesota
Nationwide Childrens Hosp
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Fdtn
Natl Academy of Dermatology
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nurse Practitioners
Natl Aids Treatment
$300,000.00
Charitable Donations
Advocacy Project
Natl Alliance of State And
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Territorial Aids Directors
Natl Asoc of Managed Care
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys
Natl Asoc of Managed Care
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys
Natl Asoc of Managed Care
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys
Natl Asoc of Managed Care
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phys
Natl Asoc of Managed Care
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys
Natl Breast Cancer
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Coalition Fund
Natl Business Coalition On
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
Natl Commission On
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Correctional Hlth Care
Natl Commission On
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Correctional Hlth Care
Natl Commission On
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Correctional Hlth Care
Natl Committee for Quality
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assurance
Natl Committee for Quality
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Assurance
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$240,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk
Natl Comprehensive Cancer
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Natl Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Socty
Natl Organization of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumlgy Managers
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$85,000.00
Charitable Donations
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$70,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Pancreas Fdtn
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Parkinson Fdtn Inc.
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$26,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$26,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$26,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$26,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$13,550.00
Charitable Donations
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Psoriasis Fdtn
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Natl Socty for Cutaneous
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicine
Natl Socty for Cutaneous
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicine
Natl Socty for Cutaneous
$135,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicine
Natl Socty for Cutaneous
$135,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Medicine
Neuro Challenge Foundation
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
Neurologic Disease
$4,995.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
New Jersey Academy of
$105,000.00
Educational Grants
Family Phys
New Mexico Parkinsons
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
Disease Coalition
New York Academy of Scnc
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
New York Academy of Scnc
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
New York Socty for
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
New York State Council of
$11,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth-System Pharmacists
New York State Rheumlgy
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Socty
New York Univ School of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
New York Univ School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
New York Univ School of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
New York Univ School of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
New York Univ School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
New York Univ School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
New York Univ School of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Nexus Global Grp Scnc
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nicole Jarvis Md Parkinsons
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Research Fdtn
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
($40,000.00)
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$128,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
North American Ctr for
$390,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
(NACCME, LLC)
North American Ctr for
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
(NACCME, LLC)
North American Ctr for
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
(NACCME, LLC)
North American Ctr for
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
(NACCME, LLC)
North American Socty for
$31,000.00
Educational Grants
Pediatric Gastro
Hepatology And Nutrition
North American Socty for
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Pediatric Gastro
Scholarships
Hepatology And Nutrition
North Dakota Pharmacists
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Asoc
North Dakota Society of
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Health System Pharmacists
North Eastern Section of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
The American Chemical
Society, Inc.
North Memorial Commty Fdtn
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northeast Business Grp On
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
Northeast Business Grp On
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
Northwest Health Law
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Advocates
Northwest Kdny Centers
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northwest Parkinsons Fdtn
$7,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwest Parkinsons Fdtn
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northwest Parkinsons Fdtn
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern Memorial Fdtn
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern Univ
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Northwestern Univ
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Northwestern Univ
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern Univ
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern Univ
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Norton Hlthcr Inc.
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ocular Immunology And
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Uveitis Fdtn
Ohio Asoc of Rheumlgy
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ohio Gastro Socty
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Omnia Education Inc.
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Oncology Nursing Socty
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Oncology Nursing Socty
$38,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Open Doors Commty School
$2,000.00
Charitable Donations
Oregon Hlth & Scnc Univ
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Oregon Hlth & Scnc Univ
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Oregon Hlth & Scnc Univ
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Oregon Hlth & Scnc Univ
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Oregon State University
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Organic Reactions Catalysis
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Socty
Ostomy Asoc of Greater
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chicago
Ounce of Prevention Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Pacific Dermatologic Asoc
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pacific Dermatologic Asoc
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pack Hlth LLC
$91,375.00
Educational Grants
Pack Hlth LLC
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Pack Hlth LLC
$127,800.00
Educational Grants
Pack Hlth LLC
$108,875.00
Educational Grants
Pancreas Club The
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk Inc.
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$234,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Ntwrk Inc.
Park Nicollet
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Alliance Inc.
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson And Movement
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Disorder All
Parkinson And Movement
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Disorder All
Parkinson And Movement
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Disorder All
Parkinson Asoc of The
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Rockies
Parkinson Asoc of The
$6,000.00
Educational Grants
Rockies
Parkinson Association of
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Alabama
Parkinson Association of
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Central Florida Inc.
Parkinson Council
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Fdtn of The Natl
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Capital Area
Parkinson Foundation of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oklahoma
Parkinson Foundation of
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oklahoma
Parkinson Institute
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Ntwrk of Arizona
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinson Society of
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Greenville Area
Parkinson Study Group
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinson Support Center of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Kentuciana
Parkinson Support Center of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Kentuciana
Parkinson Wellness Recovery
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinsons And Movement
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Disorder Foundation
Parkinsons Asoc of Western
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan
Parkinsons Disease Fdtn
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinsons Disease Fdtn
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinsons Disease Fdtn
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinsons Outreach
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Parkinsons Resources of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oregon
Parkinsons Resources of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Oregon
Parkinsons Unity Walk
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Parkinsons Unity Walk
$64,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Partners Hlthcr System
($10,000.00)
Educational Grants
Partnership for A Drug Free
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
America
Partnership for Quality Med
$2,000.00
Charitable Donations
Donations Pqmd
Partnership for Quality Med
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Donations Pqmd
Patient Access Ntwrk Fdtn
$8,400,000.00
Charitable Donations
Patient Access Ntwrk Fdtn
$260,000.00
Charitable Donations
Patient Access Ntwrk Fdtn
$557,000.00
Charitable Donations
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$22,500.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$22,500.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Power LLC
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pediatric Endocrinology
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nursing Socty
Pediatric Endocrinology
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Nursing Socty
Pediatric Splts of Virginia
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
LLC
Pennsylvania Academy of
$13,550.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology And
Dermatologic Surgry
Pennsylvania Socty of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Gastro
Pennsylvania State Univ
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
($36,337.33)
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania State Univ
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Phmcy Quality Alliance
$12,500.00
Educational Grants
Phoenix Childrens Hosp
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Phys Education Resource
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Phys Education Resource
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Pins for Parkinsons
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pittsburgh Business Grp On
$3,800.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
Pittsburgh Business Grp On
$3,800.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth
President And Fellows of
$6,000.00
Educational Grants
Harvard Colg
Prevent Cancer Fdtn
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Prime Education Inc.
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$218,348.25
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$142,376.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Princeton Univ Trustees
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Proce Inc.
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Project Access Now
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Project Inform Inc.
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Project Inform Inc.
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Projects In Knowledge Inc.
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Promedica International Cme
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Promis Hlth Organization
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Prostate Cancer Foundation
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Chicago
Prostate Cancer Research
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Inst
Prostate Cancer Research
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inst
Prostate Hlth Education
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Prostate Hlth Education
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ntwrk
Prostate Net Inc. The
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Prostaware
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Puerto Rico Academy of
$16,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Family Phys
Puerto Rico Asoc of Gastro
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Puerto Rico Asoc of Gastro
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Puerto Rico Asoc of Gastro
$6,500.00
Educational Grants
Purdue Univ
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Purdue Univ
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Purdue Univ
($60,000.00)
Educational Grants
Regents of The Univ of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
California The
Regents of The Univ of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
California The
Regents of The Univ of
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
California The
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
California The
Regents of The Univ of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
California The
Regents of The Univ of
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
California The
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
California The
Regents of The Univ of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
California The
Regents of The Univ of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Michigan
Regents of The Univ of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Michigan
Regents of The Univ of
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Michigan
Regional Osteopathic Med
$165,000.00
Educational Grants
Education
Renal Phys Asoc
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Respiratory Hlth Asoc of
$4,050.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Metro Chicago
Rheumatism Socty of The
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
District of Columbia The
Rheumatology Association of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Nevada
Rheumlgy Alliance of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Louisiana
Rheumlgy Nurses Socty
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumlgy Nurses Socty
$31,875.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumlgy Nurses Socty
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumlgy Nurses Socty
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumlgy Nurses Socty
$44,625.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Riverside Medical Clinic
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Charitable Foundation
Robert Michael Educational
$123,500.00
Educational Grants
Inst LLC
Robert Michael Educational
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Inst LLC
Rock Steady Boxing
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rocky Mountain Ms Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Rush Univ Med Ctr
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Rush Univ Med Ctr
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rush Univ Med Ctr
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Rutgers The State Univ of
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
New Jersey
Rutgers The State Univ of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
New Jersey
Rutgers The State Univ of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
New Jersey
Rutgers University
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Safety Pharmacology Socty
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Saint Anthony Hosp Fdtn
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
San Francisco Neuro Socty
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
San Francisco Retina
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
San Juan Bautista Med
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Scott And White Healthcare
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
Scripps Hlth
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Hlth
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Hlth
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Hlth
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Hlth
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Hlth
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Research Inst.
$5,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Scripps Research Inst.
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Seattle Science Foundation
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Sexual Medicine Socty of
($25,000.00)
Educational Grants
North Am
Sexual Medicine Socty of
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
North America Inc.
Share
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Sheknows LLC
$43,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Smith Wholesale Drug
$9,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Company
Sociedad Dermatologica De
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Puerto Rico
Sociedad Dermatologica De
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Puerto Rico
Sociedad Pr Endocrinologia
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Y Diabetologia
Sociedad Puertorriquena
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pediatria
Society for Mucosal
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Immunology
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$107,400.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Society of Nuclear Medicine
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
and Molecular Imaging
Socty for Immunotherapy of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer
Socty for Leukocyte Biology
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty for Neuroscience
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Socty for Translational
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Oncology
Socty of Dermatology Phys
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assistants
Socty of Dermatology Phys
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assistants
Socty of Dermatology Phys
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Assistants
Socty of Investigative
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
Socty of Toxicologic
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pathology
Socty of Toxicologic
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Pathology
Socty of Toxicology
$450.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Socty of Toxicology
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
South Carolina Alliance of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Hlth Plans
South Carolina
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatological Asoc
South Dakota Parkinson
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Foundation
South Texas Asoc of
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Rheumatologists
Southeastern Consortium for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Dermatology
Splty Pharma Education Ctr
$49,750.00
Educational Grants
St Louise Regional Hosp
($2,000.00)
Educational Grants
State of Maryland
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
State of Maryland
$5,500.00
Educational Grants
State of Maryland
$23,000.00
Educational Grants
Super Jake Fdtn The
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Susan G Komen Philadelphia
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
Take A Breather Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Take A Breather Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Take A Breather Foundation
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Tarsus Cardio Inc. Dba
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
South Beach Symposium
Team Fox North Texas
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Tennessee Dermatology Socty
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Tennessee Disability
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Tennessee Disability
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Coalition
Tennessee Nurses
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Teratology Socty
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Academy of Family
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Physicians
Texas Medical Association
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Medical Association
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Neuro Socty
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Osteopathic Medical
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Association
Texas Urological Socty
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Texas Urological Socty
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
The Endocrine Socty
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
The Endocrine Socty
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
The Endocrine Socty
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
The International Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Council
Trinity Christian Colg Asoc
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Trustees of The Univ of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Pennsylvania
Tufts Med Ctr
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Tufts Univ
($4,580.00)
Educational Grants
Tulane Univ Hlth Scnc Ctr
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clnc
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clnc
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Prosthetics Clnc
Scholarships
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clnc
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clnc
Ultimate Med Academy Med
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Learning Grp LLC
Ultimate Med Academy Med
$198,790.00
Educational Grants
Learning Grp LLC
Ultimate Med Academy Med
$98,600.00
Educational Grants
Learning Grp LLC
Ultimate Med Academy Med
$389,100.00
Educational Grants
Learning Grp LLC
UMA Education Inc. DBA
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Grp
Umass Amherst
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Umass Fdtn
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
United Spinal Association
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Inc.
United States Adult Cystic
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Fibrosis Asoc Inc.
United Way of Ctrl
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Massachusetts
United Way of Ctrl
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Massachusetts
Univ Connecticut Derm
$12,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ Connecticut Derm
($130.91)
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ Hlth Srvc At Stony
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Point Inc.
Univ Hosp Cleveland Med
$15,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ Hosp of Brooklyn
$16,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Alabama At
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Birmingham
Univ of Alabama At
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Birmingham
Scholarships
Univ of California--San
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Francisco
Scholarships
Univ of California--San
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Francisco
Univ of California--San
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Francisco
Univ of California Berkeley
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of California Berkeley
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Univ of California Berkeley
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Univ of California Irvine
$5,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of California Irvine
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$130,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Colorado Denver
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Univ of Florida
$15,898.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Florida
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Florida Fdtn
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorship
Univ of Florida Fdtn
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Illinios
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Illinois Fdtn
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Univ of Illinois Fdtn
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Univ of Kansas Hosp
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Kansas Hosp
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Louisville Research
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Fdtn
Univ of Louisville Research
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Fdtn
Univ of Louisville Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Fdtn
Univ of Louisville Research
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Fdtn
Univ of Maryland Baltimore
$5,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Maryland Baltimore
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Fdtn
Univ of Massachusetts Med
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
School
Univ of Massachusetts Med
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
School
Univ of Minnesota Regents
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Minnesota Regents
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Ctr
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Ctr
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grants Donations Report--2017
(Parentheses represent refunds of previously disclosed payments)
Report as of 3/31/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recipient
Payment Amount
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
50 Hoops
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
A and R Educational Group
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
LLC
A and R Educational Group
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
LLC
Academia Medica Del Sur
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Academia Puertorriquena DE
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurologia
Academy of Managed Care
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmacy
Academy of Physician
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assistants, Tennessee
Advanced Urology Institute
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education and General Fund
Advances in Cosmetic and
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Dermatology Inc.
Advocate Bromenn Medical
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Advocate Bromenn Medical
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Center
Aesthetic Dermatology
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Symposia
Aesthetic Dermatology
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Symposia
AIDS Connecticut
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
AIDS Connecticut
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
AIDS Institute
$36,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alabama Dermatology Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alabama Dermatology Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alaska Rheumatology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alliance
Alliance for Aging Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alliance for Patient Access
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alzheimers Association
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Greater Illinois Chapter
Alzheimers Association
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Greater Illinois Chapter
Alzheimers Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Greater Illinois Chapter
Alzheimers Disease and
$133,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Related Disorders
Association Inc.
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
American Academy of
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
American Academy of
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
American Academy of
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of
$37,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
American Academy of Family
$17,000.00
Educational Grants
Physicians
American Academy of
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$53,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Neurology Institute
Scholarships
American Academy of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$14,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatrics
American Academy of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Physician Assistants
American Academy of
$16,000.00
Educational Grants
Physician Assistants
American Association of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Clinical Endocrinologists
New Jersey Chapter
American Association of
$18,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
New Jersey Chapter
American Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians of Indian
Origin Arkansas
American Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians of Indian
Origin Arkansas
American Association for
($2,205.00)
Educational Grants
Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Care
International
American Association for
$25,000.00
Fellowships and
Cancer Research
Scholarships
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Laboratory Animal Science
American Association for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Laboratory Animal Science
New England Branch
American Association for
$3,150.00
Corporate Sponsorships
The Study of Liver Disease
American Association of
$7,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gynecologic Laparoscopists
Inc
American Association of
$59,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gynecologic Laparoscopists
Inc
American Association of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmaceutical Scientists
American Autoimmune Related
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Brain Tumor
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Brain Tumor
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Brain Tumor
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Brain Tumor
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Brain Tumor
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Action Network Connecticut
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Action Network North
Carolina
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Action Network
American Chemist Society
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chemist Society
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
American Chemist Society
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
American College of Chest
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Physicians
American College of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Pharmacology
American College of
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Endocrinology
American College of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
American College of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Laboratory Animal Medicine
American College of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American College of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Osteopathic Obstetricians
and Gynecologists
American College of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Osteopathic Obstetricians
and Gynecologists
American College of
$57,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Foundation
American College of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians West Virginia
Chapter
American College of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
American College of
$80,000.00
Fellowships and
Rheumatology
Scholarships
American College of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$37,500.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$17,600.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
American College of
$2,000,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Research and
Education Foundation
American College of
$500,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Research and
Education Foundation
American Congress of
$10,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$13,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American
$12,500.00
Charitable Donations
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American Kidney Fund
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Legion National
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$275,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
American Liver Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Lung Association
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Lung Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of The Northeast
American Lung Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of The Northeast
American Lung Association
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of The Northeast
American Med Group
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$4,940.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Neuro Associate
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
American Pancreatic
$25,000.00
Patient Support
Associate
American Pancreatic
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate
American Parkinson Disease
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$62,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Red Cross of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Greater Chicago
American Society for
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics
American Society for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Reproductive Medicine
American Society for
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Reproductive Medicine
American Society for
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Reproductive Medicine
American Society of Colon
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
and Rectal Surgns
American Society of
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Hematology
Scholarships
American Society of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Society of
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Society of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Society of Nphro
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Society of Nphro
$160,000.00
Educational Grants
American Statistical
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate
American Statistical
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Associate
American Thyroid Associate
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
American Urological
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$13,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate Inc Western
Section
American Urological
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Association
American Urological
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Urological
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Urological
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Urological
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Urological
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Association
American Urological
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Urological
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Americans for Med Progress
$90,000.00
Charitable Donations
Americares Foundation
$12,000.00
Charitable Donations
American Hepato-Pancreato-
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Biliary Association
Angel Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arizona State Association
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Physician Assistants
Arizona United Rheumatology
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alliance--Aura
Arkansas State Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association Inc.
Arkansas Technology
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
University Foundation
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$259,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation Inc.
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Patient Services
$2,400.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Patient Services
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Patient Services
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
ARVO Foundation for Eye
$5,000.00
Fellowships and
Research
Scholarships
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$100,000.00
Patient Support
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$28,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$56,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$34,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$13,275.00
Educational Grants
ASCO Cancer Foundation
$26,000.00
Educational Grants
Asembia
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
ASHP Foundation
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Associate DE
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterologia Y
Hepatologia Pediatrica DE
Puerto Rico Aghppr
Associate DE Reumatologos
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
DE Puerto Rico
Associate DE Reumatologos
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
DE Puerto Rico
Associate of Physician
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assistants in Oncology
Inc.
Associate of Physician
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assistants in Oncology
Inc.
Associate of Physician
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assistants in Oncology
Inc.
Associate of Professors of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gyn and Obstetrician
Associate of Professors of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gyn and Obstetrician
Associate of Professors of
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Gyn and Obstetrician
Associate of Reproductive
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Health Professionals
Associate of Univ
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Technology Managers
Association of Community
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Centers (ACCC)
Association of Community
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Centers (ACCC)
Association of Women in
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Association of Women in
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Association of Women in
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Atlanta Dermatology and
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pathology Associates, PC
Autoimmune Advocacy
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alliance
Auxiliary of Robert Wood
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Johnson University
Hospital
Baehr Challenge Ltd
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ball State University
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Baylor College Medicine
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Infusion Dis
Baylor College Medicine
$3,600.00
Fellowships and
Infusion Dis
Scholarships
Baylor Health Care System
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
Baylor Scott and White
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Health
Baylor Scott and White
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Health
Bendcare
$410,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Beth Israel Deaconess
($16,526.70)
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Beth Israel Deaconess
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$35,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Beth Israel Deaconess
($1,751.70)
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Beth Israel Med Center
$25,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Bioconnections LLC
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Biotechnology Industry
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization
Board of Trustees of The
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Leland Stanford Junior
Univ
Board of Trustees of The
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Illinois
Bonnie J Addario Lung
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Foundation
Bonnie J Addario Lung
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Foundation
Boomer Esiason Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Borland Groover Clinic
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Borland Groover Clinic
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Borland Groover Clinic
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Boston College School of
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nursing
Boston Society Inc.
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Boston Taiwanese
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Biotechnology Association
Inc.
Brain Support Network Inc.
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Breast Friends
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Breastcancer.Org
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Brian Grant Foundation
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Brian Grant Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Brigham and Women's
$7,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital, Inc.
Brigham and Women's
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital, Inc.
Scholarships
Broad Institute
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
California Associate of
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Groups
California Associate of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Groups
California Chronic Care
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Coalition
California Chronic Care
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Coalition
California Life Sciences
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
California Life Sciences
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
California Neurology
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
California Neurology
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
California Society of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatology Surgry
California Society of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatology Surgry
California Society of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatology Surgry
Cancer and Leukemia Group B
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cancer and Leukemia Group B
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cancer and Leukemia Group B
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cancer Awareness of Nevada
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Care
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Care
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Care
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Molecular Thrpt
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Support Community
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Support Community
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Support Community
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Wellness Center
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cardinal Health
$170,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cardinal Health
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Caribe Gyn
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Caribe Gyn
$17,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Caring Ambassadors Program
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Inc.
Caring Ambassadors Program
$15,000.00
Patient Support
Inc.
Carti Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cascade AIDS Project
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cedars--Sinai Med Center
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cedars--Sinai Med Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Central Brain Tumor
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Registry of The United
States
Central Brain Tumor
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Registry of The United
States
Central Savannah River Area
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Csra Parkinson Support
Group
Chicago Urological Soctiey
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Childrens Hospital Corp
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Childrens Hospital of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Philadelphia
Childrens Treehouse
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
Chimp Haven
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chinese American Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nuclear Medicine and
Molecular Imaging
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chronic Liver Disease
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$247,350.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$226,945.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Chronic Lymphocytic
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Leukemia Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$22,825.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Cincinnati Childrens
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital Medical Center
Scholarships
Cincinnati Childrens
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hospital Medical Center
City of Hope National Med
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Center
Cleveland Clinic
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clinic
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clinic
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cleveland Clinic
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clinic
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cleveland Clinic
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cleveland Clinic
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cleveland Clinic
($4,853.56)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
($6,652.23)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
($5,410.94)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic Minority
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Mens Health Center
Scholarships
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$95,560.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Cll Global Research
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cll Global Research
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cll Global Research
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Coalition for Prevention of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Colorectal Cancer in
Puerto Rico
Coalition of Positive
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Health Empowerment
Coalition of Texans With
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Disabilities
Coalition On Positive
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health Empower
Cockerell Educational
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Cody Dieruf Benefit
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
Cold Spring Harbor
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Laboratory
Collaborative Alliance for
$6,000.00
Fellowships and
Pancreatic Education and
Scholarships
Research
Collaborative Alliance for
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Pancreatic Education and
Research
Collaborative Alliance for
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pancreatic Education and
Research
Colorado Gerontological
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Columbia Univ Med Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Community Access National
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Network
Community Center
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Center
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Initiatives
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Initiatives
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Initiatives
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Liver Alliance
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Liver Alliance
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Liver Alliance
$9,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Liver Alliance
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Liver Alliance
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Complex Mechanisms of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Disease Aging and Trauma
(Cmdat) Research
Foundation
Connecticut Advanced Nurse
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practitioner Society
Connecticut Advocates for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinsons
Connecticut Peer Review
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization--Qualidigm
Connecting To Cure Crohns
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Colitis
Consortium of Multiple
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
$55,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Continuing Educational
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$149,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$99,550.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
($1,050.00)
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$121,165.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Med Education
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Outfitters LLC
Cornell Univ Weill Med
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
College
Cornell Univ Weill Med
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
College
Cornerstone Health
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Enablement Strategic
Solutions, LLC
Cornerstone Health Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Health Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cradles To Crayons Inc.
$300.00
Charitable Donations
Creighton Univ
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$14,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$15,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation of America
Scholarships
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Cure Cf
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Curepsp Inc.
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Curepsp Inc.
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Curepsp Inc.
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Curesearch for Childrens
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer
Curesearch for Childrens
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$9,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$750,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Fund Emilys Entourage
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Danville D Elegance
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dava Oncology Lp
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dava Oncology Lp
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Davis Phinney Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Davis Phinney Foundation
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
DBC Pri-Med LLC
$165,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Deep South Cancer
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Deep South Cancer
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Deep South Cancer
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dermatology Education
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dermatology Education
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dermatology Education
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dermatology Education
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dermatology Education
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dermatology Foundation
$135,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Univ LLC
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Digestive Disease Week
$31,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Digestive Health Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Diversity and Leadership
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Doctor Solomon Carter
($4,919.07)
Fellowships and
Fuller Mental Health
Scholarships
Center
Donate Life Coalition of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Michigan
Duke Univ
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Duke Univ
($16,360.00)
Educational Grants
Eastern Virginia Medical
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
School
Economic Alliance for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan
Eicosanoid Research
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Eisenhower Desert
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
El Centro Regional Medical
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Center F
Elsevier Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Employers Health Coalition
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Endocrine Society
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Society
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Endocrine Society
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endometriosis Foundation of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
America
Epilepsy Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Central Florida
Epilepsy Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Escuela DE Medicina DE
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ponce
Excellence in Rheumatology
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education LLC
Family Med Center
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Bolingbrook
Federation of American
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of American
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of Clinical
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Society
Federation of Clinical
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Society
Feinstein Institute for Med
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Research
Florida Cancer Specialists
$34,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Florida Chapter of America
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Academy of Pediatrics
Florida Chapter, American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
College of Phyician
Services
Florida Hospital Orlando
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Florida Society of
$22,600.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgry
Florida Society of
$25,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgery
Florida Society of
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Physician
Assistants Inc.
Florida Society of
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Physician
Assistants Inc.
Florida Society of
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Florida Society of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Inc.
Florida Society of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Inc.
Focus Med Communications
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Focus Med Communications
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foster Ocular Immunology
$33,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Foundation for Biomedical
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Research
Foundation of Consortium of
$5,450.00
Fellowships and
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
Scholarships
Cmsc
Foundation of Consortium of
$32,000.00
Fellowships and
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
Scholarships
Cmsc
Free To Breathe
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Free To Breathe
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Free To Breathe
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Friends of Cancer Research
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Friends of The St Louis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ Liver Center
Fundacion Alfredo Ruiz
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Fundacion Daledale Inc.
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Fundacion Puertorriquena DE
$12,500.00
Educational Grants
Pacientes Consult
Endometriosis
Funk Zitiello Foundation
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastrointestinal Research
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Gateway for Cancer Research
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Geneva Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
George Washington Univ
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
George Washington Univ
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hospital
George Washington Univ
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hospital
George Washington Univ
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hospital
Georgetown Univ
$7,000.00
Educational Grants
Georgetown Univ
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Georgia Society of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgery
Gildas Club Chicago
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Give for A Smile
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Global Academy for Medical
$36,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$58,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$76,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Healthy Living
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Global Healthy Living
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Global Healthy Living
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Global Oncology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Global Resource for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Advancing Cancer Education
Global Virus Network Inc.
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Global Virus Network Inc.
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Good Grief
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Great Lakes Chapter of The
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Society for
Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics
Group for Research and
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assessment of Psoriasis
and Psoriatic Arthritis
Grupo de Apoyo de Ninos y
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Adolescentes Consult
Reumatologia
Grupo de Apoyo de Ninos y
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Adolescentes Consult
Reumatologia
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
and Research Institute
H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
and Research Institute
Halo House Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Harborside Press
$38,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Harborside Press
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Healthcare 21 Business
$16,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Coalition
Healthcare 21 Business
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Coalition
Healthy Women
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Healthy Women
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Heart to Heart
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Inc.
Heb Grocery Co Lp
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hematology Oncology
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy Associate
Hematology Oncology
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy Associate
Henry Ford Health System
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Henry M Jackson Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Hep C Connection
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hepatitis C Association
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Hepatitis C Association
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Hepatitis C Mentor and
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Group The
Hepatitis Education Project
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Hidradenitis Suppurativa
$27,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Hitchcock Foundation
($2,685.00)
Educational Grants
Hitchcock Foundation
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Hitchcock Foundation
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Hitchcock Foundation
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
HMP Communications
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
HMP Communications
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hope Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Hope Foundation
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital of the University
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Hospital of the University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Hospital of the University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Houston Area Parkinson
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Houston Business Coalition
$11,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
On Health
Howard Brown Health Center
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Howard Hanna Children's
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Free Care Fund
Hubbard Street Dance
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Chicago
Human Growth Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Human Growth Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Humboldt--Del Norte County
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Society
IBD Horizons
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
IBD Horizons
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
IBD Horizons
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
IBD Horizons
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
IBD Remedy Inc.
$5,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
IBD Remedy Inc.
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Illinois Cancercare
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Illinois Society of
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Physician
Assistants
Illinois Society of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Physician
Assistants
Imedex LLC
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
($3,596.00)
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
($247.00)
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$114,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Imedex LLC
$45,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Impact Education LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Indian Doc Associate of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Houston
Indiana Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Indiana Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Indiana Univ
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Indiana Univ
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Indiana Urological
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Infectious Diseases Society
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of America
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Support Foundation
Innovation Foundation Inc.
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Integra Life Science
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
Service
Integrated Benefits
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Institute Inc.
Integrated Med Foundation
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Integrated Med Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Integrated Med Foundation
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
International Aids Society--
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Usa
International Aids Society--
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Usa
International Alliance for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Biological Standardization
International Association
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Association
$95,150.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Association
$264,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Association
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Association
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Cancer
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Advocacy Netwk
International Chinese
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Statistical Associate
International Dermatology
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Outcome Measures
International Dermatology
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Outcome Measures
International League of
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Associate for Rheumlgy
International Medical Corps
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Pelvic Pain
$21,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
International Physician
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ntwrk Dba International
Oncology Ntwrk
International Physician
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ntwrk Dba International
Oncology Ntwrk
International Physician
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ntwrk Dba International
Oncology Ntwrk
International Society for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Antiviral Research
International Society for
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
The Study of Xenobiotics
International Society of
$86,420.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nephrology
Iraq And Afghanistan
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Veterans
Jefferson Med College at
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Thomas Jefferson Univ
Jefferson Med College at
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Thomas Jefferson Univ
Jefferson Med College at
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Thomas Jefferson Univ
Jewish Hospital
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ventures
Johns Hopkins Technology
$6,500.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Univ School
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Jonathan Wood and Associate
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
JWC Covenant Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Kansas Univ Endowment
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Association
Keystone Symposia
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Keystone Symposia
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Kidney Foundation Inc..
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Northeast
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$735.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,185.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$450.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$270.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,545.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$552.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,095.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,085.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$6,000.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$705.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$390.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,035.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,185.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,515.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,950.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$735.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$735.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$555.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$855.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,020.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$990.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$360.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$510.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,595.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$450.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$825.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,035.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,860.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,080.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,005.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,290.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$450.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,050.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,380.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$690.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$720.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$739.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$885.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,035.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$240.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,220.00
Patient Support
Lake County Haven
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Large Urology Group
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practice Associate
Large Urology Group
$66,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practice Associate
Large Urology Group
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practice Associate
Latino Center On Aging
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lenox Hill Hospital
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$1,267,000.00
Charitable Donations
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$32,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Leukemia Research
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Leukemia Research
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Liver Health Connection
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Liver Health Connection
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Livestrong Foundation
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Lone Star Parkinson Society
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Louisiana Urological
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Loyola Stritch School of
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Medicine Division of
Dermatology
Loyola Stritch School of
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Medicine Division of
Dermatology
Lung Cancer Alliance
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lung Cancer Alliance
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lung Cancer Alliance
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lung Cancer Alliance
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lung Cancer Research
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Lung Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Lungevity Foundation
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Lungevity Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lungevity Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lungevity Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lungevity Foundation
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lupus and Allied Diseases
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Lupus and Allied Diseases
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Lupus and Allied Diseases
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Lupus Foundation New
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
England, Inc.
Lupus Foundation of Florida
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Lupus Research Alliance,
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Lymphoma Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
MS Cure Fund Inc.
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Magellan Rx Management Inc.
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
March of Dimes Foundation
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Massachusetts Association
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for Mental Health
Massachusetts General
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital
Scholarships
Massachusetts General
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hospital for Children
Massachusetts General
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hospital for Children
Massachusetts Prostate
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Coalition
Massachusetts Society for
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Med Research
Massachusetts Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Clinical Oncologists
ME Strong Inc.
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med--LQ LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Med College of Wisconsin
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med College of Wisconsin
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Univ of South Carolina
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Medical Learning Institute
$33,790.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$42,300.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$116,850.00
Educational Grants
Medical Univ of South
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Carolina
Medina Community Clinic
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Medscape LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$212,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$235,500.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$565,100.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$38,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$52,500.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
$33,500.00
Educational Grants
Memorial Sloan Kettering
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Center
Memphis Business Group On
$5,100.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Mens Health and Wellness
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Center
Mercy Med Center Inc.
$3,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Mercy Med Center Inc.
$3,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Methodist Hospital
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Methodist Hospital
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michael J Fox Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michael J Fox Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan Institute of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Urology, PC
Michigan Parkinson
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Michigan Parkinson
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Michigan Rheumatism Society
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Mid America MS Achievement
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Center
Midwest Business Group on
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Midwest Business Group on
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Miles for Cystic Fibrosis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Minnesota Urological
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Missouri Hepatitis C
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance
Mount Sinai School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medicine
Scholarships
Mount Sinai School of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Movement Disorder Society
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Movement Disorder Society
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Movement Disorder Society
$321,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Movement Disorder Society
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Movement Disorder Society
$11,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
MS Views and News Inc.
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Multiple Myeloma Research
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation Inc.
Scholarships
Multiple Sclerosis
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation Inc.
Musella Foundation for
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Brain Tumor Research and
Information Inc.
Nashville Cares Inc.
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
National Academy of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Nurse
Practitioners
National Aids Treatment
$300,000.00
Patient Support
Advocacy Project
National Alliance of Mental
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Illness Flordia
National Alliance of Mental
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Illness Tennessee
National Alliance of State
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Territorial AIDS
Directors
National Alliance of State
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
and Territorial Aids
Directors
National Animal Interest
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Alliance
National Associate of
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$10,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$10,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Pediatric Nurse
Practitioners
National Association of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hispanic Nurses
National Association of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Latino Elected and
Appointed officials
Education Fund
National Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Society (Nbts)
National Brain Tumor
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society, Inc.
National Breast Cancer
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Coalition Fund
National Business Coalition
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
On Health
National Business Group On
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
National Coalition for
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer
National Coalition for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer
National Commission On
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Correctional Health Care
National Committee of
$125,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Quality Assurance
National Community
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dispensing Associate NCODA
National Community
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dispensing Associate NCODA
National Community
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dispensing Associate NCODA
National Comprehensive
$90,898.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$55,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Federation of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Independent
National Foundation for The
($81,525.67)
Educational Grants
Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
National Hispanic Council
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
On Aging
National Kdny Foundation
$292,054.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
National Medical
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Association
National Minority Quality
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
forum
National Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
National Multiple Sclerosis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
National Multiple Sclerosis
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
National Multiple Sclerosis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society-Greater Illinois
Chapter
National Organization of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Managers
National Pancreas
$80,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
National Pancreas
$80,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
National Pancreas
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Pancreas
$190,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Pancreas
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Pancreas
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Pancreas
$85,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
National Pancreas
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
National Parkinson
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
National Parkinson
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
National Parkinson
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
National Parkinson
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
National Parkinson
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Society for
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$140,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cutaneous Medicine
Neuro Challenge Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Neurologic Disease
$4,995.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
New England Dermatological
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
New England Immunology
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Conference Inc.
New England Quality Care
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alliance
New Venture Fund
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
New York Academy of Science
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
New York Academy of Science
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
New York Med Colllege
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
office of Continuing Med
Education
New York Society for
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
New York State Rheumlgy
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
New York State Rheumlgy
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Nexus Global Group Science
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nicole T. Jarvis, M.D.,
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
PLLC
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
North American Center for
$375,025.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Center for
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Society for
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Pediatric Gastroenterology
Hepatology and Nutrition
North Carolina Biosciences
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization
North Dakota Pharmacists
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Northeast Business Group On
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Northeast Business Group On
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Northeastern University
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Northern Illinois
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
University Foundation
Northwest Health Law
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Advocates
Northwest Indiana
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinsons
Northwest Kidney Centers
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Northwest Parkinsons
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Northwest Parkinsons
$14,900.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Northwestern Univ
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Northwestern Univ
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Norton Healthcare
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Norwich University
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
NYU School of Medicine
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
NYU School of Medicine
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
NYU School of Medicine
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
NYU School of Medicine
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
NYU School of Medicine
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Ocular Immunology and
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Uveitis Foundation
Ocular Immunology and
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Uveitis Foundation
Ohio Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Ohio Gastroenterology
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Ohio Gastroenterology
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Ohio Gastroenterology
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Omnia Education Inc.
$98,000.00
Educational Grants
Omnia Education Inc.
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
Oncology Nursing Society
$20,200.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oradian Inc.
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oregon Health and Science
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ
Oregon Health and Science
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ
Oregon Health and Science
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ
Oregon Health and Science
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ
Oregon Health and Science
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ
Osmania Gandhi Kakatiya
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Medical Alumni Association
of America
Pacific Dermatologic
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Pacific Dermatologic
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Pack Center LLC
$22,575.00
Educational Grants
Pack Center LLC
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Pack Health LLC
$119,750.00
Educational Grants
Pack Health LLC
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Pack Health LLC
$79,750.00
Educational Grants
Pack Health LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Pack Health LLC
$42,875.00
Educational Grants
Pack Health LLC
$42,875.00
Educational Grants
Pack Center LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Pancreas Club
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Network
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$282,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Network
Park Nicollet Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson and Movement
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson and Movement
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson and Movement
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson Association
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Council
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinson Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Study Group
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinson Study Group
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Study Group
$2,716.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Parkinson Support Center of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Kentuciana
Parkinson Support Center of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Kentuciana
Parkinsons and Movement
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Disorder Foundation
Parkinsons Association
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinsons Association
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinsons Association
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Parkinson's Awareness
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of Central
Indiana
Parkinsons Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Institute
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson's Nebraska
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinsons Outreach
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Partnership for Quality Med
$2,000.00
Charitable Donations
Donations Pqmd
Patient Access Network
$287,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$2,284,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$10,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$7,577,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$15,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Pcec Prostrate Conditions
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education Council
Pediatric Endocrine Society
$3,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatric Endocrine Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatric Endocrinology
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nursing Society
Pediatric Endocrinology
$17,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nursing Society
Pediatric Ibd Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Peerview Institute for
($2,000.00)
Educational Grants
Medical Education
Pennsylvania Academy of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgry
Pennsylvania Biotechnology
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Pennsylvania Prostate
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Coalition
Pennsylvania Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
People To People Health
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
People To People Health
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Performrx
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmaceutical Research and
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Manufacturers of America
Philadelphia Research and
$5,500.00
Educational Grants
Education Foundation
Phrmct Care Management
$73,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
Phrmct Care Management
$88,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
Phrmct Care Management
$73,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
Physicians Education
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Pink Door Nonprofit
$2,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization
Pins for Parkinsons
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pittsburgh Business Group
$13,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
On Health
Pittsburgh Business Group
$13,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
On Health
Postgraduate Institute for
$59,725.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Presbyterian Healthcare
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
President and Fellows of
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Harvard College
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prime Education Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$190,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$244,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$332,620.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$106,400.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$128,902.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$155,125.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$154,150.00
Educational Grants
Primo Education LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Princeton Univ Trustees
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Project Inform
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Project Inform, Inc.
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Project Spark Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Projects in Knowledge Inc.
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Projects in Knowledge Inc.
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Projects in Knowledge Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Prostate Cancer Foundation
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chicago
Prostate Cancer
$5,000.00
Patient Support
International
Prostate Cancer Research
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Instutute
Prostate Health Education
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Network
Prostate Health Education
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Network
Prostaware
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Psoriasis and Psoriatic
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Clinics
Multicenter Advancement
Network
Psoriasis and Psoriatic
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Clinics
Multicenter Advancement
Network
Puerto Rico Associate of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Puerto Rico Associate of
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
Puerto Rico Associate of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Purdue Univ College of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Purdue Univ College of
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Recovery Idaho
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Regents of The Univ of
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
California
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
California
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
($658.85)
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Michigan
Regents of The Univ of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan
Regents of the University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of Minnesota
Rehabilitation and
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community
Renal Physician Associate
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Research Institute at
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nationwide Childrens
Hospital
Research Institute for Fox
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chase Cancer Center
Rheumatology Association of
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Iowa
Rheumatology Association of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Iowa
Rheumatology Association of
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Iowa
Rheumatology Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Minnesota and The Dakotas
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$46,325.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$21,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumlgy Alliance of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Louisiana
Riverside Family Medicine
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Residency The
Riverside Medical Clinic
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Charitable Foundation
Robert Michael Educational
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute LLC
Rock Steady Boxing
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Roger Williams Medical
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Center
Scholarships
Roger Williams Medical
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rotary Club of Downtown
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Macon
Rush Univ Medical Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Rush Univ Medical Center
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Rush Univ Medical Center
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rush Univ Medical Center
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Rush Univ Medical Center
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rush Univ Medical Center
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Rutgers Univ Foundation
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Sacramento Gastrointestinal
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education and Research
Safety Pharmacology Society
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
San Francisco Aids
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
San Francisco Public Center
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
San Francisco Retina
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
San Francisco Retina
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
San Juan Bautista Medical
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Center
Scholarships
Scott and White Healthcare
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Scripps Health
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Health
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Health
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Scripps Research Institute
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Seattle Science Foundation
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Seattle Science Foundation
$8,500.00
Educational Grants
Seton Family of Hospitals
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Sexual Medicine Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
North America
Foundation(Smsna)
Sexual Medicine Society of
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
North America
Foundation(Smsna)
Shanti Project Inc.
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Share
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Share
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Sharsheret
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Sheknows LLC
$102,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Sheknows LLC
$57,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Sheknows LLC
$200,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Sinai Health System
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Sociedad Dermatologica de
$35,000.00
Patient Support
Puerto Rico
Sociedad PR Endocrinologia
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
y Diabetologia
Sociedad Puertorriquena
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatria
Sociedad Puertorriquena
$9,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatria
Sociedad Puertorriquena
$14,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatria
Society for Clinical
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Research Sites Inc.
Society for Clinical Trials
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Leukocyte
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Biology
Society for Mucosal
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Immunology
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Neuroscience
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuroscience
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Womens Health
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Research
Society for Womens Health
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Research
Society of Dermatology
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Society of Dermatology
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Society of Dermatology
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Society of Dermatology
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Society of Investigative
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
Society of Nuclear Medicine
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Molecular Imaging
Socty for Gynecologic
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Investigation
Socty for Immunotherapy of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer
South Carolina Alliance of
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health Plans
South Dakota Parkinson
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
South Texas Association of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatologists
South Texas Association of
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatologists
Spondylitis Association of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
America
Spondylitis Association of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
America
Spondyloarthritis Research
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Treatment Network
Spartan
Stage One Family Theatre
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
State of Maryland
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
State of Pennsylvania
$25,065.00
Educational Grants
State of Pennsylvania
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
State of Pennsylvania
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
State of Pennsylvania
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Summit for Stem Cellular
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Surviveit
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Susan G Komen Breast Cancer
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation Inc.
Swedish Medical Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
First Hill Campus
Take A Breather Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Take A Breather Foundation
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Talem Health Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Tarsus Cardiology Inc. Dba
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
South Beach Symposium
Tennessee Disability
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Coalition
Texas Academy of Family
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians
Texas Neuro Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Texas Society for
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology and
Endoscopy
Texas Society for
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology and
Endoscopy
Texas Society for
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology and
Endoscopy
Texas Urological Society
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Texas Urological Society
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Thomas Jefferson University
($4,242.75)
Educational Grants
Thomas Jefferson University
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Transcelerate Biopharma
$1,500,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Trustees of Boston Univ D/B/
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
A
Trustees of Boston Univ D/B/
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
A
Trustees of Boston Univ D/B/
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
A
Trustees of Dartmouth
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
College--Administration
Trustees of Tufts College
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Trustees of Tufts College
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Tufts Medical Center
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Tufts Medical Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Prosthetics Clinic
Scholarships
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
UCSF Medical Center at
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Parnassus
Ultimate Medical Academy
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$175,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$213,500.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$249,250.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
($5,370.00)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$149,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$213,500.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$115,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$289,810.00
Educational Grants
LLC
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$38,800.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMASS Memorial Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
United Rheumatology
$36,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
United Rheumatology
$205,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
United States Adult Cystic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Fibrosis Association Inc.
Univ Health Service at
$1,166.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Stony Point Inc.
Univ Health Service at
$1,167.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Stony Point Inc.
Univ Health Service at
$1,167.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Stony Point Inc.
Univ Health Service at
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Stony Point Inc.
Univ Health Service at
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Stony Point Inc.
Univ Hospital of Brooklyn
($5,527.00)
Educational Grants
Univ of California
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Berkeley--Administration
Univ of California,
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Riverside Student Health
Scholarships
Services
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$140,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Chicago
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$195,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$80,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$454,420.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
($1,212.00)
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation--Sunflower Fund
Univ of Colorado Denver
$25,000.00
Fellowships and
School of Medicine
Scholarships
Univ of Colorado Denver
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Univ of Florida Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Florida Foundation
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Florida Foundation
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Illinios
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Illinois
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Illinois Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Illinois Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Illinois Foundation
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Univ of Louisville Research
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of Louisville Research
$98,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of Louisville Research
$47,725.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of Louisville Research
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of Maryland Baltimore
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Univ of Maryland Baltimore
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
Univ of Miami
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Miami
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Miami Dept of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$675.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$68,900.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of New Mexico
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Univ of North Carolina at
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Chapel Hill
Scholarships
Univ of North Carolina at
($5,463.46)
Educational Grants
Chapel Hill
Univ of North Carolina at
($40,000.00)
Fellowships and
Chapel Hill
Scholarships
Univ of Pittsburgh
$2,200.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Pittsburgh
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Pittsburgh
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Pittsburgh
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Pittsburgh
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Rhode Island
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of South Alabama
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
College of Medicine
Univ of South Florida
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Health Professions
Conferencing Corp
Univ of Southern California
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Southern California
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Southern California
$78,500.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Tennessee Obgyn
($1,758.03)
Educational Grants
Center
Univ of Tennessee Obgyn
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Center
Univ of Texas Health
$16,032.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Science Center at San
Antonio
Univ of Texas Health
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Science Center at San
Antonio
Univ of Texas Health
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Science Center at San
Antonio
Univ of Texas M D Anderson
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Center
Univ of Texas Southwestern
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Med Center
Scholarships
Univ of Texas Southwestern
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Center
Univ of Texas Southwestern
$55,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Center
Univ of The State of New
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
York Univ at Buffalo
Univ of Toledo
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Universidad Central Del
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$11,205.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
($308.75)
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$24,939.25
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
($3,795.00)
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad Central Del
($3,460.75)
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
University of Alabama at
($186.25)
Educational Grants
Birmingham Hospital
University of Alabama at
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Birmingham Hospital
Scholarships
University of California
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Irvine
Scholarships
University of California
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Irvine
Scholarships
University of Colorado
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
University of Connecticut
$12,000.00
Fellowships and
Health Science Center
Scholarships
University of Connecticut
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Health Science Center
Scholarships
University of Connecticut
($774.73)
Fellowships and
Health Science Center
Scholarships
University of Edinburgh Usa
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Development Trust Inc.
University of Illinois--
$82,092.00
Fellowships and
office of Business and
Scholarships
Financial Services
University of Illinois--
$79,559.00
Fellowships and
office of Business and
Scholarships
Financial Services
University of Rochester
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University of Sheffield in
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
America Inc.
University of Washington
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
University of Washington
($255.67)
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Upstage Lung Cancer
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Urology Center of Colorado
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
US Too International
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
US Too International
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Valley Childrens Hospital
$4,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Valley Medial Center
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Vanderbilt Univ By and
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Through Its Medical Center
Vanderbilt Univ By and
$12,500.00
Fellowships and
Through Its Medical Center
Scholarships
Vanderbilt Univ By and
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Through Its Medical Center
Vanderbilt Univ By and
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Through Its Medical Center
VHA Inc.
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Vindico Med Education
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Virginia Association of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health Plans
Virginia Commonwealth Univ
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
School of Medicine
Washington and Lee
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
University
Washington Hospital Center
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Corp
Washington Rheumatology
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alliance
Washington Univ in St Louis
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Washington Univ in St Louis
$1,600.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Washington Univ in St Louis
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Webmd Global LLC
($500.00)
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$146,500.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$340,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$105,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$600,000.00
Educational Grants
Webmd Global LLC
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Western Pennsylvania
$5,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital forbes Regional
Scholarships
Campus
Western Pennsylvania
($1,502.07)
Fellowships and
Hospital forbes Regional
Scholarships
Campus
Western States Pharmacy
$3,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Conference for Pharmacy
Residents Fellowships and
Preceptors
Wisconsin Chapter of The
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American College of
Healthcare Executives
Wisconsin Collaborative for
$2,650.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Healthcare Quality
Wisconsin Dairyland Chapter
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Healthcare Information
and Management Systems
Society (HIMSS)
Wisconsin Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Wj Weiser Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Management Inc.
World Parkinson Coalition
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Inc.
Yale Univ
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Young Survival Coalition
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Zebrafish Disease Models
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Zero The Project To End
$270,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostate Cancer
Zero The Project To End
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grants and Donations Report--2018
(Parentheses represent refunds of previously disclosed payments)
Report as of 3/31/3019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recipient
Payment Amount
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
50 Hoops
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
50 Hoops
$10,000.00
Patient Support
A and R Educational Group
$80,350.00
Corporate Sponsorships
LLC
A and R Educational Group
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
LLC
AAPS
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Aasld Foundation (American
$500,000.00
Charitable Donations
Association for The Study
of Liver Disease)
Aasld Foundation (American
$250,000.00
Charitable Donations
Association for The Study
of Liver Disease)
Academia Puertorriquena DE
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurologia
Academic Cme LLC
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Academy of Managed Care
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$27,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$32,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmacy
Academy of Managed Care
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmacy
Advanced Medical Education
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Consultants, Corp.
Advanced Urology Institute
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education and General Fund
Advances in Cosmetic and
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Dermatology Inc.
Advances in Cosmetic and
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Dermatology Inc.
Adventist Health System--
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Sunbelt Inc.
Aesthetic Dermatology
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Symposia
AIDS Connecticut
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
AIDS Foundation of Chicago
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
AIDS Institute
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
AIDS Institute
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
AIDS Support Network
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Aimed Alliance
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alabama Academy of
$1,200.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurology
Alabama Associate of Center
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Plans
Alabama Dermatology Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alabama Society of
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Professionals
Albert Einstein College of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine Division of
Dermatology
Albert Einstein College of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva Univ
Albert Einstein College of
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine of Yeshiva Univ
Alliance for Aging Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alsac St Jude Childrens
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Research Hospital
Alzheimers Association
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Greater Illinois Chapter
Alzheimers Disease and
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Related Disorders
Association Inc.
Alzheimers Disease and
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Related Disorders
Association Inc.
American Academy of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
American Academy of
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology
American Academy of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
American Academy of Family
$19,000.00
Educational Grants
Physicians
American Academy of
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$40,050.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$38,220.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Neurology Institute
Scholarships
American Academy of
$16,470.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Neurology Institute
American Academy of
$24,112.40
Corporate Sponsorships
Ophthalmology Aao
American Academy of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatrics
American Academy of
$14,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatrics
American Academy of
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Physician Assistants
American Association of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
New Jersey Chapter
American Association of
$18,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Endocrinologists
New Jersey Chapter
American Association for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Care
International (Aaalac
International
American Association for
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Cancer Research
Scholarships
American Association for
$25,000.00
Patient Support
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research
American Association for
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Laboratory Animal Science
American Association for
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
The Study of Liver Disease
American Association of
$200,000.00
Patient Support
Clinical Endocrinologists
Inc.
American Association of
$15,200.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gynecologic Laparoscopists
Inc.
American Association of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Nurse Practitioners
American Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Association
Scholarships
American Brain Tumor
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
Association
American Brain Tumor
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Association
American Brain Tumor
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Brain Tumor
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Brain Tumor
$3,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Brain Tumor
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Association
American Brain Tumor
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Association
American Brain Tumor
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Association
Scholarships
American Brain Tumor
$22,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Brain Tumor
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Cancer Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Chemist Society
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
American Chemist Society
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chemist Society
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
American Chemist Society
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
American College of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$450,000.00
Charitable Donations
Gastroenterology
American College of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$125,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
American College of
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Laboratory Animal Medicine
American College of
$32,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American College of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Osteopathic Family
Physicians of California
American College of
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Osteopathic Obstetricians
and Gynecologists
American College of
$57,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Foundation
American College of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
American College of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Rheumatology
American College of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
American College of
$2,000,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Research and
Education Foundation
American Congress of
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$9,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$2,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
American Congress of
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists--Hawaii
Section District Viii
American Congress of
$32,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists--Hawaii
Section District Viii
American Congress of
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists--Hawaii
Section District Viii
American Congress of
$38,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists--Hawaii
Section District Viii
American Congress of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Obstetricians and
Gynecologists Montana
Section
American
$278,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$46,325.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterological
Association Institute
American Gastrointestinal
($2,094.95)
Educational Grants
Association
American Kdny Fund
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
American Liver Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
American Liver Foundation
$86,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
American Liver Foundation
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
American Med Group
$5,022.40
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$5,022.40
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$5,022.40
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$5,022.40
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Med Group
$5,022.40
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Military Partner
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Military Partner
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American National Red Cross
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Its Constituent
Chapters and Branches
American Neuro Associate
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
American Pancreatic
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Associate
American Pancreatic
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate
American Pancreatic
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Pancreatic
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Parkinson Disease
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
American Parkinson Disease
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
American Pharmacists
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association (Apha)
American Red Cross of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Greater Chicago
American Society for
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Reproductive Medicine
American Society for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Reproductive Medicine
American Society for
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Reproductive Medicine
American Society of
$17,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Anesthesiologists
American Society of
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Society of
$544,550.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hematology
American Society of
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Society of
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Hematology
Scholarships
American Society of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Society of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Hematology
American Statistical
$26,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
American Thyroid Associate
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
American Uroligical
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate Northeastern
Section
American Urological
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Associate Education and
Research Inc.
American Urological
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate Inc. Western
Section
American Urological
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate Inc. Western
Section
American Urological
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association--New York
Section
American Urological
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association--Southeast
Section
American Urological
$5,800.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association--Southeast
Section
American Urological
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Association Foundation
Americans for Med Progress
$90,000.00
Charitable Donations
Americas Hepato--Pancreato--
$35,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Biliary A
Angel Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Angel Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Angela Hospice Homecare
$2,500.00
Charitable Donations
Answer2cancer
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arizona State Association
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Physician Assistants
Arizona United Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alliance--Aura
Arkansas Prostate Cancer
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Arkansas Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Arkansas Urology Society
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$175,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$10,500.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Arthritis Foundation
$7,500.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$1,595.00
Patient Support
Arthritis Foundation
$1,650.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$300.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Arthritis Foundation
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$259,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Arthritis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$175,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Foundation
$300,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Patient Services
$19,500.00
Charitable Donations
Arts of Healing Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$60,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$60,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
ASCO Conquer Cancer
$22,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
ASHP Foundation
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Aspen Cancer Conference
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Inc.
Associate de Enfermeria
$6,700.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oncologica y Hematologica
de Puerto Rico Inc.
Associate de
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterologia y
Hepatologia Pediatrica de
Puerto Rico Aghppr
Associate de Hematologia y
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oncologia Medica de Puerto
Rico
Associate de Hematologia y
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oncologia Medica de Puerto
Rico
Associate de Hematologia y
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oncologia Medica de Puerto
Rico
Associate de Hematologia y
$11,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oncologia Medica de Puerto
Rico
Associate de Reumatologos
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
de Puerto Rico
Associate Medicos Pediatras
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Region Este Ampre
Associate Medicos Pediatras
$6,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Region Este Ampre
Associate of Physician
$2,950.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assistants in Oncology
Inc.
Associate of Physician
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assistants in Oncology
Inc.
Associate of Professors of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gyn and Obstetrician
Association of Community
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Centers (Accc)
Association of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Frontotemporal
Degeneration
Association of Idaho
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatologists Inc.
Association of Physicians
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Pakistani Descent of
North America (Appna)--New
York Chapter
Association of VA
$15,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hematology Oncology
Association of Women in
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Association of Women in
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Awesome Enablers LLC
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Awesome Enablers LLC
$250,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Baylor College Medicine
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Infusion Dis
Scholarships
Baylor Scott and White
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Health
Bellaire Crohns and Colitis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Bellaire Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Bellaire Crohns and Colitis
$400,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Bendcare
$434,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
Beth Israel Deaconess
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
Medical Center
Betty and Milton Katz
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Jewish Community Center
Bexar County Physician
$6,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Assistant Society
Big Brothers Big Sisters of
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Metro Chicago
Bio Ascend LLC
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Bio Ascend LLC
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Biomod Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Biotechnology Industry
$155,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization
Biotechnology Industry
$290,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization
Biotechnology Industry
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization
Biotechnology Industry
$56,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Organization
Black Health Matters
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Board of Trustees of The
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Illinois
Bonnie J Addario Lung
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Cancer Foundation
Bonnie J Addario Lung
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Foundation
Borland Groover Clinic
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Boston College School of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nursing
Boston Society Inc.
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Boston Taiwanese
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Biotechnology Association
Inc.
Brian Grant Foundation
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Brian Grant Foundation
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Brigham and Women's
$7,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital, Inc.
Business Health Coalition
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
California Associate of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Groups
California Life Sciences
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
California Life Sciences
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Cancer and Leukemia Group B
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Cancer and Leukemia Group B
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
Cancer Care
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Care
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Care
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Care
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Foundation for New
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Mexico
Cancer Foundation for New
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Mexico
Cancer Molecular Thrpt
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research Institute
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Research Institute
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Support Community
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Support Community
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Wellness Center
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancercare Co-Payment
$5,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Assistance Foundation
Captis Health
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cardinal Health
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cardinal Health
$105,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Carevive Systems, Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Carevive Systems, Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Carevive Systems, Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Carevive Systems, Inc.
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Caring Ambassadors Program
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Caring Ambassadors Program
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Caring Ambassadors Program
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Caring Ambassadors Program
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Inc.
Caring Ambassadors Program
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Inc.
Carti Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cascade Aids Project
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Case Western Reserve Univ
$20,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cedar Rapids Metro
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinsons Association
Cedars--Sinai Med Center
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cedars--Sinai Med Center
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Central Brain Tumor
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Registry of The United
States
Central Savannah River Area
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Csra Parkinson Support
Group
Chicago Gynecological
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Chicago Urological Soctiey
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Childrens Digestive Health
$42,428.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Nutrition Foundation
Childrens Hospital of
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Wisconsin
Children's Skin Disease
$600.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Childrens Treehouse
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Chimp Haven
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chinese American
$3,600.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Biopharmaceutical Society
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chris Elliott Fund
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Chris Elliott Fund
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chris Elliott Fund
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chris Elliott Fund
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chris Elliott Fund
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chris Elliott Fund
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Christ Hospital Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chronic Liver Disease
$450,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Chronic Liver Disease
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$25,075.00
Patient Support
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$75,000.00
Patient Support
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$35,000.00
Patient Support
Society Inc.
Chronic Lymphoytic Leukemia
$75,000.00
Patient Support
Society Inc.
Cincinnati Childrens
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital Medical Center
Scholarships
City of Hope National Med
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Cleveland Clinic
($3,131.07)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
($13,876.68)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
($7,563.37)
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Educational Foundation
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Cleveland Clinic Minority
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Mens Health Center
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
($35,000.00)
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$120,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Clinical Care Optn LLC
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
CLL Global Research
$35,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
CLL Global Research
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Club DE oficiales DE LA
$495.00
Charitable Donations
Policia DE Puerto Rico
Inc.
Coalition for Prevention of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Colorectal Cancer in
Puerto Rico
Coalition of Texans With
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Disabilities
Coalition of Texans With
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Disabilities
Cockerell Educational
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Cockerell Educational
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Cody Dieruf Benefit
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Colegio DE Farmaceuticos DE
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Puerto Rico
Colegio DE Farmaceuticos DE
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Puerto Rico
Colegio DE Profesionales DE
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
LA Enfermeria DE Puerto
Rico Inc.
Colegio DE Profesionales DE
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
LA Enfermeria DE Puerto
Rico Inc.
Colegio DE Profesionales DE
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
LA Enfermeria DE Puerto
Rico Inc.
Collaborative Alliance for
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Pancreatic Education and
Research (Caper)
Collaborative Alliance for
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
Pancreatic Education and
Scholarships
Research (Caper)
Collaborative Alliance for
$6,000.00
Fellowships and
Pancreatic Education and
Scholarships
Research (Caper)
College of American
$5,065.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pathologists
College of Lake County
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Colorado American Congress
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Obstetrician Gyn
Colorado Section
Columbia Univ Med Center
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Columbia Univ Med Center
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Community Center
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Center
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Initiatives
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Initiatives
$25,000.00
Patient Support
Community Initiatives
$1,500.00
Charitable Donations
Community Liver Alliance
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Liver Alliance
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Liver Alliance
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Oncology Alliance
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Connecticut Dermatology
$3,722.25
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Connecticut Dermatology
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Connecting To Cure Crohns
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Colitis
Consortium of Multiple
$59,150.00
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
($452.00)
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Consortium of Multiple
($341.36)
Educational Grants
Sclerosis Centers
Continuing Educational
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
($623.00)
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Continuing Educational
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance LLC
Cornell Univ Weill Med
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
College
Cornell Univ Weill Med
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
College
Cornerstone Health Inc.
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Cornerstone Health Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cradles To Crayons Inc.
$300.00
Charitable Donations
Cristo Rey St Martin
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
College Prep
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$90,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation of America
Crohns and Colitis
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation of America
Curators of The Univ of
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Missouri
Curepsp Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Curepsp Inc.
$2,500.00
Patient Support
Curepsp Inc.
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Curepsp Inc.
$45,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Curepsp Inc.
$30,000.00
Charitable Donations
Curesearch for Childrens
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$4,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$8,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$161,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
$750,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Fund Emilys Entourage
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Cystic Fibrosis Research
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Dade County Medical
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
Dahshu
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dallas Area Parkinsonism
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Dana Farber Cancer
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Institute
Dana Farber Cancer
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Institute, Inc.
Dava Oncology LP
$37,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Patient Support
Davis Phinney Foundation
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Davis Phinney Foundation
$30,000.00
Patient Support
Davis Phinney Foundation
$15,000.00
Patient Support
Davis Phinney Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Davis Phinney Foundation
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatologic Society of
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Greater New York
Dermatology Education
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Dermatology Foundation
$135,000.00
Charitable Donations
Dermatology Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Nurses
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
Dermatology PA Foundation
$2,700.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Digestive Disease Week
$32,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Digestive Disease Week
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Digestive Disease Week
$255,300.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Digestive Health Foundation
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Direct Relief
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Direct Relief
$10,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Direct Relief
$25,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Direct Relief
$5,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Direct Relief
$10,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Doctor Solomon Carter
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Fuller Mental Health
Center
Doctor Solomon Carter
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Fuller Mental Health
Center
Drew University Health
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Services
Drexel Unviersity
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Drugs for Neglected
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Diseases Initiative North
America Inc.
East Tennessee Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ecog Research and Education
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Ecog Research and Education
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Economic Alliance for
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan
Eisenhower Desert
($30,000.00)
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$300,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$563,360.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$35,100.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$250,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$475,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Eisenhower Desert
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Orthopedic Center
Embarcadero Lions Club of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Sacramento
Employers Health Coalition
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Endocrine Education Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Society
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Society
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Endocrine Society
($10,928.00)
Educational Grants
Endocrine Society
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Endometriosis Associate
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Endometriosis Foundation of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
America
Enzyme Mechanism Conference
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Epilepsy Association of
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Central Florida
Epilepsy Foundation
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Epilepsy Foundation of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Florida
Epilepsy Foundation of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan
Ethiopian Community
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of Greater
Philadelphia
Excellence in
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology Education
LLC
Excellence in
$110,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology Education
LLC
Excellence in Rheumatology
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education LLC
Family Reach Foundation
$5,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Federation of American
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of American
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of American
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of American
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Experimental
Biology Faseb
Federation of Clinical
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Society
Federation of Clinical
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Society
Federation of Clinical
$12,500.00
Educational Grants
Immunology Society
Federation of Clinical
$20,000.00
Fellowships and
Immunology Society
Scholarships
Feed My Starving Children
$500.00
Charitable Donations
Feinstein Institute for Med
$243,900.00
Educational Grants
Research
Fibroid Foundation
$90,000.00
Charitable Donations
Fibroid Foundation
$95,000.00
Charitable Donations
Florida Academy of Family
$18,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians
Florida Atlantic University
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation Inc.
Florida Coalition
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Florida Gastroenterological
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Florida Society of
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Physician
Assistants Inc.
Florida Society of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Inc.
Florida Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Inc.
Focus Med Communications
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Focus Med Communications
$135,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Footsteps for Fertility
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Force--Facing Our Risk of
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Emp
Forsyth Area Striders Team
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Fighting
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Blindness
Foundation for Biomedical
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Research
Foundation for The National
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Institute of Health
Foundation of Consortium of
$17,500.00
Fellowships and
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
Scholarships
Cmsc
Foundation of Consortium of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
Cmsc
Foundation of Consortium of
$32,875.00
Patient Support
Multiple Sclerosis Centers
Cmsc
Franklin and Marshall
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
College
French American Chemical
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Friends of Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Friends of Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Friends of Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Friends of The St Louis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ Liver Center
Fundacion Puertorriquena DE
$17,960.00
Educational Grants
Pacientes Consult
Endometriosis
Gastrointestinal and Liver
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of The
Americas Inc.
Gastrointestinal Health
$90,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
Gateway for Cancer Research
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Genesis Healthcare
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
George Washington Univ
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Georgia Academy of Family
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians
Georgia Dermatology
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physican Assistants
Georgia Society of
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgery
Georgia Society of
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgery
Gildas Club Chicago
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Global Academy for Medical
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$43,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$40,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$76,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$58,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Academy for Medical
$76,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Global Healthy Living
$45,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Global Healthy Living
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Global Oncology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Good Grief
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Gordon Research Conferences
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Grand Traverse Area
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinsons Support Group
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$5,500.00
Educational Grants
Gynecologic Oncology Group
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
and Research Institute
Halo House Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hamil Kerr Challenge
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Harborside Press
$30,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Harborside Press
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hartford Hospital
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Healthcare 21 Business
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Coalition
Healthwell Foundation
$220,000.00
Charitable Donations
Healthy Women
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Heart To Heart
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Inc.
Heart To Heart
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Inc.
Heart To Heart
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Inc.
Henry M Jackson Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Hepatitis C Association
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Hepatitis C Mentor and
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Support Group The
Hepatitis Education Project
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hermanas Carmelitas Teresas
$393.79
Charitable Donations
DE San Jose, Inc.
Hidradenitis Suppurativa
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
HIV Treaters Med Associate
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Puerto Rico
HMP Communications
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
HMP Communications
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hope Foundation
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital of the University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Hospital of the University
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Hospital of the University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Hospital of the University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
of Pennsylvania
Howard Hanna Children's
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Free Care Fund
Hubbard Street Dance
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Chicago
Human Growth Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Human Growth Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Hunt for A Cure
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Huntsman Cancer Foundation
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Huntsman Cancer Foundation
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Huntsman Cancer Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
IASLC Foundation
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
IBD Horizons
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
IBD Horizons
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
IBD Horizons
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Illinois Academy of Family
$4,500.00
Educational Grants
Physicians
Illinois Cancercare
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Illinois Society of
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Physician
Assistants
Imedex LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
($1,119.00)
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
($991.00)
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Imedex LLC
$114,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Imerman Angels
$1,500.00
Charitable Donations
Immune Deficiency
$9,900.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Impact Education LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Impact Education LLC
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Improve Care Now Inc.
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Improve Care Now Inc.
$100,000.00
Patient Support
Improve Care Now Inc.
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Improve Care Now Inc.
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Improve Care Now Inc.
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Indian Doc Associate of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Houston
Indiana Parkinson
$4,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Indy Hematology Education
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Indy Hematology Education
$19,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Infectious Disease of
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Puerto Rico
Innovation Foundation Inc.
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Institute for Medical and
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Nursing Education
Integrated Med Foundation
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Integrated Med Foundation
$9,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Intellisphere LLC
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Intellisphere LLC
$15,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Intellisphere LLC
$10,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Intellisphere LLC
$16,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Intellisphere LLC
$18,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Intellisphere LLC
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Internaltional Society for
$17,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmacoeconomics and
Outcomes Research
International Association
$311,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Association
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Association
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for The Study of Lung
Cancer
International Biometric
$3,875.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Eastern North
American Region
International Dermatology
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Outcome Measures
International Dermatology
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Outcome Measures
International Medical Corps
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
International Meyoloma
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
International Meyoloma
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
International Meyoloma
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
International Meyoloma
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
International Myeloma
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society (IMS)
International Organization
$50,000.00
Patient Support
of Multiple Sclerosis
Nurses
International Pelvic Pain
$23,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
International Pelvic Pain
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
International Physician
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ntwrk Dba International
Oncology Ntwrk
International Physician
$95,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ntwrk Dba International
Oncology Ntwrk
International Physician
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ntwrk Dba International
Oncology Ntwrk
International Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Council
International Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Council
International Society for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Antiviral Research
It Takes Guts
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Ventures
Johns Hopkins Technology
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Ventures
Johns Hopkins Technology
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ventures
Johns Hopkins Technology
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Ventures
Johns Hopkins Technology
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Ventures
Johns Hopkins Technology
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ventures
Johns Hopkins Technology
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Ventures
Scholarships
Johns Hopkins Technology
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Ventures
Johns Hopkins University
($3,916.11)
Educational Grants
Johns Hopkins University
($2,784.14)
Educational Grants
JWC Covenant Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Kansas Univ Endowment
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Association
Kelsey Research Foundation
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Kentucky Rural Health
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Kentucky Rural Health
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Kentucky Rural Health
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,095.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,250.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$5,325.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$465.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$315.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$705.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$2,295.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$348.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$435.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,050.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$372.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$255.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$825.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$345.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,125.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$255.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$480.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$705.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$885.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,695.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$480.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$915.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$360.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,290.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$900.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,500.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$930.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,200.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$675.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$750.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$360.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,680.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$525.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$375.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$990.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$1,830.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Laboratorio Clinico Toledo
$600.00
Patient Support
Lahey Hospital and Medical
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Center
Lake County Crisis Center
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Lake County Haven
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Large Urology Group
$66,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practice Associate
Large Urology Group
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practice Associate
Large Urology Group
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practice Associate
Large Urology Group
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Practice Associate
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$95,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
Leukemia and Lymphoma
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Leukemia Research
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation Inc.
Scholarships
Leukemia Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Leukemia Research
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation Inc.
Scholarships
Linkage To Health Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Liver Health Connection
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Liver Health Connection
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Livestrong Foundation
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Loma Linda University
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
School of Medicine
Lung Cancer Alliance
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lung Cancer Research
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Lung Cancer Research
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lungevity Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lungevity Foundation
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Lungevity Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Lungevity Foundation
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Lupus and Allied Diseases
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association, Inc.
Lymphoma Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Lymphoma Research
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Magellan Rx Management Inc.
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
March of Dimes Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Massachusetts General
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Hospital
Massachusetts General
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Hospital
Scholarships
Massachusetts Society for
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Med Research
Mayo Clinic
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Mayo Clinic Scottsdale
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Mayo Clinic Scottsdale
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Mckesson Specialty Health
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmaceuticals and
Biotechnology Solutions
Mckesson Specialty Health
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmaceuticals and
Biotechnology Solutions
Mckesson Specialty Health
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pharmaceuticals and
Biotechnology Solutions
ME Strong Inc.
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med--LQ LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Med--LQ LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Med--LQ LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Med Conference Planners
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Educator Consortium
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Med Univ of South Carolina
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Medical Education Resources
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Medical Learning Institute
$148,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$55,495.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Learning Institute
($715.00)
Educational Grants
Medical Oncology
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of Southern
California
Medical Univ of South
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Carolina
Medical Univ of South
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Carolina
Medical Univ of South
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Carolina
Medicinal and Bioorganic
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Chemistry Foundation The
Medina Community Clinic
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Medscape LLC
($7,703.00)
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
($2,475.00)
Educational Grants
Medscape LLC
($205.88)
Educational Grants
Medstar Georgetown
$800.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Transplant Institute
Fairfax
Medstar Health Inc.
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Meeting Designs LLC
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Memorial Hermann Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Memorial Hermann Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Memorial Sloan Kettering
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Center
Merriam LLC Dba World Class
$73,085.00
Educational Grants
Cme
Metavivor Research and
$4,000.00
Charitable Donations
Support, Inc.
Methodist Dallas Med Center
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Irb
Methodist Hospital
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Metropolitan Chicago Breast
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer
Michael J Fox Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michael J Fox Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michael J Fox Foundation
$600,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michael J Fox Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michael J Fox Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan Parkinson
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Michigan Parkinson
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Michigan Rheumatism Society
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Midwest Business Group On
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Midwest Parkinsons
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Initiative
Miles for Cystic Fibrosis
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Miles for Cystic Fibrosis
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Minnesota Urological
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Mississippi Arthritis and
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatism Society
Missouri Hepatitis C
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Alliance
MIT Medical Obstetrics and
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Gynecology
Montana Academy of
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ophthalmology
Montefiore Med Center
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Mount Sinai School of
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mount Sinai School of
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Mountain Area Center
$1,200.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education Center
Movement Disorder Society
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Movement Disorder Society
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Movement Disorder Society
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Movement Disorder Society
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Movement Disorder Society
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Movement Disorder Society
$208,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Movement Disorder Society
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Multiple Myeloma Research
$25,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation Inc.
Scholarships
Multiple Myeloma Research
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Multiple Myeloma Research
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Musella Foundation for
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Brain Tumor Research and
Information Inc.
Nami Oregon
$2,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nami Oregon
$2,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nami Tennessee
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
National Academy of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology Nurse
Practitioners
National Academy of Science
$85,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
National AIDS Treatment
$300,000.00
Charitable Donations
Advocacy Project (NATAP)
National Alliance of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Healthcare Purchaser
Coalitions
National Alliance of State
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Territorial Aids
Directors
National Alliance of State
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
and Territorial Aids
Directors
National Animal Interest
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Alliance
National Associate of
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Associate of
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Managed Care Physician
National Association of
$300.00
Charitable Donations
Area Agencies On Aging
(N4a)
National Association of
$6,600.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Health Centers
Nachc
National Association of
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
School Nurses Inc.
National Brain Tumor
$5,700.00
Charitable Donations
Society Inc.
National Brain Tumor
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
National Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Society Inc.
National Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Society Inc.
National Brain Tumor
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
National Coalition for
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Survivorship
National Coalition for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Survivorship
National Coalition for
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Survivorship
National Coalition for
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Survivorship
National Coalition for
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Survivorship
National Community
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dispensing Associate Ncoda
National Comprehensive
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$55,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer Network
National Comprehensive
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Cancer Network Foundation
National Comprehensive
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Cancer Network Foundation
Scholarships
National Comprehensive
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Cancer Network Foundation
National Comprehensive
$25,000.00
Patient Support
Cancer Network Foundation
National Comprehensive
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Cancer Network Foundation
National Comprehensive
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Network Foundation
National Comprehensive
$100,000.00
Fellowships and
Cancer Network Foundation
Scholarships
National Eczema Association
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
National Health Council
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
National Minority Quality
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
forum Inc.
National Minority Quality
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
forum Inc.
National Multiple Sclerosis
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
National Pancreas
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Pancreas
$75,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Pancreas
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
National Pancreas
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Partnership for
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Women and Families Inc.
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
National Psoriasis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$150,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Foundation
Scholarships
National Psoriasis
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Psoriasis
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
National Society for
$55,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$80,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cutaneous Medicine
National Society for
$160,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cutaneous Medicine
New England Immunology
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Conference Inc.
New Jersey Academy of
($7,440.00)
Educational Grants
Family Physicians
New York Academy of Science
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
New York Academy of Science
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
New York Academy of Science
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
New York Academy of Science
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
New York Cancer Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
New York University School
($5,000.00)
Educational Grants
of Medicine
Nikki Mitchell Foundation
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
NL Communications Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$55,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
NL Communications Inc.
$145,000.00
Educational Grants
North American Center for
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Continuing Med Education
North American Society for
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatric and Adolescent
Gynecology
North American Society for
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Pediatric Gastroenterology
Hepatology and Nutrition
North Carolina Academy of
$235,500.00
Educational Grants
Family Physcians
North Carolina Academy of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Family Physcians
North Carolina Oncology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Management Society
North Carolina Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Eye Physicians and
Surgeons
North Dakota Pharmacists
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Northeast Business Group On
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Northeast Business Group On
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Northeast Kidney Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Northern California Society
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
for Clinical
Gastroenterology
Northwell Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Northwest Parkinsons
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
Northwest Parkinsons
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation
Northwestern Univ
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Northwestern Univ
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Northwestern Univ
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern Univ
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Northwestern Univ
$3,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Northwestern Univ
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Nutrition4kids, LLC
$75,000.00
Patient Support
Nutrition4kids, LLC
$100,000.00
Patient Support
NYU School of Medicine
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
NYU School of Medicine
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
NYU School of Medicine
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Cardiothoracic Surgery
NYU School of Medicine
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Cardiothoracic Surgery
Ochsner Clinic Foundation
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Ocular Immunology and
$65,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Uveitis Foundation
Ohio Association of
$1,300.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Community Health Centers
Ohio Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology
Ohio Gastroenterology
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Ohio Gastroenterology
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Ohio State Univ
$3,500.00
Educational Grants
Omnia Education Inc.
$231,475.00
Educational Grants
Oncology Nursing Society
$38,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oncology Nursing Society
$9,100.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oregon Health and Science
$3,000.00
Patient Support
Univ
Oregon Health and Science
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ
Oregon Health and Science
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ
Our Brain Bank
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pacific Business Group On
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Pacific Business Group On
$6,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Pacific Business Group On
$6,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Pacific Business Group On
$6,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Pacific Business Group On
$6,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health
Pacific Dermatologic
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Pacific Dermatologic
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Pack Center LLC
$242,750.00
Patient Support
Pack Center LLC
$200,000.00
Patient Support
Pack Center LLC
$13,100.00
Educational Grants
Pack Center LLC
$125,500.00
Educational Grants
Pack Center LLC
$110,225.00
Educational Grants
Pack Center LLC
$151,700.00
Educational Grants
Pancreatic Cancer Action
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Network
Para LA Naturaleza Inc.
$500.00
Charitable Donations
Park Nicollet Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Park Nicollet Foundation
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Alliance
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson and Movement
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson and Movement
$15,000.00
Patient Support
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson and Movement
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson and Movement
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson and Movement
$15,000.00
Patient Support
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson and Movement
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Disorder Alliance
Parkinson Association of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Alabama
Parkinson Association of
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Greater Daytona Beach
Pagdb
Parkinson Association of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Northern California
Parkinson Association of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
The Carolinas
Parkinson Association of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
The Carolinas
Parkinson Council
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Foundation of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Oklahoma
Parkinson Foundation of The
$10,000.00
Patient Support
National Capital Area
Parkinson Foundation of The
$10,000.00
Patient Support
National Capital Area
Parkinson Foundation of The
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
National Capital Area
Parkinson Foundation
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Western Pennsylvania
Parkinson Ntwrk of Arizona
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson Support Center of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Kentuciana
Parkinson Support Center of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Kentuciana
Parkinson's Association of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
San Diego
Parkinson's Association of
$17,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
San Diego
Parkinsons Association of
$7,500.00
Patient Support
The Rockies
Parkinsons Awareness
$1,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of Central
Indiana
Parkinsons Disease
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$135,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinsons Disease
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
Parkinson's Nebraska
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinson's Nebraska
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Parkinsons Unity Walk
$54,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Partnership for A Drug Free
$75,000.00
Charitable Donations
America
Partnership for Cures
$60,000.00
Patient Support
Partnership for Quality Med
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Donations Pqmd
Partnership for Quality Med
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Donations Pqmd
Patient Access Network
$1,200,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$12,007,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$5,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$10,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$11,200,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$11,022,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Access Network
$30,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$40,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$30,000.00
Patient Support
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Patient Empowerment Ntwrk
$20,000.00
Patient Support
PD Gladiators
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
PD Gladiators
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Pediatric Specialists of
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Virginia LLC
Peerview Institute for
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Medical Education
Pennsylvania Academy of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatology and
Dermatologic Surgry
Pennsylvania Prostate
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer Coalition
Pennsylvania Society of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
Pennsylvania Society of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
People To People Health
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
People To People Health
$20,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
Pharmacy Benefit Management
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Institute
Pharmacy Benefit Management
$5,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Institute
Phoenix Obgyn Society
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Phoenix Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Phrmct Care Management
$95,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Associate
Physicians Continuing
$42,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Education
Physicians Education
$42,550.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$40,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Physicians Education
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Resource LLC
Pinnacle Clinical Research
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pins for Parkinsons
$500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Platformq Health Education,
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Postgraduate Healthcare
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Education LLC
Postgraduate Institute for
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Postgraduate Institute for
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
Medicine
Presbyterian Healthcare
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
President and Fellows of
$12,000.00
Educational Grants
Harvard College
President and Fellows of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Harvard College
President and Fellows of
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Harvard College
President and Fellows of
$11,500.00
Educational Grants
Harvard College
President and Fellows of
$3,000.00
Educational Grants
Harvard College
President and Fellows of
($18,400.00)
Educational Grants
Harvard College
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prevent Cancer Foundation
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prime Education Inc.
$120,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$199,725.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$295,217.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$93,930.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$274,830.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Education Inc.
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$81,260.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$86,320.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$222,410.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology Inc.
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Prime Oncology LLC
($21,072.00)
Educational Grants
Primo Education LLC
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Project Inform
$50,000.00
Charitable Donations
Project Inform
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Projects in Knowledge Inc.
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Projects in Knowledge Inc.
$78,000.00
Educational Grants
Promis Health Organization
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Prostate Cancer Foundation
$1,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Chicago
Prostate Cancer
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
International
Prostate Cancer Research
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Instutute
Prostaware
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostaware
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Providence Health and
$20,000.00
Patient Support
Services Southern
California
Psoriasis and Psoriatic
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Arthritis Clinics
Multicenter Advancement
Network
Puerto Rico Associate of
($1,088.60)
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Puerto Rico Associate of
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
Puerto Rico Associate of
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Gastroenterology
Puerto Rico Associate of
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Gastroenterology
Puerto Rico Nephrology
$3,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society Inc.
Puerto Rico Obstetrician
$1,400.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Gyn Inc.
Puerto Rico Obstetrician
$17,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Gyn Inc.
Puerto Rico Obstetrician
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Gyn Inc.
Purdue Univ College of
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Purdue Univ College of
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Purdue Univ College of
($18,852.35)
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Purdue Univ College of
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Pharmacy
Randolph College
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Regents of The Univ of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
California
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
California
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$17,612.00
Fellowships and
California
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$2,500.00
Patient Support
California
Regents of The Univ of
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
California
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
California
Scholarships
Regents of The Univ of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
California
Regents of The Univ of
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
California
Regents of The Univ of
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan
Regents of The Univ of
$1,000.00
Educational Grants
Michigan
Regents of The Univ of
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Michigan
Respiratory Health
$4,050.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of
Metropolitan Chicago
Respiratory Health
$4,050.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of
Metropolitan Chicago
Respiratory Health
$4,050.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association of
Metropolitan Chicago
Revolutionizing Atopic
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Dermatitis
Rheumatology Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Minnesota and The Dakotas
Rheumatology Nurses Society
$87,500.00
Educational Grants
Rheumlgy Alliance of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Louisiana
Rheumnow
$105,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumnow
$60,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Richmond County Medical
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society
Riverside Medical Clinic
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Charitable Foundation
Rocky Mountain MS Center
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Ronald Mcdonald House
$60,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Charities, Inc.
Ronald Mcdonald House
$20,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Charities, Inc.
Ronald Mcdonald House
$20,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Charities, Inc.
Roswell Park Alliance
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Rotary Club of Downtown
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Macon
Runx1 Foundation
$2,500.00
Educational Grants
Rush University Medical
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rush University Medical
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rush University Medical
$5,000.00
Charitable Donations
Center
Rush University Medical
$300.00
Charitable Donations
Center
Rush University Medical
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rush University Medical
$85,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rush University Medical
$113,550.00
Educational Grants
Center
Rush University Medical
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Center
Safety Pharmacology Society
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Samaritan Daytop Village
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
San Francisco Aids
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
San Francisco Public Center
$100,000.00
Charitable Donations
Foundation
San Francisco Retina
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
San Juan Bautista Medical
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Center
Scholarships
Scripps Health
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Scripps Health
$66,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Scripps Health
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Seattle Science Foundation
$8,500.00
Educational Grants
Shanti
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Share
$7,500.00
Charitable Donations
Sociedad Dermatologica de
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Puerto Rico
Sociedad Dermatologica de
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Puerto Rico
Sociedad PR Endocrinologia
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
y Diabetologia
Sociedad Puertorriquena
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Pediatria
Society for Clinical Trials
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Leukocyte
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Biology
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$39,140.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$58,000.00
Educational Grants
Society for Neuro-Oncology
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Society for Physician
$10,000.00
Charitable Donations
Assistants in Pediatrics
Society for Womens Health
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Research
Society of Dermatology
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Society of Dermatology
$40,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Society of Gynecologic
$27,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Surgeons
Society of Investigative
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Dermatology
Socty for Gynecologic
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Investigation
Socty for Immunotherapy of
$50,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer
Socty for Immunotherapy of
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Cancer
Socty for Immunotherapy of
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Cancer
South Carolina Alliance of
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Health Plans
South Dakota Parkinson
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
South Dakota Parkinson
$1,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
South Sound Care Foundation
$3,250.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Southern California Society
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
of Gastroenterology
Spondylitis Association of
$20,000.00
Patient Support
America
Spondylitis Association of
$40,000.00
Patient Support
America
Spondylitis Association of
$17,750.00
Educational Grants
America
Spondyloarthritis Research
$70,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
and Treatment Network
Spartan
St. Barnabas Hospital
$1,300.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
St. Jude Childrens Research
$30,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Hospital
St. Jude Childrens Research
$20,000,000.00
Charitable Donations
Hospital
St. Lukes Hospital
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
State of West Virginia
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Rheumatology Society
Super Jake Foundation The
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Susan G Komen Colorado
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Susan G Komen Colorado
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Talem Health Inc.
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
Talem Health Inc.
$235,820.00
Educational Grants
Tarsus Cardiology Inc. Dba
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
South Beach Symposium
Texas Academy of Family
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians
Texas Academy of Family
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians Foundation
Texas Healthcare and
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Bioscience
Texas Indo-American
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physicians Society
Texas Medical Association
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Texas Osteopathic Medical
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association Foundation
Thomas Jefferson University
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Thomas Jefferson University
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Thomas Jefferson University
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Thomas Jefferson University
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Thomas Jefferson University
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Translational Research in
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Oncology US Inc.
Trinity International
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
College
Tufts Medical Center
($1,190.13)
Educational Grants
Tufts Medical Center
($513.14)
Educational Grants
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Prosthetics Clinic
Scholarships
UC Regents Maxillofacial
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Prosthetics Clinic
Ultimate Medical Academy
($4,043.06)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$174,700.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
($2,344.80)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
($5,138.86)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
($3,284.05)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
($2,134.44)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
($9,000.00)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
($885.32)
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$245,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$500,000.00
Educational Grants
LLC
Ultimate Medical Academy
$349,450.00
Educational Grants
LLC
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$375,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$225,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$43,358.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$163,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$166,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMA Education Inc. Dba
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Global Education Group
UMASS Memorial Foundation
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
United Medical Center
$2,280.00
Educational Grants
United Rheumatology
$225,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
United Spinal Association
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
United Spinal Association
$12,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
United States Adult Cystic
$5,000.00
Patient Support
Fibrosis Association Inc.
United States and Canadian
$30,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Academy of Pathology
United States Renal Care
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Inc.
Unity Health Care, Inc.
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ Connecticut
($2,054.94)
Educational Grants
Dermatology
Univ Connecticut
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Dermatology
Scholarships
Univ Health Service at
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Stony Point Inc.
Univ Health Service at
$120,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Stony Point Inc.
Univ Health Service at
$120,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Stony Point Inc.
Univ of Chicago
$8,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$50,000.00
Patient Support
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
($2,097.00)
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Chicago
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Chicago
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Chicago
$18,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
($7,232.53)
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$45,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Chicago
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
($68,461.18)
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Cincinnati
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Cincinnati
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Colorado Denver
$20,000.00
Fellowships and
School of Medicine
Scholarships
Univ of Connecticut Health
$12,000.00
Fellowships and
Center, John Dempsey
Scholarships
Hospital
Univ of Florida Foundation
$60,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Illinois Foundation
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Univ of Louisville
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Louisville Research
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of Louisville Research
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of Louisville Research
$60,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation
Univ of Maryland Baltimore
$10,000.00
Patient Support
Foundation Inc.
Univ of Maryland Baltimore
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Foundation Inc.
Univ of Massachusetts Med
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
School
Univ of Miami
$20,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Miami
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Miami
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Minnesota Regents
$2,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$100,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$35,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$125,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$128,860.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$600.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$25,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$30,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Nebraska Med Center
$7,500.00
Educational Grants
Univ of New Mexico Health
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Science Center Dept of
Pediatrics Neonatology
Division
Univ of Pittsburgh
$15,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Pittsburgh
$2,200.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Pittsburgh
$20,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of South Florida Board
$37,500.00
Fellowships and
of Trustees
Scholarships
Univ of South Florida
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Health Professions
Conferencing Corp
Univ of Southern California
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Southern California
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Southern California
$7,097.77
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Southern California
$81,500.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Texas at Austin
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Univ of Texas Health
$16,032.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Science Center at San
Antonio
Univ of Texas Health
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Science Center at San
Antonio
Univ of Toledo
$2,000.00
Patient Support
Univ of Utah
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Univ of Wisconsin--Madison
$1,500.00
Educational Grants
Univeristy of Chicago
$15,000.00
Charitable Donations
Cancer Research Foundation
Universidad Central Del
($2,283.00)
Educational Grants
Caribe School of Medicine
Universidad DE Puerto Rico
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Universidad DE Puerto Rico
$59,783.50
Corporate Sponsorships
Universidad DE Puerto Rico
$30,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
University Health Services
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
University Health Services
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University Health Services
$25,000.00
Educational Grants
University of Alabama at
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Birmingham Hospital
Scholarships
University of California
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Irvine
Scholarships
University of California
$6,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
San Francisco Foundation
University of Illinois--
$15,821.60
Fellowships and
Office of Business and
Scholarships
Financial Services
University of Illinois--
$75,138.40
Fellowships and
Office of Business and
Scholarships
Financial Services
University of North
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Carolina at Chapel Hill
Scholarships
University of North
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of Rochester
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
University of South Florida
($9,615.55)
Educational Grants
Foundation
University of Texas
$55,000.00
Fellowships and
Southwestern Medical
Scholarships
Center
University of Texas
$75,000.00
Fellowships and
Southwestern Medical
Scholarships
Center
University of Washington
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Medical Center
Scholarships
University of Wisconsin LA
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Crosse Foundation Inc.
Urogpo, LLC
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Urological Association of
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Urology Center of Colorado
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation
US Too International
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
US Too International
$25,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Vanderbilt Univ By and
$190,000.00
Educational Grants
Through Its Medical Center
Vanderbilt Univ By and
$10,000.00
Educational Grants
Through Its Medical Center
Vanderbilt Univ By and
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Through Its Medical Center
Vanderbilt Urology Society
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Veritas Meeting Solutions
$4,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
VHA Inc.
$35,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Vida Global Foundation
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Vietnamese American
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Healthcare Professionals
Association of Georgia
Vindico Med Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$49,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Vindico Med Education
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
Virginia Academy of
$1,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Physician Assistants
Virginia Commonwealth
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
University School of
Medicine
Virginia Council of Nurse
$1,493.94
Corporate Sponsorships
Practitioners
Wake Forest Univ
$40,000.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Wall Las Memorias
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Wartburg College
$1,000.00
Charitable Donations
Washington International
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Trade Foundation
Washington International
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Trade Foundation
Washington International
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Trade Foundation
Washington International
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Trade Foundation
Washington Univ in St Louis
($263.21)
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Washington Univ in St Louis
$6,000.00
Educational Grants
Washington Univ in St Louis
$1,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Washington Univ in St Louis
$1,600.00
Fellowships and
Scholarships
Washington Univ in St Louis
($17,777.79)
Educational Grants
We Care in Inflammatory
$25,000.00
Charitable Donations
Bowel Disease
WebMD Global LLC
$90,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$209,983.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$209,983.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$209,983.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$50,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$63,500.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$81,500.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$95,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$348,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$151,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$172,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
($1,500.00)
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
($1,142.14)
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$65,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$182,500.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$75,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$100,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$113,500.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$200,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$227,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$150,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$350,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$120,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$136,150.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$215,000.00
Educational Grants
WebMD Global LLC
$319,770.00
Educational Grants
West Virginia Community
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Voices
Wisconsin Collaborative for
$3,750.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Healthcare Quality
Wisconsin Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Wisconsin Rheumatology
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Association
Wisconsin Section American
$2,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Congress Obstetrics and
Gynecologist Acog
Women in Government
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$7,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$7,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$2,500.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
Women in Government
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Foundation Ltd
World Parkinson Coalition
$50,000.00
Fellowships and
Inc.
Scholarships
Worldwide Endomarch
$5,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Worldwide Endomarch
$3,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Yale Univ
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Zebrafish Disease Models
$5,000.00
Educational Grants
Society
Zero The Project To End
$15,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostate Cancer
Zero The Project To End
$270,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostate Cancer
Zero The Project To End
$10,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostate Cancer
Zero The Project To End
$12,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostate Cancer
Zero The Project To End
$270,000.00
Corporate Sponsorships
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exhibit 2
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Organization Legal Name
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALBERT B. SABIN VACCINE INSTITUTE, INC.
203,302.00
835,251.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALS THERAPY DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION INC.
5,159.91
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE AND RELATED DISORDERS ASSOCIATION, INC.
10,000.00
10,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY, INC.
1,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN RED CROSS
50,000.00
20,000.00
80,000.00
1,425,000.00
775,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICARES FOUNDATION, INC.
100,000.00
50,000.00
25,000.00
250,000.00
400,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APNA GHAR, INC. (OUR HOME)
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASIAN UNIVERSITY FOR WOMEN SUPPORT FOUNDATION
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASTRAEA FOUNDATION, INC.
75,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR COLLEGE OF MEDICINE INTERNATIONAL PEDIATRIC AIDS INITIATIVE
2,220,337.00
2,477,111.00
1,660,000.00
1,610,000.00
1,610,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BEACON PLACE NFP
100,000.00
100,000.00
125,000.00
150,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BERNARD P. FLORIANI FOUNDATION
50,000.00
75,000.00
110,000.00
420,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIG BROTHERS BIG SISTERS OF METROPOLITAN CHICAGO
40,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOYS AND GIRLS CLUB OF LAKE COUNTY
10,000.00
10,000.00
10,000.00
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARING AMBASSADORS PROGRAM, INC.
253,282.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASA LAKE COUNTY
25,000.00
25,000.00
25,000.00
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CATALYSIS LLC
-
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CENTER FOR NEIGHBORHOOD ENTERPRISE
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CENTRAIDE OF GREATER MONTREAL (Matching Grants--Canada)
11,000.00
11,000.00
19,600.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHICAGO CARES INC.
314,504.00
18,000.00
15,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHICAGO HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHICAGO HOUSE AND SOCIAL SERVICE AGENCY
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHICAGO TOOLBANK
5,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHINESE AMERICAN SERVICE LEAGUE
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHOCOLATE CHIPS ASSOCIATION
10,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CITY OF NORTH CHICAGO
5,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMUNITY ACTION PARTNERSHIP OF LAKE COUNTY
150,400.00
141,875.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CRADLES TO CRAYONS, INC.
515,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CRISTO REY ST. MARTIN COLLEGE PREP
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DAVIS PHINNEY FOUNDATION
120.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
IDIRECT RELIEF
1,865,000.00
1,941,111.00
1,325,000.00
2,115,000.00
850,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DRESS FOR SUCCESS WORLDWIDECENTRAL
90,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ERIE FAMILY HEALTH CENTER, INC.
100,000.00
55,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FAMILY REACH FOUNDATION
100,00.00
300,000.00
320,000.00
300,000.00
300,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEEDING AMERICA
225,000.00
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY
30,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FISHER HOUSE FOUNDATION, INC.
750,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FONDOS UNIDOS DE PUERTO RICO, INC.
136,400.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOOD BANK OF EASTERN MICHIGAN
10,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GILDA'S CLUB CHICAGO
25,000.00
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL HEALTH CORPS
50,000.00
100,000.00
100,000.00
100,000.00
100,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBEMED NFP
50,000.00
75,000.00
75,000.00
75,000.00
75,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HABITAT FOR HUMANITY INTERNATIONAL
530,200.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HABITAT FOR HUMANITY, LAKE COUNTY IL, INC.
125,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HANDS ON ORLANDO, INC
150,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEALTHREACH, INC.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEART TO HEART INTERNATIONAL, INC.
35,000.00
535,000.00
310,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HISPANIC SCHOLARSHIP FUND
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ILLINOIS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE
70,000.00
40,000.00
80,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
IMPACTING VETERANS LIVES, INC.--MIDWEST VETERANS CLOSET
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
IMSA FUND FOR ADVANCEMENT OF EDUCATION
133,000.00
133,000.00
40,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDIANA UNIVERSITY
1,150,000.00
1,100,000.00
1,100,000.00
1,100,000.00
1,100,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL CORPS
100,000.00
350,000.00
25,000.00
450,000.00
550,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JK GROUP, INC. (Matching Grants)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JUNIOR ACHIEVEMENT OF CHICAGO
33,500.00
50,000.00
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
KABOOM!
342,582.00
397,081.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
KIDS RANK
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
KOHL CHILDREN'S MUSEUM
495,500.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
KOHL CHILDREN'S MUSEUM OF GREATER CHICAGO
44,615.00
154,000.00
154,300.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LAKE COUNTY CARES
22,145.00
22,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LAKE COUNTY CRISIS CENTER FOR THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF
10,000.00
10,000.00
10,000.00
25,000.00
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, INC.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LAKE COUNTY VETERANS AND FAMILY SERVICES FOUNDATION
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAP INTERNATIONAL
313,800.00
412,907.00
460,000.00
510,000.00
325,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MASSACHUSETTS BIOTECHNOLOGY EDUCATION FOUNDATION
40,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING CANCER CENTER
100,000.00
100,000.00
100,000.00
100,000.00
100,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MIDWEST ATHLETES AGAINST CHILDHOOD CANCER, INC
865.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MOTHERS TRUST FOUNDATION
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY, INC.
12 ,500.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL INVENTORS HALL OF FAME, INC.
225,000.00
225,000.00
153,900.00
176,000.00
259,725.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS SOCIETY
350.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NICASA, NFP
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH CHICAGO COMMUNITY PARTNERS
246,833.00
237,889,00
642,500.00
730,000.00
750,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH CHICAGO COMMUNITY UNIT SCHOOL DISTRICT 187
100,600.00
165,000.00
828,430.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHERN ILLINOIS FOOD BANK
14,400.00
15,000.00
25,000.00
30,000.00
55,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PADS LAKE COUNTY, INC.
10,000.00
10,000.00
10,000.00
10,000.00
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTNERS IN HEALTH
100,000.00
300,000.00
383,335.00
688,925.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
POINTS OF LIGHT FOUNDATION
545,800.00
708,000.00
954,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRAIRIE STATE LEGAL SERVICES, INC.
25,000.00
25,000.00
25,000.00
25,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PROJECT HOPE--THE PEOPLE-TO-PEOPLE HEALTH FOUNDATION, INC.
250,000.00
100,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
READING POWER, INC.
10,000.00
40,000.00
58,000.00
260,000.00
300,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ROSALIND FRANKLIN UNIVERSITY OF MEDICINE AND SCIENCE
10,000.00
65,120.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SHEDD AQUARIUM
50,000.00
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SIEMPRE UNIDOS
60,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SILICON VALLEY COMMUNITY FOUNDATION (Matching Grants)
2,763,823.52
3,059,133.44
504,232.72
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
STRENGTHEN ORLANDO, INC.
6,515.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TAPROOT FOUNDATION
200,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TEAM RUBICON
375,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TEXAS CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ALS ASSOCIATION GREATER CHICAGO CHAPTER
5,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE FULLER CENTER FOR HOUSING HERO PROJECT LAKE COUNTY
60,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE HEART OF AMERICA FOUNDATION
726,910.00
1,019,652.00
1,327,500.00
2,050,000.00
1,993,300.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE SCRIPPS RESEARCH INSTITUTE
290,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TPA NETWORK INCORPORATED
2,285.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRAVIS MANION FOUNDATION
100,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED WAY OF CENTRAL MASSACHUSETTS
44,000.00
45,000.00
61,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNITED WAY OF LAKE COUNTY
80,000.00
80,000.00
70,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSTIY OF CHICAGO
1,000,000.00
1,000,000.00
1,000,000.00
1,000,000.00
1,000.000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
WARRIORS AND QUIET WATERS FOUNDATION, INC.
50,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
WILLIAM MARSH RICE UNIVERSITY
94,300.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
WOUNDED WARRIOR PROJECT
750,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
WPS60
110,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
YBLC, INC.
15,000.00
15,000.00
15,000.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
YOUR CAUSE HOLDINGS, LLC (Matching Grants)
2,805,067.87
4,120,115.28
7,012,295.67
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12,292,102.52
13,593,332.35
15,187,786.59
19,856.907.28
26,850,256.67
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Matching Grants are listed by Organizations that manage the program and not by the ultimate re
Prepared Statement of Hon. Chuck Grassley,
a U.S. Senator From Iowa
I want to welcome the witnesses and thank them for being here.
The information they share will help inform the committee as it
addresses the issue of high prescription drug prices.
America has a problem with the high cost of prescription medicines.
Whether it's about the EpiPen, insulin, or other prescriptions, in
the thousands of letters I've received, Iowans have made clear that
high drug prices are hurting them.
I've heard about people skipping doses of their prescription drugs
to make them last until the next paycheck.
I'm not a doctor, but rationing one's medicine doesn't sound like a
safe prescription for health and wellness.
Others have told me about leaving their prescription on the
pharmacy counter because it cost too much.
There is no question that researchers and doctors have developed
treatments and cures for diseases where there were once none.
And, such innovations take time and money.
But, we're all trying to understand the sticker shock that many
drugs generate. Especially when some of those drugs have been around
for a long time.
There is a balance between incentivizing innovation and keeping
prices affordable for consumers and taxpayers.
Like all systems, things can get out of balance.
The good news is, we are here to discuss solutions.
In fact, we are here today thanks to our system of checks and
balances.
Congress has a constitutional responsibility to be a meaningful
check on the spending of taxpayer money.
That responsibility includes not just holding hearings, but also
holding the private sector and the government accountable through
oversight.
Just like a doctor has to properly diagnose a disease before it can
be treated, Congress needs to understand what's going on in the drug
pricing supply chain in order to respond in a measured and effective
way.
As a part of that fact-finding, as of last Friday, Ranking Member
Wyden and I launched an inquiry into the high cost of insulin.
This hearing is not about scapegoating any one group regarding high
drug costs.
That's why we're holding a series of bipartisan hearings on the
issue.
Without a doubt, drug pricing is a complex issue.
But I think we should all be asking: Should it be so complex?
We cannot allow anyone to hide behind the current complexities to
shield the true cost of a drug.
And, we shouldn't turn a blind eye to industry practices that
thwart the laws and regulations designed to promote competition and
generic drug entry in the market.
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, FDA Commissioner
Scott Gottlieb and the Federal Trade Commission have identified a
number of tactics that undermine competition--like withholding samples,
pay for delay, product-hopping, and rebate bundling, just to name a
few.
While these agencies are taking enforcement action or looking at
regulatory changes, we here in Congress are exploring legislative
options to deter companies from engaging in these practices that keep
drug prices high for patients.
Today, we expect open, honest answers from the pharmaceutical
industry to figure out how we got here and see what ideas they have to
make things better.
One of the first things we need to talk about is list price.
Secretary Azar has said that pharmaceutical companies believe that
the list price is meaningless.
In fact, some of your testimony today will echo that.
However, for a patient taking a drug that has no competition, the
list price is meaningful.
For seniors on Part D who are paying co-insurance as a percentage
of list price, the list price is meaningful.
For people who have high deductible plans and pay thousands of
dollars towards list price, the list price is meaningful.
For pharmacy benefit managers, providing drugs with a high list
price can be more attractive than providing a less expensive drug.
Therefore, for taxpayers, the list price is meaningful.
We've all seen the finger pointing. Every link in the supply chain
has gotten skilled at that.
But, like most Americans, I'm sick and tired of the blame game.
It's time for solutions.
One way or another, we're going to get some clarity.
The American people deserve straight answers and real solutions.
On that note, I want to remind each of you that it's a crime under
title 18, U.S. Code, section 1001 to provide false testimony to
Congress.
Thank you for coming. I look forward to your testimony.
______
Prepared Statement of Pascal Soriot,
Chief Executive Officer, AstraZeneca
i. overview
AstraZeneca appreciates the opportunity to engage with the
committee on the important topic of drug pricing in the United States.
We would like to emphasize our commitment to addressing these
challenges and the important issues raised by the committee regarding
drug pricing and affordability.
AstraZeneca is a global, science-led biopharmaceutical company that
focuses on the discovery, development and commercialization of
prescription medicines, primarily for the treatment of diseases in
three main therapy areas: Oncology; Cardiovascular; Renal and
Metabolism; and Respiratory. We are also selectively active in the
areas of autoimmunity, neuroscience, and infection. We are proud to
call Wilmington, DE home to our North American headquarters. We are
equally proud that one of our three global Research and Development
(``R&D'') headquarters is located in Gaithersburg, MD.
We are honored to contribute to improving the lives of millions of
patients in the U.S. and across the globe. This statement is focused on
four points explaining AstraZeneca's purpose, core values, and vision
for the future:

First, we are a science-led organization, as reflected in
our continued investment in R&D and our success in introducing
new treatments. Continuing to develop treatments that deliver
long-term benefits to patients and the overall health of the
U.S. population requires society's commitment to supporting
investment in innovation through purchasing our medicines for
the duration of patent protection at a responsible price that
allows for the recoupment of the investment and risk associated
with innovation.

Second, we believe medicines are part of the solution to
controlling health-care costs. They not only improve patient
outcomes and increase quality of life, but also reduce
downstream costs by keeping people healthy and out of the
hospital. This contribution to reducing overall health-care
costs should be considered when discussing drug pricing.

Third, we recognize that we are only able to improve the
lives of patients if they are able to take our medicines as
prescribed. To that end, we are committed to sustaining and
improving patient access and affordability.

Fourth, we recognize that the current state of drug pricing
in the U.S. health-care system is not sustainable and that
patients are facing increasingly high out-of-pocket costs. We
believe that these issues must be addressed urgently, and we
hope to be a constructive partner in finding solutions.
ii. benefits of innovation and r&d funding
Science is at the core of what we do, and we are focused on being
at the forefront of scientific innovation to deliver tomorrow's
treatments and cures. Since 2017, the Food and Drug Administration
(``FDA'') has approved 18 AstraZeneca products or significant
indications, and five of our products have received breakthrough
therapy designation. Breakthrough therapy designation is designed
specifically for the expedited development and review of drugs for
serious or life-threatening conditions, and these designations
highlight how critical our work is to patient health in the U.S. For
example, our oncology medicine CALQUENCE was granted breakthrough
therapy designation for certain patients with mantle cell lymphoma and
tezepelumab received such a designation for certain patients with
severe asthma.
In order to achieve these results, we reinvest a significant
percentage of our revenues in research to identify the next generation
of life-changing medicines. Over the past several years, we have worked
tirelessly to rebuild our R&D pipeline. We now have approximately 8,900
employees in our R&D organization working at sites across the world.
Our financial commitment to R&D has been significant. In 2018 alone, we
spent nearly $6 billion on R&D, or 28 percent of our total product
sales--a commitment to R&D that well exceeds the average spending of
our research-based peers.\1\ Over the past six years, even as our
revenues declined, we continued to make substantial investments in both
R&D and acquiring products for our pipeline. In 2018, these investments
have only just started to contribute to growth of our company.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA).
PhRMA Annual Membership Survey (2018). https://www.phrma.org/report/
2018-phrma-annual-membership-survey.
These results are possible only if society makes a commitment to
support innovation so that treatments can be developed to the benefit
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of society as a whole for years to come.
The development of new drug therapies requires society to make an
up-front investment through purchasing our medicines during the patent
protection period at a responsible price we charge, and then at a very
substantially reduced price for an indefinite period after patent
expiry when generics are introduced. Thus, long-term improvements in
healthcare derived from new medicines can only be achieved if society
is willing to pay a responsible price for a certain number of years
that allows for the recoupment of the investment and risk involved in
pharmaceutical innovation. Improvements in patient health and reduction
of overall health-care costs over the long term are a direct result of
this commitment to support innovation.
For example, in the U.S., we have seen incredible progress in
reducing cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality. Between 2000
and 2014, age-adjusted mortality rates for cardiovascular and heart
disease declined by approximately 35 percent; several factors have
contributed to this decline, but the development of new medicines,
including cholesterol-lowering medicines like statins, has played an
important role.\2\ To take an AstraZeneca example, CRESTOR, a statin,
was approved by the FDA in 2003. A study of CRESTOR showed that it
reduced cardiovascular mortality and morbidity over the lifetime of the
patient compared to the standard of care, resulting in economic
value.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Sidney S, Quesenberry CP, Jr, Jaffe MG, Sorel M, et al. Recent
trends in cardiovascular mortality in the United States and public
health goals. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(5):594-599. doi: 10.1001/
jamacardio.2016.1326.
\3\ Ohsfeldt RL, Gandhi SK, Smolen LJ, et al. Cost effectiveness of
rosuvastatin in patients at risk of cardiovascular disease based on
findings from the JUPITER trial. J Med Econ. 2010;13(3):428-37. doi:
10.3111/13696998.2010.499758.
It is important to note that there are significant risks involved
in developing new therapies. Only approximately 12 percent of therapies
entering clinical study are approved, and the average cost of
development approaches $2.6 billion.\4\ In 2018, return on R&D
investment among larger biopharmaceutical manufacturers fell to 1.9
percent, its lowest point since 2010.\5\ If we are not successful, we
lose our investment in the therapy. Although we are proud of our
success rate, we know that setbacks are inevitable when pushing the
boundaries of science. For example, in 2018, we announced with our
partner Lilly the discontinuation of Phase III clinical trials of
lanabecestat, an investigational treatment for Alzheimer's disease.
Such results are disappointing, but are an integral part of the nature
of scientific discovery.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ DiMasi JA, Grabowski HG, Hansen RA. Innovation in the
pharmaceutical industry: new estimates of R&D costs. J Health Econ.
2016;47:20-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2016.01.012.
\5\ Deloitte Centre for Health Solutions. Unlocking R&D
Productivity: Measuring the return from pharmaceutical innovation 2018.
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health-care/
articles/measuring-return-from-pharmaceutical-innovation.html.
Given the risks involved in developing a medicine, strong
intellectual property (``IP'') protections and exclusivity for
innovator products are a key component to ensuring that manufacturers
continue to develop therapies that benefit society as a whole. While
they create incentives to innovate, it is important to note that IP
protections and exclusivity for innovator therapies do not generally
prevent other competitor therapies from entering a given class,
allowing robust competition to exist; for example, there are seven
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
different statin molecules approved in the marketplace.
Once these protections expire, generic and biosimilar competitors
can enter the market, which further increases competition. Again,
taking CRESTOR as example, since 2016 when it lost exclusivity, over 16
generic forms have been approved and are available in the market today,
driving prices down very substantially. We strongly support this
construct and policy efforts to encourage competition. We describe
these proposals in section V of this statement.
Finally, it is also worth noting that a significant portion of our
R&D occurs here in the U.S. We invest more than $2.7 billion annually
in U.S.-based R&D work, employing approximately 2,700 people in our
science units within our R&D centers in Maryland, Massachusetts, and
California. Our approach to R&D is consistent with our broader and
long-standing commitment to U.S. jobs in research and manufacturing.
Our largest footprint is in this country, with 12,800 employees
throughout the U.S. Additionally, we recently completed a $200 million
expansion in our Frederick, MD facility where biologics, including
FASENRA for certain patients with severe asthma, and our immuno-
oncology therapy, IMFINZI, are manufactured. This sustained investment
in R&D leads to the creation of high-quality jobs and generates
economic value in the U.S.
To summarize, because we have put science and research at the
center of our company, we have had more success in our R&D pipeline
than ever before, delivering long-term healthcare benefits. This
success, however, is only possible if society remains committed to
supporting investment in innovation.
iii. value of medicines
The investments we make in researching and developing new therapies
cannot occur in a vacuum. We must also ensure that our medicines bring
value to patients, payers, and the health-care system as a whole.
We are only able to stand behind the value of our medicines if that
value is carefully and appropriately defined. In the health-care
industry and as part of policymaking, there is frequent reflection on
the meaning of ``value.'' We believe value must be assessed
holistically and include all costs related to the treatment of a given
condition. In particular, we must consider improvements in clinical
outcomes and quality of life as well as reduction of hospitalizations
and other medical costs.
Additionally, the future savings that prescription medicines can
bring to the healthcare system by preventing more costly interventions
should not be overlooked as their value is considered. A recent study
in Health Affairs of total Medicare spending per beneficiary from 1999
to 2012 found that the spending growth rate slowed to just 1.1 percent
per year on average since 2005. The study found that half of the total
slowdown was attributable to reduced spending growth on cardiovascular
diseases and events, like heart attacks and related conditions.
Increased medication use for conditions like hypertension, high
cholesterol, and diabetes explained half of that effect. The authors
noted that while large, even this impact of medications is likely to be
understated.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Cutler D, Ghosh K, et al., Explaining the Slowdown in Medical
Spending Growth Among the Elderly, 1999-2012. Health Affairs. February
2019. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2018.05372.
One of our own therapies--BRILINTA--is an example of a medicine
used in the cardiovascular setting that brings value to both patients
and the broader health-care system. This oral antiplatelet therapy is
indicated to reduce the rate of cardiovascular death, heart attack, and
stroke in patients with acute coronary syndrome (``ACS'') or a history
of heart attacks. For at least the first 12 months following the
diagnosis of ACS, BRILINTA has been shown to be superior to
clopidogrel, a generic oral antiplatelet. In addition, in patients with
ACS, BRILINTA in combination with aspirin resulted in 21 percent
reduction in cardiovascular mortality compared to clopidogrel in
combination with aspirin.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, et al. Ticagrelor versus
clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med.
2009;361(11):1045-57. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0904327.
In addition, BRILINTA in combination with aspirin also resulted in
lower medical care costs compared to clopidogrel in combination with
aspirin. The lower medical costs are driven primarily by fewer hospital
readmissions and cardiovascular revascularization interventions--
resulting in medical care cost offsets of approximately $1,000 per
patient per year.\8\ This represents countless hours of patient time
better spent with family and friends than in the hospital.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Data on file. 2134602; AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP.
Another example of the value that medicines can provide relates to
the relationship between diabetes and heart failure. In 2015, an
estimated 30.2 million adults in the U.S. had diabetes, with the vast
majority (90-95 percent) having type 2 diabetes.\9\ Up to 50 percent of
patients with type 2 diabetes may develop heart failure.\10\ The
prevalence of heart failure in the U.S. is expected to increase from
5.8 million in 2012 to 8.5 million in 2030.\11\ The total cost of heart
failure, which includes direct and indirect costs, is projected to
increase from $31 billion in 2012 to $70 billion in 2030, with the
majority of these costs (80 percent) related to hospitalization.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National
Diabetes Statistics Report, 2017. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pdfs/
data/statistics/national-diabetes-statistics-report.pdf.
\10\ American Diabetes Association. CV Disease and risk management:
standards of medical care in diabetes--2019. Diabetes Care.
2019;42(Suppl 1);S103-S123. doi: 10.2337/dc19-S010.
\11\ Heidenreich P, Albert N, Allen L, et al. Forecasting the
impact of heart failure in the United States: a policy statement from
the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:606-619. doi:
10.1161/HHF.0b013e318291329a.
\12\ Id.
Our oral type 2 diabetes product FARXIGA is a sodium-glucose
cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor. This newest class of oral diabetes
medication has consistently demonstrated cardiovascular benefits for
diabetes patients that are absent in older diabetes treatments, further
supporting the importance of biopharmaceutical innovation. A recent
cardiovascular outcomes trial demonstrated that FARXIGA significantly
reduced the risk for hospitalization for heart failure or
cardiovascular death.\13\ With initial hospitalizations and
readmissions for heart failure in the Medicare population exceeding
$10,000 for each event in the U.S., it can be readily observed where
these new therapies can help further reduce total cost of care in the
most at-risk patient populations.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al. for the DECLARE-TIMI 58
Investigators. Dapagliflozin and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2
diabetes [published online ahead of print November 10, 2018]. N Engl J
Med. 2018. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1812389. Accessed November
10, 2018.
\14\ Ziaeian B, Heidenreich PA, Xu H, et al. Medicare expenditures
by race/ethnicity after hospitalization for heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction. JACC Heart Fail. 2018;6:388-97. doi:
10.1016/j.jchf.2017.12.007.
In highly complex conditions, the measure of value and
effectiveness can be more multifaceted. In cancer, for example, there
are several end-points to measure effectiveness, such as progression-
free survival and overall survival. To account for this complexity,
cost-effectiveness studies for cancer therapies can measure the value
in providing the medication earlier in the course of treatment. An
example from our portfolio is IMFINZI--currently the only FDA-approved
immunotherapy for the treatment of patients with unresectable stage III
non-small cell lung cancer whose cancer has not progressed following
platinum-based concurrent chemoradiation therapy. Before IMFINZI,
patients in this setting underwent a period of ``watch and wait'' after
chemoradiation,\15\ and for up to 89 percent of these patients their
cancer was likely to spread further.\16\ Based on the PACIFIC trial,
IMFINZI may reduce the risk of death for these patients by nearly a
third.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Postmus PE, Kerr KM, Oudkerk M, et al. Early and locally
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC): ESMO Clinical Practice
Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Annals of Oncol.
Published online July 1, 2017. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdx222.
\16\ Albain KS, Swann RS, Rusch VW, et al. Radiotherapy Plus
Chemotherapy With or Without Surgical Resection for Stage III Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer. Lancet. Published online August 1, 2009. doi: 0.1016/
S0140-6736(09)60737-6.
\17\ Antonia SJ, Villegas A, Daniel D, et al. Overall survival with
durvalumab after chemoradiotherapy in stage III NSCLC. N Engl J Med.
2018;379(24):2342-2350. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1809697. Epub 2018 Sep 25.
In a recent analysis, use of IMFINZI was found to be cost-effective
in comparison to the previous ``watch and wait'' approach to treatment.
This cost-effectiveness analysis, published in the Journal of the
American Medical Association in December 2018, indicates that although
IMFINZI consolidation therapy increased national cancer spending,
treating earlier in the course of cancer progression may provide
significant value.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Criss SD, Mooradian MJ, Sheehan DF, et al. Cost-effectiveness
and Budgetary Consequence Analysis of Durvalumab Consolidation Therapy
vs. No Consolidation Therapy After Chemoradiotherapy in Stage III Non-
Small Cell Lung Cancer in the Context of the U.S. Health Care System.
JAMA Oncol. Published online December 13, 2018. doi: 10.1001/
jamaoncol.2018.5449.
For a drug therapy to bring the most value to patients and the
health-care system, it is imperative that the therapy is reaching the
right patients at the right point in their treatment journeys. At
AstraZeneca, we are focused on improving outcomes for patients on a
personalized level by identifying the most appropriate treatments.
Approximately 90 percent of our pipeline now has a precision medicine
approach and reflects the broad range of cutting-edge technologies,
tissue diagnostics, next-generation sequencing and point of care
diagnostics we have introduced. By more precisely matching patients
with the right medicine, we bring greater value to payers and the
health-care system and help to ensure that patients receive the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
specific therapy that is most appropriate for their treatment needs.
Finally, the concept of value is a key component in our pricing
determinations. AstraZeneca has always taken a thoughtful approach to
pricing, and we continue to do so, considering many factors. In
addition to our significant R&D investments, we consider clinical
value, size of patient population, government/payer coverage
requirements, patient affordability, competition and other market
conditions. We remain committed to pricing responsibly and making our
medicines available and affordable to patients.
iv. commitment to patient access and affordability
Although we are thoughtful in our approach to pricing, we know that
patients continue to face challenges at the pharmacy counter. We fully
recognize that drug therapies cannot bring value to the health-care
system or to patients unless they can access the medicines they need.
Our commitment to affordable access translates into a number of
resources and programs that have helped make our medicines available to
patients.
A. AstraZeneca Savings and Affordability Programs
To ensure that patients in the U.S. are aware of our affordability
programs, we were the first company to include messages about these
programs in all of our U.S. television advertisements. Since 2005,
every televised advertisement has reminded viewers: ``If you can't
afford your medication, AstraZeneca may be able to help.''
We stand behind this statement. Forty years ago, we were one of the
first manufacturers in our industry to establish a patient assistance
program to help low-
income patients obtain certain medicines free of charge. Through our
``AZ&Me'' program, we have provided prescription drug savings to more
than four million patients in the U.S. and Puerto Rico between 2008 and
2018.
In addition to AZ&Me, we offer extensive copay savings programs to
help eligible, commercially insured patients reduce copay costs at the
pharmacy. These copay savings programs are unfortunately not available
to Part D patients and this has created challenges for this population,
reducing adherence to important lifesaving or life-improving
treatments.
B. Value-Based Agreements
We are also working closely with payers and health systems to
explore innovative solutions to improve access and affordability that
demonstrate the value our medicines bring to patients and the health-
care system. For several years, AstraZeneca has been exploring these
types of solutions through value-based agreements where we are willing
to work with health-care stakeholders to tie payment to patient
outcomes.
To date, we have entered into approximately 40 value-based
agreements across our therapeutic areas with a variety of payers,
making AstraZeneca a leader in the field of value-based agreements. As
an example, AstraZeneca agreed with Express Scripts that for IRESSA, an
oral treatment for certain types of lung cancer, we will fully
reimburse Express Scripts for discontinued use before the third fill,
including if discontinuation occurs because patients did not respond to
treatment.
While most of these agreements have been focused on securing
patient access to our medicines and delivering better patient outcomes,
where payers are willing, we are also looking to more directly address
patient out-of-pocket affordability through these innovative
arrangements.
As an example, last month, we announced the initiation of a value-
based agreement for University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (``UPMC'')
Medicare patients who are prescribed BRILINTA. This value-based
contract, which was effective as of January 1, 2019, is groundbreaking
in two ways. First, the contract lowers the out-of-pocket costs for a
UPMC Medicare Part D patient to approximately $10 for a 30-day supply.
Second, what UPMC pays for BRILINTA will vary based on patient
outcomes, tying the cost of the drug to its real-world clinical
performance.
We are currently exploring another value-based agreement in
Medicare Part D. In addition to having a significant outcomes-based
component, this arrangement would reduce patient out-of-pocket costs.
This type of agreement allows patients to access their medicines at a
lower out-of-pocket cost and payers to control their overall health-
care costs through paying for outcomes.
However, there remain significant operational and regulatory
hurdles to the broader implementation of value-based agreements.
Operational challenges include capturing appropriate data and other
capabilities on the part of payers that are needed to successfully
execute these arrangements. For example, value-based agreements
typically require plans to have systems in place to report measures
like adherence and readmissions. While many payers and health systems
are evolving to meet the needs of the changing health-care environment,
greater investments need to be made in data capabilities. In addition,
policy and regulations must advance to support value-based agreements
in becoming a standard approach to reimbursement.
We believe that there are steps the government can take to address
these challenges to help encourage the timely adoption of value-based
agreements, including in public sector programs like Medicare. These
recommendations are described in more detail in section V of this
statement. Through the partnership of payers and policymakers, we look
forward to a future where implementation of value-based agreements
across public and private payers is widespread.
C. Discounts and Rebates
Finally, we negotiate rebates and discounts with payers and
pharmacy benefit managers (``PBMs'')--including in Medicare Part D--to
help ensure that our therapies have the most robust access possible.
Without providing these discounts and rebates, many life-savings
medicines would not be placed on plan formularies and therefore would
be largely unavailable to the patients who need them most. Our
estimates for 2018 show that across our products, our average rebate is
nearly 50 percent of our gross revenues in the U.S. Taking BRILINTA as
an example, approximately one third of gross revenue is provided back
in rebates. For most of our diabetes therapies, rebates well exceed 50
percent of gross revenues.
Over the past several years, discounts and rebates for our
therapies have increased overall, both in the commercial sector and
Part D. In recent years, in our primary care portfolio, which includes
the majority of our therapies, we have seen flat to declining net
effective prices to AstraZeneca for most of our products. Taking
CRESTOR as an example, in the 5-year period before it lost exclusivity,
even though list price increased, in 2011, CRESTOR's average net
effective price earned by AstraZeneca was $2.52 per day (one pill per
day). In 2016 when CRESTOR lost exclusivity, the average net effective
price was again $2.52.
However, discounts and rebates do not necessarily translate to
lower cost-sharing for patients. There are a series of factors that
impact a patient's out-of-pocket costs, including individual insurance
plan benefit design (copayments, coinsurance, and deductibles),
formulary placement, provider access, and assistance programs or
savings offers. As a science-led, patient-focused company, the fact
that many patients struggle with out-of-pocket costs despite the
discount and rebates we provide stands counter to our mission of
improving patient health.
v. the path forward: evolving the current system
Despite rapidly increasing rebate amounts, affordability of drug
therapies is an increasingly significant public policy and public
health issue. We agree that the current system is not sustainable--for
patients, payers, and society as a whole--and we are committed to
engaging across stakeholders to develop a new paradigm that improves
affordability and access for patients while ensuring that manufacturers
can continue to develop innovative therapies.
To achieve these goals of improving affordability and supporting
innovation, we must progress from a volume-based to a value-based
health-care system. We continue to be forward-leaning in this regard,
and we encourage other stakeholders to join us in the effort to deliver
and pay for health care, including drug therapies, in a more
affordable, efficient, and effective way.
An important step is to evolve the current system of paying for and
delivering drug therapies to one in which patients more directly
benefit from the discounts and rebates we provide. Specifically, we
believe that patient cost-sharing should be more aligned to a product's
net price as opposed to its list price, as is the case today.
However, as we look ahead to the future, even more must be done to
improve patient affordability and to truly build a health-care system
based on the value of therapies provided to patients.
A. Value-Based Agreements Should Be the Future Standard
First, in a future system, the default approach should be that
pricing and reimbursement for drug therapies are tied to patient
outcomes and the value the particular therapy provides. As such, it is
imperative that manufacturers and payers--including Part D plans--
engage in value-based agreements similar to the IRESSA and BRILINTA
examples referenced previously. Policies to encourage these
arrangements and to reduce or eliminate existing challenges will be
essential to their long-term success. To that end, AstraZeneca
appreciates the support of Senators Warner and Cassidy for value-based
agreements, as demonstrated by their requests for input on the Patient
Affordability Value and Efficiency (``PAVE'') Act. This draft
legislation would promote the development of value-based agreements by
offering increased flexibility for manufacturers to enter into such
arrangements, including with Medicare Part D plans.
In addition to the policies outlined in the PAVE Act, there are
other ways that the government could facilitate value-based agreements.
For example, the Department of Health and Human Services (``HHS'')
should consider how its recent proposed rule regarding PBM rebates can
be structured to protect existing and future value-based agreements. We
appreciate that HHS solicited comments on this topic, and we look
forward to sharing our perspective in our written comments to the
proposal. In addition, to encourage utilization of agreements that best
address the government's goals, we recommend that HHS develop a
prioritized list of clinical outcomes measures for manufacturers and
payers to consider when developing outcomes-based agreements.
Over the past several years, we have engaged with HHS, and
specifically the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation
(``CMMI''), to advance specific models involving our therapies in the
Medicare program. To date, we have not been able to execute on a model
with HHS or CMMI and the feedback we have received is that company-
specific models are challenging to implement. We look forward to
continued dialogue on these issues, and we hope to work with HHS, CMMI
and other stakeholders to develop a scalable framework in which
innovative models can be implemented in an appropriate way.
B. All Patients, Including Medicare Patients, Should Benefit From
Reduced Cost-Sharing
Second, a future system should be designed to ensure that all
patients benefit from lower cost-sharing, including those patients
taking drug therapies on the Part D specialty tier. A recent study
found that rates of prescription abandonment and delayed initiation of
oral cancer therapies increase as cost-sharing amounts rise.\19\ Such a
result reflects the need for a restructuring of the current benefit
design for specialty products.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Doshi JA, Li P, Petit AR, et al. Association of Patient Out-
of-Pocket Costs With Prescription Abandonment and Delay in Fills of
Novel Oral Anticancer Agents. J Clin Oncol. 2018; 36(5): 476-482. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2017.74.5091.
Under one potential approach, a portion of manufacturer discounts
could be used to fund a reduction in cost-sharing for patients facing
the highest cost-sharing amounts. This could be accomplished by
establishing a monthly or annual out-of-pocket cap, which would give
patients greater certainty in the total amount of out-of-pocket costs
they could face. The cap would provide a safety-net for patients that
could be funded by a portion of the discounts provided across all Part
D products. Such an approach would help ensure that more patients
benefit from the discounts manufacturers provide.
C. Use of Biosimilars Should Be Supported
Third, we believe that competition is a key component to reducing
costs, and that is why we support expanded use of biosimilars in the
U.S. As a global company, we operate in countries, particularly those
in the European Union, where biosimilar competition is particularly
robust. We support a similarly vigorous biosimilars market in the U.S.
We therefore appreciate the efforts of the FDA to increase the
availability of biosimilars in the U.S., including the FDA's
development of a Biosimilars Action Plan. We support efforts to
streamline and improve the efficiency of the biosimilars approval
pathway for the benefit of patients.
We also support reimbursement policies that facilitate the uptake
of biosimilars. Such policies include Medicare reimbursement rates that
ensure that biosimilars can compete on equal footing with innovator
products.
d. market-based competition should be maintained
Finally, it is imperative to maintain market-based competition
between manufacturers and between plans. Market-based competition plays
an important role in keeping costs down. This is how the lifecycle of
innovator therapies works today when competitors enter the market and
generic medicines become available over time.
The competitive market in the U.S. also provides patients with
access to innovative medicines faster. For example, American patients
have access to cancer medicines about 2 years earlier than patients in
other countries, including Germany, France, and the U.K.\20\ This
timely access to new cancer therapies is correlated with improved
survival rates; from 1997 to 2012, rates of cancer mortality fell by 20
percent in the U.S., compared to a 15 percent reduction in the U.K.\21\
Additionally, nearly 90 percent of newly launched medicines from 2011
to 2017 were available in the U.S., compared to just two-thirds in the
U.K., half in Canada and France, and one-third in Australia; and of 14
new diabetes medicines launched over that period, only one was
available in France.\22\ Given the benefits brought to patients by new
antidiabetic agents such as SGLT2 inhibitors (reduction in heart
failure and hospitalizations for heart failure), U.S. patients and
payers greatly benefit from the earlier introduction of these
innovative medicines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ PhRMA analysis of IMS Consulting Group ``Patient Access to
Innovative Oncology Medicines Across Developed Markets.'' June 2016.
\21\ World Health Organization (WHO). WHO mortality database.
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/mortality_data/en. PhRMA analysis of WHO
mortality database, using age--specific death rates.
\22\ PhRMA analysis of IQVIA Analytics.
While the current system needs reform, some of the benefits to the
current structure are the speed of access and reimbursement of new
medicines and the robust nature of the negotiations between
manufacturers and PBMs, which in turn creates competition between
manufacturers. As the system evolves, it is important that this ability
to compete is maintained. Therefore, there must be flexibility to
continue to negotiate net price by product and indication, among other
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
factors.
This flexibility is necessary not only to maintain competition, but
also to facilitate additional innovations in the way drugs are priced
and reimbursed. For example, variable discounts could be used to reduce
cost-sharing for patients over time as they remain adherent to their
medications. Additionally, we support the concept of indication-based
pricing, which recognizes that the value of a drug therapy with more
than one indication may vary based on indication. Indication-based
pricing would allow greater competition among manufacturers based on
the clinical efficacy of their therapies on an indication-by-indication
basis. Allowing discounts to vary based on the indication for which a
therapy is prescribed will be key to facilitating indication-based
pricing.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge that the coverage and
reimbursement policies in Medicare Part B have been criticized for not
sufficiently encouraging price competition for physician-administered
drug therapies. We are supportive of reforms in the Medicare Part B
program to address these concerns. Such reforms could include an
inflation penalty if a manufacturer's price increase exceeds a certain
threshold, as well as steps to ensure that the government and Medicare
patients more directly benefit from the discounts and rebates provided
in the commercial sector. Similar to the suggestion above on creating a
Part D out-of-pocket cap funded by a portion of manufacturer discounts,
the savings generated from an inflation penalty and increased
competition in Part B could be used to fund an out-of-pocket cap for
Medicare Part B patients.
Competition is a fundamental requirement to reducing costs over
time, both in Medicare Part B and Part D. Flexibility in the future
system will be necessary to maintain competition and to explore
additional innovations in the pricing and reimbursement of drug
therapies. We must also be willing to work together to improve the
efficiency of the Part B program. We look forward to working with
policymakers and other stakeholders to shape the future system to
accomplish these goals.
vi. conclusion
Although there is no single solution to the challenges we face, we
welcome the opportunity to speak with you about ways to evolve our
health-care system. We share your concern that many patients are facing
challenges with out-of-pocket costs, and we are committed to working
towards solutions that support patient access and affordability while
sustaining innovation. AstraZeneca, along with many others in the
pharmaceutical industry, is innovating to discover and develop
tomorrow's cures and treatments, and we know we need to be a
constructive partner to find solutions to ensure that patients benefit
from the therapies we develop.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Pascal Soriot
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
Question. At the hearing, you testified that AstraZeneca does not
withhold samples from generic manufacturers in order to block generic
versions of your drug from entering the market. You also expressed your
support for the ``Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent
Samples Act,'' also known as the CREATES Act. However, the FDA has a
list on its website which identifies reference listed drug (RLD) access
inquiries where brand manufacturers may have prevented generic
companies from obtaining samples of products necessary to support FDA
approval. AstraZeneca is on this FDA list. This would appear to
contradict your testimony at the hearing that AstraZeneca has not
withheld samples of their products to delay generic competition.
Could you please explain in detail why AstraZeneca is on the FDA
list?
Answer. AstraZeneca appreciates the opportunity to address the
question of one of our medicines, BRILINTA (ticagrelor) appearing on
the Reference Listed Drug Access Inquiries list (RLD List). We would
first like to state that AstraZeneca supports allowing generic
manufacturers access to samples. Withholding or otherwise blocking such
access is inconsistent with that position. Our internal review has not
identified any unanswered, delayed, or outstanding requests for samples
of BRILINTA by any generic manufacturers.
It is our understanding that BRILINTA was included on the RLD List
based on a single inquiry received by the FDA. Unfortunately, the RLD
List does not identify the company that reportedly requested
information (or samples) from AstraZeneca, the date the information was
requested, or any other information that would allow AstraZeneca to
better understand or further investigate the circumstances of this
inquiry. On its website, the FDA does advise that it has ``not
independently investigated or confirmed the access limitations
described in the inquiries received.'' \1\ Given this limitation, the
listing of an inquiry on the RLD List does not mean that the FDA has in
fact determined that access to samples by generic manufacturers was
limited or withheld for the medicines identified. Indeed, based on our
internal review, we have not identified any circumstances that
substantiate the inquiry received by the FDA relating to BRILINTA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Reference Listed Drug (RLD) Access Inquiries, U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/
ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm (last updated Feb. 7, 2019).
Question. Could you please explain in detail the discrepancy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
between your testimony and the FDA list?
Answer. AstraZeneca is not aware of any instances where the company
has withheld or otherwise blocked access to samples by generic
manufacturers. Based on our internal review, AstraZeneca is not aware
of any unanswered, delayed, or outstanding requests for samples of
BRILINTA by any generic manufacturers.
In addition, BRILINTA is and has always been available via normal
commercial distribution channels (i.e., wholesalers) since its U.S.
launch. It has never had a restricted distribution program.
Finally, more than 15 generic manufacturers have applied for
regulatory approval from the FDA for the manufacture of generic
ticagrelor and some, like Watson/Teva, have received tentative
approvals from the FDA. Because conducting bioequivalence studies with
the branded medicine is an FDA pre-approval requirement, it is clear
that these generic manufacturers are not having difficulty accessing
branded ticagrelor for their studies.
In light of the context provided above, it is unclear why any
generic manufacturer would be unable to obtain a sample of BRILINTA for
their purposes or why an inquiry was lodged with the FDA related to
this medicine.
Question. Has AstraZeneca ever blocked access to samples?
Answer. AstraZeneca is not aware of instances where the company has
refused to sell samples or has otherwise blocked access to samples by
generic manufacturers.
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' proposed
rule, ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates
Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees,'' envisions that drug manufacturers will offer up-front
discounts rather than the back-end rebates that are now commonly
provided. Some observers argue that a 1996 court case called into
question whether manufacturers could offer up-front discounts,
resulting in today's rebate-based system. I've heard differing opinions
as to whether the issues related to the initial court case are still
relevant.
If the HHS proposed rule is finalized, can you assure the committee
that your company will offer up-front discounts? If not, why?
Answer. If the HHS proposed rule is finalized largely as proposed,
AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use point-of-
sale discounts.
Question. Please describe how you expect your company to respond to
the HHS proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor protection for back-end
rebates in Medicare Part D that is referenced above if it is finalized.
Assuming you are confident that antitrust laws do not prevent your
company from offering up-front discounts, specifically, do you envision
that your company lowers the list price of a drug to the current after-
rebate net price, offer discounts equal to the current rebate amount,
or a combination of both?
Answer. Assuming the HHS rebate rule is finalized largely as
proposed, AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use
point-of-sale discounts. Our goal is to maintain net prices broadly in
line with today, recognizing our ability to do so may be dependent on
external factors and market response such as how plans evolve their
benefit design and the total degree of transparency under the new
model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector, and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
Question. To what extent are the back-end rebates your company
currently offers contingent on the amount of market share realized for
your drugs as a result of Part D plan formulary placement and other
techniques?
Answer. Our arrangements in Part D do not include a market share
component.
Question. Please provide a breakdown of percentage of sales that go
to each payer (including Medicare, Medicaid, private pay, other) and a
similar percentage by volume of the total number of each drug compared
to total volume. Please provide this data for the most recent year
available.
Answer. Below you will find our estimated relative payer split of
Gross Product Sales in the U.S., for the year ending December 31, 2018.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Products
-----------------------------
Sales $ Millions
Proportion of Total
Payer
Business
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicaid
1,826,337
11.0%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fed Gov't (VA, DOD, CDC,
2,986,585
18.1%
PHS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GPO/LTC
1,362,663
8.2%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Commercial
5,019,907
30.4%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicare Part D
3,514,858
21.3%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tricare
70,799
0.4%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-Contracted Sales/Other
1,756,851
10.6%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total
16,538,000
100.0%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. Do your companies hire consultants or lobbyists to
promote products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committees? To whom do you disclose advocacy activities surrounding
State Medicaid programs, if at all?
Answer. AstraZeneca does not utilize consultants or lobbyists to
promote medicines at State Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P&T) Committees.
However, AstraZeneca Medical Affairs personnel may engage in peer-to-
peer medical discussions with members of the medical community
including Medicaid P&T committee members.
AstraZeneca has comprehensive internal policies that oversee
interactions between AstraZeneca employees and government officials.
Federal and state laws and regulations also govern lobbying activities,
and AstraZeneca complies with the attendant disclosure requirements.
Question. Please describe how the costs of patient assistance
programs are accounted for within your company's financial statements.
Please also describe the types of market information, such as
prescribing and use patterns, that your company collects from different
types of patient assistance programs and patient hub services.
Answer. AZ&MeTM Prescription Savings Program (Patient
Assistance Program):
In furtherance of its objective of ensuring patient access,
AstraZeneca was one of the first manufacturers in the industry to
establish a patient assistance program to facilitate access to certain
medicines for uninsured and underinsured low-income patients. This
program, known as AZ&Me, provides eligible patients with medicines at
no cost.
We account for the costs of medicines provided through the AZ&Me
program as a component of our Operating Expenses.
In connection with the AZ&Me program, AstraZeneca collects general
program enrollment data such as number of patients in the program and
medicine provided.
Access 360TM (Patient Hub):
AstraZeneca's patient hub, Access 360, is a reimbursement support
program that provides patients and their healthcare providers with
limited access and reimbursement support for AstraZeneca specialty care
medicines. Access 360 collects patient, provider and payer coverage
data in conjunction with appropriate patient opt-ins to administer the
limited reimbursement services offered by the program.
Question. Please provide a list of all contributions since January
1, 2014, that your company has made to any tax exempt organizations
working on issues related to drugs within your product lines, including
but not limited to patient groups, disease awareness groups, medical or
professional societies, universities or hospitals, industry
associations or leagues. For each contribution, please provide the name
of the organization that received the donation, the date the donation
was made, the amount of the donation, and a description of the purpose
of the contribution (i.e., was the contribution for the general fund, a
specific purpose to a specific program, or continuing medical
education). Please also note whether the contribution was unrestricted
or restricted; if it was restricted, please explain all restrictions.
Finally, if your company maintains a foundation or other separate
charitable arm, please provide the name of all such entities, and list
all donations made from that entity or entities.
Answer. Our commitment to improving the lives of patients goes
beyond our innovative medicines. We place significant value on
collaboration and partnerships, including work done by non-profits,
patient advocates, medical professionals, and researchers. To that end,
we provide support for eligible programs through corporate
contributions, research support, fellowships, and medical education
grants. We also support conferences and initiatives for healthcare
professionals and scientists.
AstraZeneca believes in providing information to the public about
our company, our medicines and about how we do business. In 2008, we
began publishing biannual reports of our contributions to nonprofit
organizations. We use contributions as our umbrella term for financial
support to nonprofit organizations contributing to the public good
(e.g., donations, sponsorships, and partnerships).
The below data reflects the total value of contributions made by
AstraZeneca to nonprofit organizations in the U.S. in the years 2014-
2018. A full list of contributions, including the recipient
organization, associated program name, and amount of each contribution,
can be found here: https://www.astrazeneca-us.com/sustainability/
Corporate-transparency/grants-and-contributions-disclosure.html.

2018: $18.3 million

2017: $5.5 million

2016: $10.9 million

2015: $19.8 million

2014: $15.5 million
In addition, in 1993, AstraZeneca founded the AstraZeneca
HealthCare Foundation, a 501(c)(3) entity. The AstraZeneca HealthCare
Foundation aims to promote public awareness surrounding healthcare
issues, further public education and medical knowledge, and support
charitable and qualified exempt organizations whose work aligns with
the Foundation's charitable goals.
In furtherance of AstraZeneca's commitment to improving health, in
2010 the AstraZeneca HealthCare Foundation launched the Connections for
Cardiovascular HealthSM (CCH) program. With the mission of
improving cardiovascular health in the U.S., CCH awards grants to U.S.-
based nonprofit organizations whose work supports CCH's mission. Since
its launch, CCH has awarded nearly $23 million to 52 organizations
working to prevent cardiovascular disease.
The below data reflects the approximate total value of grants made
by CCH per year between 2014 and 2018. A full list of grants, including
the recipient organization, associated program name, and amount of each
contribution, can be found here: https://www.astrazeneca-us.com/
sustainability/healthcare-foundation/connections-for-cardiovascular-
health.html#past-grant-awardees--0.

2018: $1.2 million

2017: $993,880

2016: $1.8 million

2015: $1.9 million

2014: $2.6 million
AstraZeneca also awards medical education grants and scientific
sponsorships. These grants are offered to support independent medical
education, scientific sponsorships, and fellowship or healthcare
professionalin-training. Grants are offered for conduct of programs,
are awarded on the basis of individual applications through our medical
education grants process, and are not conditioned on services. This
process and all grant decisions are managed independently within our
Medical Affairs group and have no connection to our sales and marketing
departments.
The below data reflects the approximate total value of medical
education grants made by AstraZeneca per year, since 2014. A full list
of medical education grants offered to non-profit organizations,
including the recipient organization, associated program name, date,
and amount of each contribution, can be found in Appendix A.

2018: $28.9 million

2017: $17.5 million

2016: $11.6 million

2015: $24.9 million

2014: $14.8 million
Question. Pay-for-delay agreements cost consumers and taxpayers
billions in higher drug costs every year. The FTC has gone after drug
companies that enter into these settlements where the brand pays the
generic company to keep its lower cost alternative off the market. I'm
the lead Republican sponsor of S. 64, the Preserve Access to Affordable
Generics and Biosimilars Act, which would help put an end to these
deals.
Do you agree that these pay-off agreements keep drug costs high for
patients because they delay competition?
Answer. AstraZeneca has confidence in patents that protect our
medicines and, where appropriate, we file lawsuits to protect our
intellectual property.
AstraZeneca does not enter into ``pay-off agreements,'' if those
are understood to include settlements that pay generic competitors to
delay entry into the market. AstraZeneca engages in patent settlements
but we do not believe these resolutions contribute to increased prices.
In the absence of a settlement, a generic would not necessarily prevail
in the patent litigation and therefore would not be able to enter the
market. Indeed, AstraZeneca has entered into many early-entry patent
settlements that allow generic manufacturers to license innovator
patents and thereby permit generic competition before expiration of
AstraZeneca's patent rights.
Settlement agreements that permit entry of generic drugs before
expiration of relevant patent rights do not stifle competition but
instead permit early entry by resolving patent disputes that would
otherwise prevent generic alternatives to branded medication.
All of AstraZeneca's patent settlements fully comply with the law.
These settlements provide increased clarity and stability to both
parties, allowing innovators like AstraZeneca to continue investing
substantially in new medicines for patients and frequently allowing
generic competitors to enter the market before expiration of
AstraZeneca's patent rights.
Question. Has your company ever entered into these kinds of
settlements with a generic company?
Answer. AstraZeneca does not enter into settlements that pay
generic competitors to delay entry into the market.
Question. Do you support the pay for delay bill?
Answer. While AstraZeneca supports efforts to curb patent
settlement abuses, we have concerns about the Preserve Access to
Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act in its current form. For
example, the proposed legislation would be retroactive to 2013 and
would unfairly subject to potential scrutiny lawful settlements entered
into based on the then existing legal construct. As a general matter,
AstraZeneca believes that patent settlement agreements are pro-
competitive because they can permit entry of generic drugs before
expiration of relevant patent rights.
rebate traps/walls
Question. I'm increasingly concerned about the effect of so-called
``rebate traps'' or ``rebate walls'' on patients' access to quality,
lower cost medicine. I understand there is ongoing litigation
challenging these practices as anti-competitive.
Does your company engage in the bundling of rebates over multiple
products? If so, why? And what benefit does the consumer gain from
that?
Answer. AstraZeneca offers portfolio discount arrangements to
improve patient access and affordability across multiple medicines,
thus ensuring the right medicine can be prescribed for the right
patient. Portfolio discounting allows manufacturers and plans another
mechanism to negotiate for formulary access for the patient, in
addition to single-medicine discounts and rebates. Irrespective of the
approach to discounting, AstraZeneca also ensures discounts are
appropriately reported in government price reporting metrics (e.g.,
Best Price, Average Manufacturer Price, and Average Sales Price).
Question. Does your company view these practices as anticompetitive
or harmful to patients' access to quality, lower cost medicine?
Answer. AstraZeneca does not view these practices as
anticompetitive or harmful to patients' access. In fact, AstraZeneca
offers portfolio discount arrangements to improve patient access and
affordability.
Question. If a policy were adopted to eliminate rebates, or to
require that rebate savings be passed on to the consumer, would that in
and of itself solve the issue of rebate ``traps'' and ``walls''? And
would consumers benefit from such a policy?
Answer. AstraZeneca believes that evolving the current system of
paying for and delivering drug therapies to one in which patients more
directly benefit from the discounts and rebates that AstraZeneca
provides is an important step towards improving affordability and
supporting innovation. This can best be accomplished by eliminating
rebates in Medicare Part D and the commercial sector, which would
create competition between manufacturers on net price instead of rebate
amounts, thereby helping to eliminate rebate ``traps'' and ``walls.''
AstraZeneca also believes that patient cost-sharing should be more
aligned to a medicine's net price, and that eliminating rebates and
moving to a point-of-sale discount model should help accomplish this
goal. Additionally, it is important to note that lowering list prices
in the U.S. without addressing broader challenges, including benefit
design, will not improve affordability for many patients. While
eliminating rebates is an important step, benefit designs must also be
evaluated.
drug pricing
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider regulatory costs or compliance? If so, how specifically do
those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least
one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. AstraZeneca does not directly consider regulatory or
compliance costs when setting the list price of a drug. AstraZeneca's
approach to pricing across all medicines is driven by a number of
factors, including clinical value, patient access and affordability,
patient population, government and payer coverage requirements, RandD
expenditures, manufacturing costs, and competitive dynamics.
AstraZeneca is mindful of healthcare costs and is continuously
exploring innovative opportunities and solutions to deliver medicines
while considering cost and value. In setting drug prices, AstraZeneca
takes into account both the budget impact to payers (including Medicare
and pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs)) as well as patient out-of-pocket
costs to maintain patient access to needed medication. AstraZeneca has
also been a leading innovator in developing alternate payment
structures for its medicines. In particular, AstraZeneca has emphasized
value-based agreements, which, broadly speaking, seek to link access,
reimbursement or price, to a demonstrated clinical benefit or outcome.
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider the risk of liability or litigation? If so, how specifically
do those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at
least one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
Answer. AstraZeneca does not consider the risk of liability or
litigation when setting the list price for a particular drug.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. What role do you see value-based arrangements (VBAs)
playing in the effort to reduce prescription drug costs? What potential
do these arrangements have to find the ``sweet spot'' between
controlling costs to patients and encouraging innovation of new drugs?
Answer. We believe medicines are part of the solution to
controlling health-care costs. They not only improve patient outcomes
and increase quality of life, but also reduce downstream costs. Value-
based agreements allow us to reimburse the health-care system if our
medicines do not deliver as intended. This solution demonstrates our
willingness to stand behind the value of our medicines.
AstraZeneca is working closely with payers and health systems to
explore innovative solutions to improve access and affordability that
demonstrate the value our medicines bring to patients and the health-
care system. Our value-based agreements aim to manage the totality of
treatment costs and keep people healthy and out of the hospital. For
several years, AstraZeneca has been exploring these types of solutions
through value-based agreements where we are willing to work with
health-care stakeholders to tie payment to patient outcomes.
To date, we have entered into approximately 40 value-based
agreements across our therapeutic areas with a variety of payers,
making AstraZeneca a leader in the field of value-based agreements.
As an example, and as noted in the written testimony submitted to
the Senate Committee on Finance, AstraZeneca agreed with Express
Scripts that for IRESSA, an oral treatment for certain types of lung
cancer, we will fully reimburse Express Scripts for discontinued use
before the third fill, including if discontinuation occurs because
patients did not respond to treatment.
Question. How can VBAs help lower what patients pay out-of-pocket?
Answer. While most of these agreements have been focused on
securing patient access to our medicines and delivering better patient
outcomes, where payers are willing, we are also looking to more
directly address patient out-of-pocket affordability through these
innovative arrangements.
Our ambition is that these agreements will evolve to enable
reimbursement back to a payer to be shared with the patient when
medicines do not perform as expected.
As an example where a value-based agreement directly reduced out-
of-pocket costs for patients, we recently announced the initiation of a
value-based agreement for University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
(UPMC) Medicare patients who are prescribed BRILINTA. This value-based
contract, which was effective as of January 1, 2019, is groundbreaking
in two ways. First, the contract lowers the out-of-pocket costs for a
UPMC Medicare Part D patient to approximately $10 for a 30-day supply.
Second, what UPMC pays for BRILINTA will vary based on patient
outcomes, tying the cost of the medicine to its real-world clinical
performance.
We are currently exploring another value-based agreement in
Medicare Part D. In addition to having a significant outcomes-based
component, this arrangement would reduce patient out-of-pocket costs.
This type of agreement allows patients to access their medicines at a
lower out-of-pocket cost and payers to control their overall healthcare
costs through paying for outcomes.
Question. Can Congress do more to allow for and encourage the use
of VBAs?
Answer. We believe that there are steps the government can take to
address challenges and help encourage the timely adoption of value-
based agreements, including in public sector programs like Medicare.
For example, at this time, the current Anti-Kickback Safe Harbor
(AKS) regulations do not expressly address value-based agreements.
Accordingly, manufacturers must seek to structure value-based
agreements to meet the requirements of existing safe harbors from the
AKS, such as the discount safe harbor and personal services safe
harbor, that were created for purposes other than value-based
agreements. Although we believe that value-based agreements can
strongly benefit patients and the health-care system overall, the lack
of clarity in application of the safe harbors to value-based agreements
creates regulatory uncertainty that discourages broader implementation
of value-based agreements in public-sector programs.
In addition to the risk of AKS liability, value-based agreements
present other regulatory challenges that manufacturers must navigate.
For example, manufacturers must manage complex government price
reporting calculations that may not account for price fluctuations over
time that may be associated with a value-based agreement.
In a future system, the default approach should be that pricing and
reimbursement for drug therapies are tied to patient outcomes and the
value the particular therapy provides. As such, it is imperative that
manufacturers and payers--including Medicare plans--engage in value-
based agreements similar to the IRESSA and BRILINTA examples referenced
previously.
Policies to encourage these arrangements and to reduce or eliminate
existing challenges will be essential to their long-term success. To
that end, AstraZeneca appreciates the support of Senators Warner and
Cassidy for value-based agreements, as demonstrated by their requests
for input on the Patient Affordability Value and Efficiency (PAVE) Act.
This draft legislation would promote the development of value-based
agreements by offering increased flexibility for manufacturers to enter
into such arrangements, including with Medicare Part D plans by
addressing AKS and government pricing concerns.
This legislation is particularly important given the
administration's proposal to eliminate PBM rebates under the discount
safe harbor. Currently, many value-based agreements are structured
using a rebate agreement, under which the terms of a discount are based
on clinical or cost outcomes measures. Therefore, the elimination of
discount safe harbor protection for rebates without an exception for
value-based agreements could inadvertently reduce incentives for value-
based agreements, which we do not believe is the administration's
intent. We have therefore recommended to HHS that value-based
agreements are exempt from the proposed changes to the discount safe
harbor and we encourage members of Congress to support this exemption.
Through the partnership of payers and policymakers, we look forward
to a future where implementation of value-based agreements across
public and private payers is widespread.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. We continue to hear that rebates negotiated off of the
list price of a drug are both good and bad. Pharmacy benefit managers
and plans have argued that rebates are used to lower premiums across
the board and that it is the best way to seek a price concession on
otherwise expensive drugs. Your industry argues that these payers are
insisting on higher rebates that can only be achieved by raising list
prices. But patients often lose under this system, with out of pocket
costs being tied to list price. Insulin patients appear to be routinely
impacted by this perversity in the system.
Please explain to the committee how your company would reduce list
prices if rebates were no longer a part of the equation?
Answer. Assuming the HHS rebate rule is finalized largely as
proposed, AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use
point-of-sale discounts. Our goal is to maintain net prices broadly in
line with today, recognizing our ability to do so may be dependent on
external factors and market response such as how plans evolve their
benefit design and the total degree of transparency under the new
model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector, and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
Question. What assurance can you provide that you would in fact
lower your prices?
Answer. Assuming the HHS rebate rule is finalized largely as
proposed, AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use
point-of-sale discounts. Our goal is to maintain net prices broadly in
line with today, recognizing our ability to do so may be dependent on
external factors and market response such as how plans evolve their
benefit design and the total degree of transparency under the new
model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
Question. What actions should be taken to ensure that patients are
actually seeing the benefits of lower out-of-pocket costs?
Answer. In the absence of rebates, the market incentives for the
differential between list and net price should be reduced because
manufacturers will be competing on the basis of net price instead of
rebate amounts. Because Part D patient cost-sharing is currently based
on list price and not net price, this change may also result in lower
cost-sharing for patients. Additionally, it is important to note that
lowering list prices in the U.S. without addressing broader challenges,
including benefit design, will not improve affordability for many
patients. While eliminating rebates is an important step, benefit
designs must also be evaluated.
AstraZeneca also supports monthly and annual out-of-pocket caps in
Medicare Part D to further ensure that patients see the benefits of
lower out-of-pocket costs.
Question. If rebates are driving high list prices for drugs as drug
manufacturers' claim, why do you think that Part B drugs, which have no
PBM rebates, are also seeing significant price increases? Whose fault
is that?
Answer. For our Part B products, price increases are modest and
generally in line with inflation. We are supportive of competition,
including policies that support more widespread use of biosimilars.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Steve Daines
Question. As an advocate for improving Montanans' access to low-
cost medications, I've been a champion of the Creating and Restoring
Equal Access to Equivalent Samples (CREATES) Act, which would combat
anticompetitive practices used by some brand-name pharmaceutical
companies to block or delay competing generic drugs from entering the
market. During the hearing when I asked if your company had ever
withheld samples from generic manufacturers, you answered emphatically
no. Yet, according to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), generic
drug makers have made inquiries with the agency claiming they were
unable to access samples provided by Pfizer and AstraZeneca that are
needed to conduct studies to produce low-cost generic drugs.
Do you agree that denying generic drug manufacturers access to
samples keeps drug costs high for patients due to lack of competition?
Answer. AstraZeneca is supportive of allowing generic manufacturers
to have access to samples.
Question. Has your company refused to sell samples or placed any
barriers in the way of generic drug makers acquiring samples?
Answer. AstraZeneca is not aware of instances where the company has
refused to sell samples or has otherwise blocked access to samples by
generic manufacturers.
Question. Are you aware of any outstanding requests for samples?
Answer. AstraZeneca is not aware of any unanswered, delayed, or
outstanding requests for samples of our medicines by generic
manufacturers.
It is our understanding that one of our medicines, BRILINTA, was
included on the Reference Listed Drug Access Inquiries List (RLD List)
based on a single inquiry received by the FDA. However, BRILINTA has
always been available via normal commercial distribution channels
(i.e., wholesalers) and has never had a restricted distribution
program.
Unfortunately, the RLD List does not identify the company that
reportedly requested information (or samples) from AstraZeneca, the
date the information was requested, or any other information that would
allow AstraZeneca to better understand or further investigate the
circumstances of this inquiry. On its website, the FDA does advise that
it has ``not independently investigated or confirmed the access
limitations described in the inquiries received.'' Given this
limitation, the listing of an inquiry on the RLD List does not mean
that the FDA has in fact determined that access to samples by generic
manufacturers was limited or withheld for the medicines identified.
Indeed, based on our internal review, we have not identified any
circumstances that substantiate the inquiry received by the FDA
relating to BRILINTA.
Question. How does your company work to prevent abuses in the
sample system?
Answer. AstraZeneca is supportive of allowing generic manufacturers
to have access to samples and is not aware of instances that would be
considered abuse of the samples system.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
re-evaluating business strategies in foreign countries
Question. Since taking office, President Trump has made reducing
drug prices one of his highest priorities--and has repeatedly spoken
about his frustration with the U.S. subsidizing the costs of
pharmaceuticals for the rest of the world. He has gone so far as to
issue proposals, like the International Pricing Index (IPI) Model, in
an attempt to bring down prescription drug prices. With the increased
scrutiny of the industry and of the drug supply chain as a whole in the
United States, have any of your companies re-evaluated your business
strategy in foreign countries?
Answer. We continuously evaluate our business approaches in all
markets and adjust our strategies accordingly based on many factors,
including the overall environment.
Question. If not, then why?
Answer. See response above.
Question. If a proposal, like IPI, were implemented, would it force
your companies to potentially ``walk away from the negotiating table
when other countries demand low prices subsidized by America's
seniors,'' as HHS Senior Advisor for Drug Pricing Reform John O'Brien
has said?
Answer. If the IPI model were put into effect as proposed, where an
identified average international price would be derived from 16
countries, this would impact our ability to sell our medicines in some
of the identified markets.
The IPI model was issued as an Advanced Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (ANPRM). Important details such as the medicines that would
be included in the model, the final list of nations included as
reference countries, and the timing of reimbursement changes are still
unknown. We look forward to engaging with policymakers on this
proposal.
Question. What are some of your ideas on how we can ensure
Americans aren't shouldering the full cost of pharmaceuticals?
Answer. We agree that out-of-pocket costs are unsustainable in the
U.S., but the answer is not to move to a system found in other
countries or to link pricing in the U.S. to the International Pricing
Index.
It is critical to recognize that while price controls are the
default in many other countries, these price controls result in reduced
access to important medicines. In the 16 countries referenced in the
International Pricing Index model proposal, only 55 percent of new
cancer medicines are available, compared to 96 percent in the U.S. In
those countries, it also takes more than a year longer for the
medicines to become available and this can have significant impacts on
patients. For example, in 2018, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) approved a new indication for
LYNPARZA for ovarian cancer. However, the U.K.'s National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has not recommended that the U.K.'s
National Health System (NHS) reimburse for LYNPARZA in this indication,
resulting in limited access for patients in the U.K.
Instead of international reference pricing, we should focus on
market-based solutions. We believe that there are several steps that
lawmakers can take to ensure that drug prices are affordable for
Americans, while ensuring that innovation in the biopharmaceutical
sector can continue to flourish in the U.S. Our suggestions fall in
five main categories, described in more detail below:

Rebate Reform: The current pharmacy benefit manager (PBM)
rebate system does not fully benefit patients and has resulted
in a lack of transparency across the supply chain. We support
the current proposed rule to eliminate rebates in Medicare Part
D and Medicaid managed care. We also support efforts to
eliminate rebates in the commercial sector as well, which will
likely require legislation. We therefore recommend that
Congress explore legislation that would eliminate rebates in
the commercial market.

Value-Based Agreements: As described in detail in our
written testimony to the Senate Committee on Finance hearing,
we are also working closely with payers and health systems to
explore innovative solutions to improve access and
affordability that demonstrate the value our medicines bring to
patients and the health-care system. For several years,
AstraZeneca has been exploring these types of solutions through
value-based agreements where we are willing to work with
health-care stakeholders to tie payment to patient outcomes. To
date, we have entered into approximately 40 value-based
agreements across our therapeutic areas with a variety of
payers, making AstraZeneca a leader in the field of value-based
agreements.
We believe that there are steps the government can take to
address certain regulatory challenges to the broader
implementation of value-based agreements and help encourage the
timely adoption of value-based agreements, including in public-
sector programs like Medicare. To that end, AstraZeneca
appreciates the support of Senators Warner and Cassidy for
value-based agreements, as demonstrated by their requests for
input on the Patient Affordability Value and Efficiency (PAVE)
Act. This draft legislation would promote the development of
value-based agreements by offering increased flexibility for
manufacturers to enter into such arrangements, including with
Medicare Part D plans.

Biosimilars: We also encourage Congress to consider policies
to encourage greater use of biosimilars in the U.S. We believe
that competition is a key component to reducing costs, and that
is why we support expanded use of biosimilars in the U.S. As a
global company, we operate in countries, particularly those in
the European Union, where biosimilar competition is
particularly robust. We support a similarly vigorous
biosimilars market in the U.S.
We therefore appreciate the efforts of the FDA to increase
the availability of biosimilars in the U.S., including the
FDA's development of a Biosimilars Action Plan. We support
efforts to streamline and improve the efficiency of the
biosimilars approval pathway for the benefit of patients. Such
efforts could include increased transparency into the patents
applicable to biologic medicines.
We also support cost-sharing and reimbursement policies that
facilitate the uptake of biosimilars. Such policies include
Medicare reimbursement rates that ensure that biosimilars can
compete on equal footing with innovator medicines, and
reductions to cost-sharing amounts for biosimilars.

Out-of-Pocket Caps for Medicare Patients: In the commercial
market, it is common for patients to have a cap on total out-
of-pocket amounts. However, such a construct does not exist in
the Medicare program. Because of the way the Part D benefit is
designed, for example, cost-sharing can be particularly high in
the first months of the plan year and/or in the first months of
therapy. A recent study found that rates of prescription
abandonment and delayed initiation of oral cancer therapies
increase as cost-sharing amounts rise. Such a result reflects
the need for a restructuring of the current benefit design,
which could be accomplished by establishing a monthly or annual
out-of-pocket cap. This would give patients greater certainty
in the total amount of out-of-pocket costs they could face.

Transparency: We support greater transparency across the
biopharmaceutical supply chain, which includes greater
transparency into drug pricing. To that end, we generally
support the policies included in the current versions of the
SPIKE and C-THRU Acts. There are a variety of State-level drug
pricing transparency laws and regulations. We believe that
having a consistent, Federal standard for drug pricing
transparency requirements, like those included in the SPIKE
Act, should pre-empt state transparency laws to reduce
confusion and compliance burden.
We also support transparency efforts to ensure that patients
and prescribers have meaningful information on out-of-pocket
costs at the point of prescribing, so that they can make
informed decisions about the most appropriate and affordable
therapy.
foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
Question. President Trump and Secretary Azar have both repeatedly
described their frustrations with ``foreign freeloading'' of U.S. drugs
in the last year. ``When foreign governments extort unreasonably low
prices from U.S. drug makers, Americans have to pay more to subsidize
the enormous cost of research and development. . . . It's unfair and
it's ridiculous, and it's not going to happen any longer.''
Do you agree that because of foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems, U.S. patients and innovators are shouldering the
burden for financing edical advances?
Answer. We agree that many foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems do not adequately recognize innovation in the
biopharmaceutical sector. In many other countries, the government
utilizes price controls for drug therapies, and in many cases these
price controls result in reduced or delayed access to therapy for
patients in those countries. The U.S. benefits from an open-market
system that supports competition and innovation and accordingly
Americans place high value on both choice and access to the latest
medicines. For patients in the U.S., it is not a question of when an
important treatment will be available, but rather how they will access
that medicine. It is in this context that AstraZeneca continues to
engage with other stakeholders regarding possible solutions and
specific actions that can be taken to address pricing concerns, which
we describe in greater detail in our written testimony. These
approaches must balance the need to improve access and affordability
while fostering innovation. Pricing controls as well as access and
reimbursement practices in other countries are a challenge.
Question. How do foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
systems affect our prescription drug costs?
Answer. We do not take into account foreign market pricing in
setting U.S. prices.
Question. Are foreign governments taking note of the concerns being
raised by the Trump administration and have they responded in any way?
Answer. While these matters have been widely reported on globally,
we do not have insights into actions being taken by other health
authorities directly in response to the Trump administration's efforts
in this area.
Question. Has there been any noticeable change in any of our trade
agreements since these concerns have been raised by the Trump
administration?
Answer. AstraZeneca and the biopharmaceutical industry have
consistently advocated for trade agreements that support strong
intellectual property rights and protect market access. We believe our
trade partners should be fair and transparent so that patients around
the world can benefit from U.S. innovation.
medicaid closed formulary proposals
Question. In an attempt to bring down drug costs, various States
have been exploring whether to exclude certain drugs from its Medicaid
program. For example, the State of Massachusetts recently asked CMS for
permission to create a closed formulary where the State Medicaid
program would pick at least one drug per therapeutic class. CMS denied
their waiver request citing violation of Federal law, but this proposal
does bring up important questions on how to contain drug prices in
State Medicaid programs.
If the principles of the Medicare Part D program--including the
necessary patient protections--were applied to State Medicaid programs,
do you think it [would] lower drugs costs while ensuring access to
patients?
Answer. Under the current construct in Medicaid, manufacturers
provide mandatory rebates and in turn, States are required to cover all
of the manufacturer's drugs. This ensures that Medicaid patients have
access to the full range of available therapies. We support increased
flexibility for State Medicaid agencies in managing their Medicaid
programs, but only so long as there are robust protections that ensure
that Medicaid patients can continue to access the medicines they need.
medicaid ``best price''
Question. In the Trump administration's Blueprint, they suggested
that because drug manufactures have to give Medicaid the ``best price''
on drugs, there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers--both government and commercial--than what is already offered
under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Does the Medicaid ``best price'' requirement encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices?
Answer. We do not believe that the Medicaid Best Price requirement
encourages manufacturers to increase their initial list price. However,
the requirement does impact decisions regarding the size of rebates and
discounts offered in the commercial sector because setting a new Best
Price can result in significantly increased Medicaid rebate and 340B
liability. Additionally, manufacturers may be hesitant to offer very
aggressive value-based agreements due to the risk of setting a new Best
Price.
Question. What, if any, changes would you suggest we make to the
program?
Answer. We recommend an exemption from Best Price for value-based
agreements, which is a policy included in Senator Grassley's and
Senator Warner's draft version of the PAVE Act.
outcomes-based contracts
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you highlight your
support of outcomes-based contracts and how we need to be shifting our
system toward that approach.
How will these contracts lower drug costs for patients in both the
near term and long-term?
Answer. While most value-based agreements have been focused on
securing patient access to our medicines and delivering better patient
outcomes, where payers are willing, AstraZeneca is also looking to more
directly address patient out-of-
pocket affordability through these innovative arrangements.
As an example, we recently announced the initiation of a value-
based agreement for University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC)
Medicare patients who are prescribed BRILINTA. This value-based
contract, which was effective as of January 1, 2019, is groundbreaking
in two ways. First, the contract lowers the out-of-pocket costs for a
UPMC Medicare Part D patient to approximately $10 for a 30-day supply.
Second, what UPMC pays for BRILINTA will vary based on patient
outcomes, tying the cost of the medicine to its real-world clinical
performance.
We are currently exploring another value-based agreement in
Medicare Part D. In addition to having a significant outcomes-based
component, this arrangement would reduce patient out-of-pocket costs.
This type of agreement allows patients to access their medicines at a
lower out-of-pocket cost and payers to control their overall healthcare
costs through paying for outcomes.
Question. How will they lower overall health-care costs for our
Federal programs?
Answer. We believe medicines are part of the solution to
controlling health-care costs. They not only improve patient outcomes
and increase quality of life, but also reduce downstream costs. Value-
based agreements have the potential to increase efficiencies in the
health-care system, including government programs, by ensuring that
payment is based on value rather than reimbursement based on volume.
These agreements support patients receiving the most appropriate
treatment, ensure appropriate patient behaviors and, most importantly,
tie reimbursement to improved patient outcomes.
In many cases value-based agreements encourage a focus on important
patient behaviors such as adherence and persistence as well as improved
emphasis on patient education to promote healthier lifestyles and
choices. These agreements broaden payer focus to the total cost of care
and quality outcomes. It is important that we look at all aspects
related to the cost of care to find efficiencies that drive greater
value in the health-care system. These opportunities exist in both the
commercial and government sectors.
We support value-based agreements because they allow us to
reimburse the health-care system if our medicines do not deliver as
intended. This solution demonstrates our willingness to stand behind
the value of our medicines.
Through the partnership of payers and policymakers, we look forward
to a future where implementation of value-based agreements across
public and private payers is widespread.
Question. What have the preliminary results looked like so far?
Answer. We are frequently asked if we have ever had to ``pay out''
on a value-based agreement, and the answer is ``yes.'' For example, we
have entered into an agreement for one of our oncology medicines with a
large payer. We have reimbursed the payer for more than 20 percent of
patients on that medicine. Of course, we also have examples where we
have seen the medicine perform as well or better than our clinical
data. This is good for patients and good for the payer and health
system overall in that, by providing access to that medicine, they have
seen improved patient outcomes.
transparency/point of sale
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you express your
support for the Trump administration's proposal to allow manufacturers
to provide PBMs up-front discounts that are passed onto patients at the
point of sale.
Do you feel like this proposal will make the transactions within
the drug supply chain more transparent?
Answer. Yes, the Trump administration's rebate proposal should make
transactions more transparent because cost-sharing will reflect point-
of-sale discounts and, therefore, net prices. We encourage the
administration and Congress to closely assess the impact of such
increased transparency on patients and the biopharmaceutical supply
chain more broadly.
Question. If so, would this transparency bring down drug costs--
overall and for specialty drugs?
Answer. In general, we believe that increased transparency due to
point-of-sale discounts will in turn lead to greater competition and
reduced costs overall. However, the impact of transparency on the
prices of specific drugs will vary based on the competitive landscape
for that medicine.
the relationship between wholesalers and manufacturers
Question. When talking about the pharmaceutical supply chain, a lot
of focus has been placed on the pharmacy benefit manager. But there's
another side of the equation that I'd like to ask about. How do
wholesalers negotiate pricing with manufacturers?
Answer. In general, wholesalers do not negotiate pricing with
manufacturers. Wholesalers receive service fees from manufacturers for
bona fide services they provide.
Question. What impact does this have on drug costs?
Answer. In general, wholesalers do not negotiate pricing with
manufacturers.
Question. What incentives or disincentives do they have to contain
price increases?
Answer. Wholesalers receive service fees from manufacturers for
bona fide services they provide. Certain fees across the supply chain--
including with wholesalers--are based on a percentage of the list
price. We support efforts to ``de-link'' such fees from the list price
across the supply chain, as this would align incentives across the
supply chain to lower prices.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
proposed rebate rule
Question. As has been done in many other settings, drug
manufacturers said during the hearing that one reason list prices for
drugs are high is that pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) demand
larger and larger rebates in order for the drug to receive favorable
placement on a formulary. You and your colleagues who testified during
the hearing stated if the administration's proposal on changes to the
anti-kickback safe harbor for pharmaceutical rebates took effect, your
company would likely lower list price. Like many Oregonians, I am
skeptical drug manufacturers would voluntarily lower their prices.
Therefore, would you support legislation that would (1) make
similar changes the administration has put forward related to Part D
and Medicaid managed care, (2) change the rebate system in a similar
way to the proposal for the commercial market, and (3) require drug
makers to lower the list price of their drugs equal to the amount of
rebates provided today?
Answer. Assuming the HHS rebate rule is finalized largely as
proposed, AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use
point-of-sale discounts. Our goal is to maintain net prices broadly in
line with today, recognizing our ability to do so may be dependent on
external factors and market response such as how plans evolve their
benefit design and the total degree of transparency under the new
model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
medicaid drug rebate program
Question. The Medicaid Drug Rebate Program (MDRP) requires
manufacturers to provide a basic rebate and an additional inflationary
rebate for both brand and generic drugs. The inflationary rebate is an
increasingly substantial part of total rebates due in large part to
large increases in drug prices that exceed inflation. Under current
law, this inflationary rebate is capped at 100 percent of Average
Manufacturer Price (AMP). This is the case even when manufacturers
continue to raise their prices well above inflation.
Please provide a list of all of your pharmaceutical products that
have reached the Medicaid AMP rebate cap in any of the 20 quarters from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
Answer. Please see Appendix B.
Question. For each drug listed in response to question 1, please
also provide a list of which quarters and years each drug hit the cap.
Answer. Please see Appendix B.
medicaid drug rebate program compliance
Question. I am concerned about recent reports and legal settlements
surrounding drug manufacturers' failure to comply fully with the
requirements of the MDRP. For example, an analysis by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General
found that between 2012 and 2016 taxpayers may have overpaid by as much
as $1.3 billion for 10 potentially misclassified drugs. That is why I
introduced the Right Rebate Act with Chairman Grassley to prevent drug
manufacturers from manipulating Medicaid to increase their profits.
However, I continued to be concerned about oversight and manufacturer
compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Accordingly, please describe the following:
Your company's current compliance plan and procedures used to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program including internal audits or other checks you use to identify
compliance vulnerabilities.
Answer. All aspects of AstraZeneca's compliance with the
requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, including Statutory
Pricing (average manufacturer price (AMP) and Best Price) and Medicaid
Rebate payments, are covered by AstraZeneca's compliance framework.
This compliance plan includes a robust review process, including
Sarbanes-Oxley testing, self-auditing, and formal audits by internal
and external audit.
Question. Any past or ongoing issues of non-compliance.
Answer. Since the implementation of AstraZeneca's compliance
framework, we are not aware of any compliance issues that have been
identified via this internal and external audit process.
Question. Any corrective actions taken to address identified
problems or issues of non-compliance with the MDRP and how such steps
were communicated to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Answer. As noted above, to date, no compliance issues have been
identified via this internal and external audit process.
Question. Any steps taken to improve compliance and ensure that all
Medicaid drug rebates owed to the Federal Government and the States are
paid in full.
Answer. AstraZeneca has a comprehensive compliance framework that
includes Sarbanes-Oxley testing, self-auditing, and formal audits by
internal and external audit. Additionally, as it relates to Medicaid
drug rebates owed to the Federal Government and States, AstraZeneca
performs additional reviews of claims-level data, ensuring the
completeness and accuracy of both the payments made by manufacturers as
well as claims submitted to manufacturers. This process has identified
duplicate pharmacy claims submitted to State Medicaid Agencies
resulting in overpayment by both States and manufacturers. Clearly,
these overpayments disadvantage both the States and manufacturers like
AstraZeneca.
bonus payments tied to specific drugs
Question. I am concerned by the potential for employee financial
incentives to encourage high launch prices and price increases for
prescription drugs.
Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to sales or
revenue targets of a single product your company sells? Has it ever
been? If yes, please state the product or products to which your
salary, bonus or other compensation was tied.
Answer. The CEO's compensation as well as the compensation of other
senior leaders is directly based on three areas of performance that are
generally weighted equally: development and delivery of innovative
science, our aggregate sales, and other important financial metrics.
AstraZeneca understands that executive pay is a closely scrutinized
issue. As part of our compensation decisions, we are mindful of the
sensitivity of this issue as we determine how best to incentivize,
reward and retain executives capable of leading a global pharmaceutical
company in a highly competitive market.
Question. Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to
either revenue or net income of the company as a whole? Has it ever
been? If yes, please explain what assumptions about price increases are
used when the compensation committee sets revenue or net income goals.
Does the compensation committee provide any guidance to executives in
regards to the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth?
Answer. The CEO's compensation as well as the compensation of other
senior leaders is directly based on three areas of performance that are
generally weighted equally: development and delivery of innovative
science, our aggregate sales, and other important financial metrics.
AstraZeneca's Remuneration Committee does not provide any guidance on
price increases.
provision of rebates in exchange for formulary placement
Question. In today's system, drug makers receive a limited time
window to sell their drug without competition. After that period has
expired, low-cost generics should become available. However, drug
makers often prevent access to these cheaper generic drugs in Medicare.
Researchers have found that 72 percent of Medicare Part D plans charged
lower cost-sharing for a brand name drug compared to its generic
equivalent. This means seniors were charged less out of pocket for
brand name drugs compared to generics that are on average four times
cheaper than the brand-named drug. This happens because drug makers pay
a rebate to the Part D plans in order to give the more expensive drug
better treatment than a generic. As a result, Medicare spending
increases due to the current structure of the Part D benefit.
Has your company ever paid a rebate to a Part D plan so that a
brand name drug would get preferential treatment (i.e., lower cost-
sharing or less utilization management) compared to a cheaper generic?
Answer. In certain instances, AstraZeneca enters into arrangements
under which a branded agent is discounted at or below the net cost of
the generic(s) in the market, therefore benefiting the plan and the
beneficiary. AstraZeneca typically enters into these types of
arrangements for medicines already existing on formulary. These
arrangements benefit patients by ensuring greater affordability for the
branded medicine and by ensuring continuity of treatment if a patient
has already been prescribed a branded medicine. These arrangements also
support competition because they provide the opportunity for multiple
competitors and medicine options to compete on price and other factors.
We have had several such arrangements in Medicare Part D (see Appendix
C).
Question. If so, please provide:
A list of the drugs for which your company has done this since
January 1, 2014.
Answer. A list providing this information is attached as Appendix
C.
Question. The number of Part D plans in which this type of rebate
was given for each drug in each year.
Answer. A list of the relevant Part D plans is included in Appendix
C.
net prices
Question. During your testimony, you stated, ``The estimates for
2018 show that across our medicines, our average rebate is nearly 50
percent of our gross revenues in the U.S. Despite this, in recent
years, in our primary cap portfolio, we have seen flat to declining net
effective prices for most of our medicines.''
Please describe how the company's year-over-year aggregate net
price is calculated.
Answer. The analysis discussed during the hearing on February 26,
2019 was completed by brand; the change in Net Price was calculated at
the brand level, and then weighted based on Net Sales for each brand as
a percent of Total Net Product Sales for 2018.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Net Product Sales reflect the invoiced amount less movements in
estimated accruals for rebates and chargebacks given to managed-care
and other customers. Cash discounts for prompt payment are also
deducted from sales. Average Net Price per Unit excludes product
returns, and the figures were arrived at using the conventional Net
Price calculation, that is, before deducting cost of goods sold,
royalties, and variable selling expenses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. Please also specifically address the following questions:
How many products are included in the calculation of the average
net price change? What was the median net price change?
Answer. The analysis discussed during the hearing on February 26,
2019 included 26 brands that represent 98 percent of annual Net Product
Sales in the United States for the period ending December 31, 2018.
The Median Price Change (prior to weighting) was a Net Price
decrease of 1 percent.
Question. Is net price weighted? If so, how? For example, in
determining the aggregate net price does the company assign different
weights to different products based on volume or other factors? Are
``on patent'' and ``off patent'' drugs weighted identically? Are other
statistical weights used or are all products treated equally?
Answer. The analysis discussed during the hearing on February 26,
2019 was completed by brand; the change in Net Price was calculated at
the brand level, and then weighted based on Net Sales for each brand as
a percent of Total Net Product Sales for 2018 irrespective of whether
the medicines are on or off patent.
Question. Does the figure that you provided during your testimony
account for U.S. prices, international prices, or both? Generally
speaking, when your company reports net price changes, does it
differentiate between U.S. and international prices?
Answer. The analysis discussed during the hearing on February 26,
2019 referred to 26 brands that represent 98 percent of annual Net
Product Sales in the United States for the period ending December 31,
2018.
Question. Please list the five drugs your company sold in the U.S.
that had the greatest year-over-year net price increase in 2018, noting
the increase for each drug by dollar figure and percentage. Please list
the five drugs your company sold in the U.S. that had the lowest year-
over-year net price increase (and/or the greatest decrease) in 2018,
noting the increase (or decrease) for each drug by dollar figure and
percentage.
Answer. In 2018, we experienced a Weighted Average Net price
decline in our hyper-competitive respiratory and diabetes therapeutic
areas, with declines of 2.4 percent and 1.9 percent, respectively. Our
Weighted Average Net prices in oncology remained flat. Brand-specific
pricing information is competitively sensitive information.
Question. For 2018, what was the average net price change in the
U.S. market for (1) drugs with no competition, (2) drugs with only
branded competition, and (3) drugs with generic competition?
Answer. For 2018, the Weighted Average Net price change in the
United States market for:

Medicines with no competition was an increase of 0.6
percent;

Branded ``on patent'' medicines without generic equivalents
was a decrease of 4.7 percent;

``Off patent'' medicines with generic equivalent competition
was an increase of 4.6 percent.
With respect to the last category of medicines described above, we
note by way of context that once generic options enter the market, our
market share rapidly erodes, as many PBMs, insurers, and government
agencies to which AstraZeneca offers rebates and discounts replace our
branded medicines on their formularies with these generic competitors.
Accordingly, the mix of business for medicines with generic competition
shifts towards programs whereby health plans/PBMs chose to list our
branded medicines on their formularies given a lower net cost versus
generics, and to individual patients who chose to pay for branded
agents over generic agents, resulting in a higher average net effective
price across all distribution channels.
Question. You state that ``the estimates for 2018 show that across
our medicines, our average rebate is nearly 50 percent of our gross
revenues in the U.S.'' For each product, please disclose the gross
revenue and the amount of rebates paid.
Answer. The table below reflects our Product Sales in the U.S. for
the period ending December 31, 2018, including the proportion of Gross
Sales allocated to estimated amounts we expect to pay to third-party
managed care organizations, hospitals, long-term care facilities, group
purchasing organizations, and various Federal or State programs. The
percentage of Gross Product Sales column reflects our effective rebate
rate per channel, a combination of mix of business in that channel and
related rebate rate.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USD (in
% of Gross
millions)
Product Sales
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gross Product Sales
$16,538,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chargebacks
$(2,224,000)
-13%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regulatory--Medicaid and State
$(1,304,000)
-8%
programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Contractual--Managed-care and
$(4,600,000)
-28%
Medicare
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cash and other discounts
$(286,000)
-2%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Customer returns
$(119,000)
-1%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. Branded Pharmaceutical Fee
$(140,000)
-1%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other
$(989,000)
-6%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Net Product Sales
$6,876,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brand-specific pricing information is competitively sensitive
information.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. During the hearing, when I asked whether your company
engaged in tactics to delay generic production of your products, you
answered ``no.'' However, AstraZeneca appears on the FDA's list of
companies who have access complaints against them.
Can you explain the discrepancy between your answer and the FDA
list? The FDA list can be found here: https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/
ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrug
ApplicationANDAGenerics/ucm607738.htm.
Answer. AstraZeneca appreciates the opportunity to address the
question of one of our medicines (BRILINTA) appearing on the Reference
Listed Drug Access Inquiries list (RLD List). We would first like to
state that AstraZeneca supports allowing generic manufacturers access
to samples. Withholding or otherwise blocking such access is
inconsistent with that position. Our internal review has not identified
any unanswered, delayed, or outstanding requests for samples of
BRILINTA (ticagrelor) by any generic manufacturers.
It is our understanding that BRILINTA was included on the RLD List
based on a single inquiry received by the FDA. Unfortunately, the RLD
List does not identify the company that reportedly requested
information (or samples) from AstraZeneca, the date the information was
requested, or any other information that would allow AstraZeneca to
better understand or further investigate the circumstances of this
inquiry. On its website, the FDA does advise that it has ``not
independently investigated or confirmed the access limitations
described in the inquiries received.'' Given this limitation, the
listing of an inquiry on the RLD List does not mean that the FDA has in
fact determined that access to samples by generic manufacturers was
limited or withheld for the medicines identified. Indeed, based on our
internal review, we have not identified any circumstances that
substantiate the inquiry received by the FDA relating to BRILINTA.
BRILINTA is and has always been available via normal commercial
distribution channels (i.e., wholesalers) since its U.S. launch. It has
never had a restricted distribution program.
Finally, more than 15 generic manufacturers have applied for
regulatory approval from the FDA for the manufacture of generic
ticagrelor and some, like Watson/Teva, have received tentative
approvals from the FDA. Because conducting bioequivalence studies with
the branded medicine is an FDA preapproval requirement, it is clear
that these generic manufacturers are not having difficulty accessing
branded ticagrelor for their studies.
In light of the context provided above, it is unclear why any
generic manufacturer would be unable to obtain a sample of BRILINTA for
their purposes or why an inquiry was lodged with the FDA related to
this medicine.
Question. When new products enter the market, do drug companies set
high initial rebates and then provide deep rebates in order to gain
access to insurance plan's formularies?
Answer. No, this is not AstraZeneca's general practice. We
negotiate rebates and discounts with payers and pharmacy benefit
managers (PBMs)--including in Medicare Part D--to help ensure that
patients have the most robust access possible to our therapies. Without
these discounts and rebates, many lifesaving medicines would not be
placed on plan formularies and therefore would be largely unavailable
to the patients who need them most.
The current rebate system creates misaligned incentives. This
results in a growing differential between list and net prices. We
support reforms of this system that include the elimination of rebates
in the commercial sector and in Medicare Part D, which will result in
the reduction of the differential between list and net prices and which
would allow manufacturers to ensure that the initial list price of a
drug reflects its net value.
Question. If CMS finalizes the rebate rule, do you anticipate
future products entering the market with significantly lower initial
list prices?
Answer. We believe that eliminating rebates across Medicare Part D
and commercial will generally result in lower initial list prices than
in the absence of reform, although the impact on specific medicines
will vary based on the competitive dynamics for that medicine. Reform
only in Part D and not commercial is unlikely to impact initial list
price setting practices, as the current structure does not allow for
two separate list prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a
different list price for the commercial sector).
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
Question. What are your recommendations for lowering prices for the
40 percent of drugs that do not offer rebates in Medicare Part D? In
the health insurance plans that you offer your employees, do you ask
your insurers to pass through the full manufacturer rebates to the
beneficiaries?
Answer. All of our medicines are rebated under the statutory
requirements of Medicaid, Federal Supply Schedule, 340B, and the Part D
coverage gap discount program. For our highly innovative, targeted
therapies, we do not typically provide additional rebates other than
through our value-based agreements, where such discounts are based on
patient outcomes.
In general, medicines with minimal rebates are the newest and most
innovative on the market. Expanded use of value-based agreements is a
key component to lowering costs and improving access to these medicines
that are currently not in highly rebated therapeutic classes. Under
such arrangements, manufacturers may contract to reimburse plans if the
medicine does not work as expected, lowering risks for the payer. This
also results in competition across manufacturers of medicines in these
classes by facilitating competition across clinical results and
outcomes.
As we stated before the Senate Committee on Finance, AstraZeneca
has put forward several proposals in addition to value-based agreements
to address drug pricing:

Moving away from the current rebate system, while continuing
to work with payers and PBMs to ensure robust negotiations;

Using a portion of discounts and rebates to create out-of-
pocket caps for Medicare patients;

Encouraging biosimilars and eliminating policy and
commercial barriers to their greater use.
AstraZeneca also supports increased transparency across the
biopharmaceutical supply chain, including transparency with respect to
drug pricing. To that end, we generally support the policies included
in the current versions of the SPIKE and C-THRU Acts. There are a
variety of state-level drug pricing transparency laws and regulations.
We believe that having a consistent, federal standard for drug pricing
transparency requirements, like those included in the SPIKE Act, should
pre-empt state level laws to reduce confusion and compliance burden.
We also support transparency efforts to ensure that patients and
prescribers have meaningful information on out-of-pocket costs at the
point of prescribing, so that they can make informed decisions about
the most appropriate and affordable therapy.
AstraZeneca wants to be a constructive partner in identifying
solutions that continue to allow manufacturers to innovate while
creating a more efficient and more affordable system.
AstraZeneca provides generous health-care benefits to its
employees. Today, we provide a point-of-sale discount on prescription
medicines in the form of low out-of-pocket costs for our employees. We
cap our employees' out-of-pocket costs on prescription medicines at $50
per fill to ensure they do not forgo their prescriptions due to high
out-of-pocket costs.
Question. The systems for pricing and distributing drugs are opaque
and difficult to understand.
What are your recommendations for increasing transparency in how
your companies set the list prices for drugs, and for improving
transparency in the supply chain for prescription drugs? Would you
support Federal standards for transparency in setting the list prices
for drugs?
Answer. We do believe that greater transparency is needed for
manufacturers as well as other entities in the supply chain. We
therefore would generally support transparency requirements such as
those included in the SPIKE and C-THRU Acts. Any transparency
requirements should consider the need to protect competitively
sensitive information to ensure robust competition in the market.
There are a variety of State-level drug pricing transparency laws
and regulations. We believe that having a consistent, Federal standard
for drug pricing transparency requirements, like those included in the
SPIKE Act, should pre-empt State-level laws to reduce confusion and
compliance burden.
Question. In nearly every sector of the health-care industry,
Medicare, Medicaid, employers, and insurers are moving away from fee-
for-service payments to reimbursements based on value and performance.
Prescription drugs and medical devices were the glaring exceptions to
this trend until recently.
How many of your drugs are included in value-based contracts and
how many patients are benefiting from them? How do these value-based
contracts work to lower drug prices for both patients and taxpayers?
Answer. We believe medicines are part of the solution to
controlling health-care costs. They not only improve patient outcomes
and increase quality of life, but also reduce downstream costs. Value-
based agreements allow us to reimburse the health-care system if our
medicines do not deliver as intended. This solution demonstrates our
willingness to stand behind the value of our medicines.
AstraZeneca is working closely with payers and health systems to
explore innovative solutions to improve access and affordability that
demonstrate the value our medicines bring to patients and the health-
care system. Our value-based agreements aim to manage the totality of
treatment costs and keep people healthy and out of the hospital. For
several years, AstraZeneca has been exploring these types of solutions
through value-based agreements where we are willing to work with
health-care stakeholders to tie payment to patient outcomes.
To date, we have entered into approximately 40 value-based
agreements for 15 medicines across our therapeutic areas with a variety
of payers, making AstraZeneca a leader in the field of value-based
agreements. Tens of thousands of patients have benefited from improved
access as part of these agreements.
As an example, and as noted in our written testimony submitted to
the Senate Committee on Finance, AstraZeneca agreed with Express
Scripts that for IRESSA, an oral treatment for certain types of lung
cancer, we will fully reimburse Express Scripts for discontinued use
before the third fill, including if discontinuation occurs because
patients did not respond to treatment.
While most of these agreements have been focused on securing
patient access to our medicines and delivering better patient outcomes,
where payers are willing, we are also looking to more directly address
patient out-ofpocket affordability through these innovative
arrangements.
As an example, we recently announced the initiation of a value-
based agreement for University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC)
Medicare patients who are prescribed BRILINTA. This value-based
contract, which was effective as of January 1, 2019, is groundbreaking
in two ways. First, the contract lowers the out-of-pocket costs for a
UPMC Medicare Part D patient to approximately $10 for a 30-day supply.
Second, what UPMC pays for BRILINTA will vary based on patient
outcomes, tying the cost of the medicine to its real-world clinical
performance.
We are currently exploring another value-based agreement in
Medicare Part D. In addition to having a significant outcomes-based
component, this arrangement would reduce patient out-of-pocket costs.
This type of agreement allows patients to access their medicines at a
lower out-of-pocket cost and payers to control their overall health-
care costs through paying for outcomes.
Question. Last year, Senator Portman and I did an investigation on
the pricing of an opioid overdose reversal drug called EVZIO,
manufactured by Kaleo. Kaleo increased the price of EVZIO from $575 in
2014 to $4,100 in 2017. We found that the best price Medicare was able
to get for EVZIO, about $4,000, was much higher than the price other
federal programs and private insurers were able to get. It seemed that
Kaleo was able to get this higher price of $4,000 from Medicare by
helping doctors fill out paperwork showing that the drug was medically
necessary, even though there are cheaper alternatives on the market. As
a result of the investigation, Kaleo announced it will bring a generic
version of the drug to market at only $168 per pack.
Are any of your companies providing medical necessity paperwork to
doctors in order to get your drugs covered by Medicare?
Answer. AstraZeneca policies prohibit completing medical necessity
paperwork for doctors or their staff as described in your inquiry.
Question. In 2017, the Rand Corporation estimated that biosimilar
drugs, which are competitors to complex, biologic drugs, could save the
United States more than $50 billion over the next decade. Some of you
have also argued that increasing the use of biosimilar drugs would help
lower drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers.
What is delaying the uptake of biosimilar drugs in the United
States? What policies do you recommend to increase the development of
biosimilar drugs?
Answer. AstraZeneca believes that competition is a key component to
reducing costs, and that is why we support the expanded use of
biosimilars in the U.S. As a global company, we operate in countries,
particularly those in the European Union, where biosimilar competition
is particularly robust. We support a similarly vigorous biosimilars
market in the U.S.
There are several challenges to biosimilar uptake in the U.S.,
including contracting and rebating dynamics and difficulty in obtaining
interchangeability status. We therefore appreciate the efforts of the
FDA to increase the availability of biosimilars in the U.S., including
the FDA's development of a Biosimilars Action Plan. We support efforts
to streamline and improve the efficiency of the biosimilars approval
pathway for the benefit of patients. Such efforts could include
increased transparency into the patents applicable to biologic
medicines.
We also support reimbursement policies that facilitate the uptake
of biosimilars. Such policies include Medicare reimbursement rates that
ensure that biosimilars can compete on equal footing with innovator
medicines, and reductions to cost-sharing amounts for biosimilars. We
also believe the elimination of rebates will help biosimilars compete
with innovator medicines.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
Question. The United States is one of the only countries in the
world to allow prescription drug manufacturers to advertise directly to
consumers through magazines, billboards, radio, and television
commercials. While I will not argue that it is beneficial to educate
consumers about an unfamiliar disease and encourage them to seek
medical help, most commercials from all of your companies recommend
asking about a specific brand name drug, not a medical condition.
Furthermore, even if your advertisements follow all FDA rules and list
medication side effects, they also almost always list these while a
smiling, apparently healthy person is walking on a beach. Researchers
say that this type of imagery, combined with viewing hours of drug
commercials each month, leads consumers to underestimate the risks
associated with medications. For the past decade, studies have shown
that aggressive direct-to-consumer advertising is associated with
rising drug prices and an increase in inappropriate drug prescriptions.
Since researchers have concluded that consumers are
misunderstanding the benefits and risks described in your ads, what
further policies could help you and your colleagues ensure that you are
educating patients in a clear manner?
Answer. Our advertising complies with regulatory requirements
governing direct-toconsumer (DTC) advertising and AstraZeneca believes
that DTC advertising is important to raising brand and disease
awareness, fostering patient education, and enhancing the dialogue
between patients and their physicians. Unfortunately, these positive
impacts of health-care communication efforts are often left out of the
DTC debate.
pharmaceutical companies continue to raise prices
Question. As you are well aware, high prescription drug prices are
the number one concern for Americans and their families. According to
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the average
American spends around $1,208 annually on prescription drugs. There
have been several instances where brand name or even generic drugs that
have been on the market for years continue to increase in price. One of
the most well-known examples is Mylan's increase of the price of EpiPen
from less than $100 in 2007 to more than $600 in 2016. Another example,
is the ever-increasing price of insulin. Sanofi increased the price of
a vial of Lantus from $88.20 in 2007 to $307.20 in 2017. And those are
just a small sample of price increases.
Why don't we see price decreases for drugs that have been on the
market for years without new formulations or added benefit?
Answer. As an initial matter, it is important to note the
distinction between list and net prices. Over the past several years,
discounts and rebates for our therapies have increased overall, both in
the commercial sector and Part D. In recent years, in our primary care
portfolio, which includes the majority of our therapies, we have seen
flat to declining net effective prices to AstraZeneca for most of our
medicines. Flat to declining net prices is a trend across the industry.
However, the current system makes list price decreases challenging.
Therefore, to accomplish meaningful change in terms of lowering
list price, the system must be restructured to eliminate rebates.
Assuming the HHS rebate rule is finalized largely as proposed,
AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use point-of-
sale discounts. Our goal is to maintain net prices broadly in line with
today, recognizing our ability to do so may be dependent on external
factors and market response such as how plans evolve their benefit
design and the total degree of transparency under the new model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector, and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
pay for delay
Question. Pay for delay is a tactic that more and more branded drug
manufacturers have been using to stifle competition from lower-cost
generic manufacturers. This allows you to sidestep competition by
offering patent settlements that pay generic companies not to bring
lower-cost alternatives to market. These ``pay-for-delay'' patent
settlements benefit both brand-name pharmaceutical companies by helping
them avoid costly patent litigation and general manufacturers by
rewarding them a hefty sum to delay entering the market with a cheaper
drug alternative. However, these deals do not benefit consumers.
According to an FTC study, these anticompetitive deals cost consumers
and taxpayers $3.5 billion in higher drug costs every year.
Does your company partake in pay-for-delay settlements?
Answer. AstraZeneca does not enter into settlements that pay
generic competitors to delay entry into the market. In the absence of a
settlement, a generic would not necessarily prevail in the patent
litigation and therefore would not be able to enter the market. Indeed,
AstraZeneca has entered into many early-entry patent settlements that
permit generic competitors to enter the market before expiration of
AstraZeneca's patent rights by allowing generic manufacturers to
license innovator patents.
All of AstraZeneca's patent settlements fully comply with the law.
These settlements provide increased clarity and stability to both
parties, allowing innovators like AstraZeneca to continue investing
substantially in new medicines for patients and frequently allowing
generic competitors to enter the market before expiration of
AstraZeneca's patent rights.
Question. Why would a pharmaceutical company enter into a pay-for-
delay agreement?
Answer. AstraZeneca does not enter into agreements that pay generic
competitors to delay entry into the market.
Question. Do you think these agreements stifle competition and
prevent generic alternatives to your branded medications?
Answer. AstraZeneca does not enter into agreements that pay generic
competitors to delay entry into the market. However, AstraZeneca has
entered into many early-entry patent settlements that permit generic
competitors to enter the market before expiration of AstraZeneca's
patent rights by allowing generic manufacturers to license innovator
patents. These do not stifle competition but instead permit early entry
by resolving patent disputes that would otherwise prevent generic
alternatives to branded medication.
value-based pricing
Question. One idea I wanted to get your thoughts on today, is the
idea of value-based pricing. This is an idea where a company could link
the single price it charges for a given drug to an assessment of how
well it works. Some value-based pricing arrangements could allow
insurers and patients to receive rebates from drug manufacturers if a
drug failed to work (outcome-based pricing). Another version would
involve ``indication-based pricing'' in which drug companies charge
different prices for the same drug when it is used to treat different
conditions.
Dr. Soriot, we have heard that AstraZeneca has been participating
in a value-based program in collaboration with the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center.
Could you talk more about your research in value-based pricing and
how you believe this could be possible solution to some of the high
drug prices?
Answer. We believe medicines are part of the solution to
controlling health-care costs. They not only improve patient outcomes
and increase quality of life, but also reduce downstream costs. Value-
based agreements allow us to reimburse the health-care system if our
medicines do not deliver as intended. This solution demonstrates our
willingness to stand behind the value of our medicines.
AstraZeneca is working closely with payers and health systems to
explore innovative solutions to improve access and affordability that
demonstrate the value our medicines bring to patients and the health-
care system. Our value-based agreements aim to manage the totality of
treatment costs and keep people healthy and out of the hospital. For
several years, AstraZeneca has been exploring these types of solutions
through value-based agreements where we are willing to work with
health-care stakeholders to tie payment to patient outcomes.
To date, we have entered into approximately 40 value-based
agreements across our therapeutic areas with a variety of payers.
Our research in value-based agreements has been focused on
addressing the comprehensive value of a medicine in terms of medical
cost offsets and the economic impact of achieving certain health
benefits with a medicine in a specific population. Our experience in
this area consists of health economics and outcomes research (HEOR) and
real-world evidence (RWE) studies which correlate improved outcomes and
overall better health to a direct, positive economic impact, realized
by both the payer and the patient. We use HEOR and RWE data to
establish the metrics of the value-based agreement. Another important
part of our value-based agreement research is how we measure the impact
of a value-based agreement, so we can learn what works and what does
not work for future iterations of value-based agreements.
In addition, by aligning payments for medicines more directly with
their value in improving health outcomes and/or reducing the need for
other healthcare services (such as hospitalizations), value-based
arrangements make pharmaceutical manufacturers accountable for the
results our medicines achieve and can help improve patients' health and
maximize the benefits of healthcare spending. Over time, proliferation
of value-based agreements can shift utilization toward medicines with
greater clinical value and greater ability to reduce hospitalizations
and other costly services, resulting in better health outcomes and
lower overall healthcare spending.
As manufacturers develop more complex, personalized, and promising
treatments--such as gene therapies, cell therapies, or immuno-
therapies--it will be increasingly important for health plans to enter
into value-based agreements so that they and our healthcare system may
recognize the full value of those treatments and make them available to
patients at affordable out-of-pocket amounts. Value-based agreements
serve an important role in linking the price of a medicine to
beneficiaries' demonstrated real world outcomes using that medicine.
While most of these agreements have been focused on securing
patient access to our medicines, some have also helped payers identify
which patient types are most likely to benefit from our medicines and
deliver improved patient outcomes. Partnering to drive this type of
clarity can reduce overall drug spend in meaningful ways. Where payers
are willing, we are also looking to more directly address patient out-
of-pocket affordability through these innovative arrangements.
As you mention, we recently announced the initiation of a value-
based agreement for University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC)
Medicare patients who are prescribed BRILINTA. This value-based
contract, which was effective as of January 1, 2019, is groundbreaking
in two ways. First, the contract lowers the out-of-pocket costs for a
UPMC Medicare Part D patient to approximately $10 for a 30-day supply.
Second, what UPMC pays for BRILINTA will vary based on patient
outcomes, tying the cost of the medicine to its real-world clinical
performance.
Through the partnership of payers and policymakers, we look forward
to a future where implementation of value-based agreements across
public and private payers is widespread. Value-based agreements are one
proactive solution; they are not the only solution.
drug rebate rule
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services'
(HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG) promulgated a new regulation to
remove regulatory safe harbor protections under the Anti-Kickback
Statute (AKS) for rebates on prescription drugs rebates paid by
manufactures to PBMs under Medicare Part D and for Medicaid managed
care organizations (MCOs). The OIG proposal attempts to ban most
rebates by eliminating their regulatory protections. The rule is
predicted to increase net drug costs in its early years. The CMS
actuaries estimate it would cost $196 billion over 10 years. Despite
this high price tag, the beneficiary benefits are limited. The proposed
rule notes that under the CMS Actuary's analysis, the majority of
beneficiaries would see an increase in their total out-of-pocket
payments and premium costs; reductions in total cost sharing will
exceed total premium increases.
I wanted to ask a question about the administration's rebate rule,
which I understand that many of the drug manufacturers, and your main
trade association, strongly support. According to an analysis of the
rule by the Office of Actuaries at CMS, drug manufacturers are likely
to initially retain 15 percent of the current rebates as higher net
drug prices.
Given that estimate, can you provide the committee with any
assurances that prices will not increase under this proposed rule?
Answer. Assuming the HHS rebate rule is finalized largely as
proposed, AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use
point-of-sale discounts. Our goal is to maintain net prices broadly in
line with today, recognizing our ability to do so may be dependent on
external factors and market response such as how plans evolve their
benefit design and the total degree of transparency under the new
model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector, and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. According to an article recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, medical marketers spent nearly $30
billion dollars in 2016, up from $17 billion in 1997. Direct-to-
Consumer (DTC) advertising had the biggest percentage increase: from
$2.1 billion, or 11.9 percent of all medical marketing, in 1997 to $9.6
billion, or 32 percent of total spending, in 2016.
Can you please provide what your ratio of spending on sales and
marketing to research and development is today?
Answer. In 2018, we spent $5.9 billion on RandD and $6.1 billion on
Sales and Marketing, globally. Our Sales and Marketing figures include
all costs incurred in selling, marketing, promoting, and distributing
our products.
price-gouging
Question. Sanofi, as I understand it, has made a pledge to the
public to limit its price increases to the national health expenditures
growth projection.
Would your company commit to a cap on annual price increases as
part of your PhRMA membership criteria?
Answer. Our decisions around pricing would always need to remain
independent of PhRMA membership criteria.
Question. What policies would you propose to help ensure lower
launch prices for new drugs?
Answer. As we stated at the Senate Committee on Finance hearing,
AstraZeneca has put forward a number of proposals to address drug
pricing, including:

Moving away from the current rebate system, while continuing
to work with payers and PBMs to ensure robust negotiations; and

Encouraging biosimilars and eliminating policy and
commercial barriers to their greater use.
As described below, we also support efforts to increase
transparency in the biopharmaceutical supply chain and drug
pricing specifically.
transparency
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mentioned that the
current system of pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) back-end rebates do
not rarely results in a scenario where the PBM passes on savings to
consumers at the point of sale (POS). The administration recently
proposed a rule to eliminate the anti-kickback statute safe harbor
protections for these drug rebates.
Do you agree that greater transparency should be required to
understand how manufacturers and PBMs are negotiating prices and
rebates to ensure that savings are passed down to beneficiaries?
Answer. Yes, AstraZeneca agrees that greater transparency is
needed. We therefore generally support the policies included in the
current versions of the SPIKE and C-THRU Acts.
There are a variety of State-level drug pricing transparency laws
and regulations. We believe that having a consistent, federal standard
for drug pricing transparency requirements, like those included in the
SPIKE Act, should pre-empt state level laws to reduce confusion and
compliance burden.
pbms
Question. An Axios article from March 7, 2019 highlights the fact
that, while ``pharmaceutical companies put a lot of the blame for high
drug prices on pharmacy benefit managers,'' many large pharmaceutical
companies ``rely on PBMs to manage their own health-care benefits.''
In your role as an employer, does your company contract with a
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) to administer the prescription
drug benefits for your employees and negotiate lower drug costs on your
behalf?
Answer. AstraZeneca prescription drug benefits are managed by
Express Scripts.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, how do you utilize the
rebates your PBM negotiates to lower health-care costs or drug costs
for your employee plans and what does your company do with that
savings? Specifically, do the savings go toward lowing premiums?
Answer. AstraZeneca provides generous healthcare benefits to its
employees. Today, we provide a point-of-sale discount on prescription
medicines in the form of low out-of-pocket costs for our employees. We
cap our employees' out-of-pocket costs on prescription medicines at $50
per fill to ensure they do not forgo their prescriptions due to high
out-ofpocket costs.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, does your PBM offer
point-of-sale rebates to your employees?
Answer. While AstraZeneca does not currently offer point-of-sale
rebates to employees, we are exploring opportunities to evolve our
benefits in the future.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. Please describe any policy changes you support that would
result in your company lowering the list prices of its drugs.
Answer. The current rebate construct is the key challenge in
reducing list prices and we would support legislation that would
eliminate rebates in Part D and the commercial sector. Assuming the HHS
rebate rule is finalized largely as proposed, AstraZeneca intends to
comply with its requirements and use point-of-sale discounts. Our goal
is to maintain net prices broadly in line with today, recognizing our
ability to do so may be dependent on external factors and market
response such as how plans evolve their benefit design and the total
degree of transparency under the new model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector, and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
Question. How much does your company's research and development
portfolio rely on taxpayer-funded research conducted by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)? How many of your company's products are
based, at least in part, on NIH research, and how many are the result
of research funded solely by your company?
Answer. We collaborate with the National Institutes of Health and
the National Cancer Institute, and these partnerships can lead to
important advances for patients. However, biopharmaceutical companies
conduct the vast majority of R&D needed to bring new medicines to
patients and they bear the associated costs and risks.
Question. In each of the last 5 years, how much has your company
spent on research and development versus the advertising and marketing
of your products?
Answer. Last year alone, we invested nearly $6 billion in R&D,
which represents 28 percent of our total product sales, well above the
industry average.
Our Sales and Marketing figures include all costs incurred in
selling, marketing, promoting, and distributing our products.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Year
R&D Investment
Sales and Marketing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018
$5.9 billion
$6.1 billion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017
$5.8 billion
$5.6 billion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016
$5.9 billion
$5.8 billion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2015
$6.0 billion
$6.6 billion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2014
$5.6 billion
$7.1 billion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. During the hearing, you mentioned that your company would
be likely to lower the list prices of its drugs if the recent proposal
by the Trump administration to change the current system of rebates was
extended to the private market.
If the policy was extended to the private market, how large would
the list price reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
Answer. Assuming the HHS rebate rule is finalized largely as
proposed, AstraZeneca intends to comply with its requirements and use
pointof-sale discounts. Our goal is to maintain net prices broadly in
line with today, recognizing our ability to do so may be dependent on
external factors and market response such as how plans evolve their
benefit design and the total degree of transparency under the new
model.
AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending reforms
across all payers, including in the commercial sector in addition to
Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two separate list
prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different list price for
the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support efforts to eliminate
rebates in the commercial sector, and recommend that Congress explore
such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an important step,
benefit designs must also be evaluated.
Question. How will this proposal affect how your company sets the
list prices for new drug products?
Answer. We believe that eliminating rebates across Medicare Part D
and commercial will generally result in lower initial list prices than
in the absence of reform, although the impact on specific medicines
will vary based on the competitive dynamics for that medicine. Reform
only in Part D and not commercial is unlikely to impact initial list
price setting practices, as the current structure does not allow for
two separate list prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a
different list price for the commercial sector).
Question. If the proposal is finalized and not extended to the
private market, will your company make any list price reductions? If
so, how large would the reductions be relative to the size of the
rebates your company is currently providing?
Answer. AstraZeneca would plan to reduce list prices, pending
reforms across all payers, including in the commercial sector in
addition to Part D, as the current construct does not allow for two
separate list prices (i.e., one list price for Part D and a different
list price for the commercial sector). Therefore, we also support
efforts to eliminate rebates in the commercial sector, and recommend
that Congress explore such legislation. While eliminating rebates is an
important step, benefit designs must also be evaluated.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan
Question. In June of 2018, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission (MACPAC) unanimously recommended under Recommendation 1.1 in
their annual report to Congress that Congress remove the statutory
requirement that manufacturers blend the average manufacturer price
(AMP) of a brand drug and its authorized generic.\3\ This requirement
created an unintended loophole. Rather than use the price of the
authorized generic, drug companies can sell its authorized generic to a
corporate subsidiary at an artificially lower price, and use that lower
price to bring down the AMP, which in turn lowers the rebate
obligation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ MACPAC, ``Improving Operations of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program,'' https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Improving-
Operations-of-the-Medicaid-Drug-Rebate-Program.pdf.
Does your company engage in this practice? Has your company ever
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
engaged in this practice in the past?
Answer. No. In limited circumstances, AstraZeneca has made
authorized generics available, but does so through a third-party
distributor, not an AstraZeneca subsidiary.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
Question. As a portion of your revenue, for what percentage of the
drugs in your portfolio do you offer no rebates? Based on the drugs in
your pipeline, do you foresee that portion growing? For those drugs, is
your list price equal to your net price?
Answer. All of our medicines are rebated under the statutory
requirements of Medicaid, Federal Supply Schedule, 340B, and the Part D
coverage gap discount program. For our highly innovative, targeted
therapies, we do not typically provide additional rebates other than
through our value-based agreements, where such discounts are based on
patient outcomes. Therefore, due to statutory rebates and other fees
and discounts, the net price is lower than list price for all
medicines.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you generate in U.S. sales
revenue? Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, AstraZeneca's U.S. revenue was $6.88 billion. We
invested $5.9 billion in R&D, globally.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? What company functions do you consider to be included
in administration? Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, we spent $5.9 billion on R&D and $10 billion on
Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) costs globally, which is
inclusive of Sales and Marketing costs of $6.1 billion.
Selling, General and Administrative expenses are defined as fixed
costs of selling products and services and costs of central services
and administration, which are not included in inventory values.
General and administrative costs include costs of central services
and administration, such as: Human Resources, Finance, Facilities,
Purchasing, Strategy and Business Development, Legal, Corporate
Affairs, and other corporate expenses.
Our Sales and Marketing figures include all costs incurred in
selling, marketing, promoting, and distributing our products.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
sales? What company functions do you consider to be included in sales?
Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, we spent $5.9 billion on R&D and $6.1 billion on
Sales and Marketing, globally.
Our Sales and Marketing figures include all costs incurred in
selling, marketing, promoting, and distributing our products.
Question. Why do you advertise for the drugs you manufacture? What
factors do you consider in choosing which drugs you advertise?
Answer. We consider many factors when making decisions regarding
the advertising of our medicines, including the opportunity to raise
brand and disease awareness, patient education, and the enhancement of
the patient/physician dialogue.
We believe that health-care communications efforts can have a
positive impact on patient health. AstraZeneca made a decision several
years ago to use our direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertisements to share
another important message with patients: We were the first company to
include messages about our affordability programs in all of our DTC TV
advertisements, making clear to patients that if they cannot afford
their medicines, AstraZeneca may be able to help. We continue this
practice today, which we believe is reflective of AstraZeneca's
commitment to patient access and affordability.
______
Appendix A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Organization
Program Title
Date
Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Chronic Total
01/07/2014
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
Occlusion and
Left Main Summit
2014: A Live
Demonstration
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TORRANCE MEMORIAL
Cardiology Update
01/08/2014
$2,500.00
MEDICAL CENTER
2014:
Conventional
Wisdom and Beyond
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
Grand Rounds in
01/09/2014
$8,027.93
Cardiovascular
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
Sixth Annual
01/12/2014
$3,000.00
Morton Arnsdorf
Cardiovascular
Research Day at
the University of
Chicago
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA OSTEOPATHIC
15th Annual
01/15/2014
$5,000.00
MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
Cardiovascular
DISTRICT SOCIETY 2
and Medicine
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
25th Annual
01/16/2014
$5,000.00
CARDIOLOGY--PUERTO
Meeting ACC
RICO CHAPTER
Puerto Rico
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Patient
01/23/2014
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Outcomes: Updated
PHYSICIANS
Treatment
Strategies in the
Management of
Acute Coronary
Syndrome (ACS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY MEDICAL
6th Annual
01/23/2014
$5,000.00
CENTER OF SOUTHERN
Cardiovascular
NEVADA
and Stroke
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SAINT JOSEPH'S
Antithrombotic
01/23/2014
$2,737.62
HOSPITAL--ATLANTA
Protocol for
Acute Coronary
Sndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESERACH
Gordon Research
01/26/2014
$1,700.00
CONFRENCE
Seminar--``Lipopr
otein
Metabolism''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Rheumatology Best
01/26/2014
$9,795.58
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Practices 6th
Annual
Rheumatology
Highlights
Report--``Transla
ting an
International
Meeting into
Clinical
Practice''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KERN ASPEN LIPID
Evolving Concepts
01/26/2014
$7,000.00
CONFERENCE
of HDL Function
in
Cardiometabolic
Diseases and
Beyond
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH'S REGIONAL
Acute Coronary
01/27/2014
$2,225.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Syndrome:
Evidence-Based
Management in the
Present Era
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
Lipid Academy
01/28/2014
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Series of 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
Masters in
01/28/2014
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Lipidology Series
of 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Rheumatology Grand
01/29/2014
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Rounds
CALIFORNIA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
Overview of the
01/29/2014
$5,439.84
Duke Health
Systems Acute
Coronary
Syndromes
suggested
algorithm of care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA ACADEMY OF
PAFP/F Smoking
01/29/2014
$13,666.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Cessation and
FOUNDATION
Asthma Outcomes
CME
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
Advances in the
01/30/2014
$30,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Diagnosis and
Treatment of the
Rheumatic
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY
Emory Symposium on
01/30/2014
$5,000.00
Coronary
Atherosclerosis
Prevention and
Education
(ESCAPE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
Clinical Pearls
01/30/2014
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
for COPD
CONTINUING EDUCATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Practical
01/30/2014
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Strategies to
PHYSICIANS
Improve Patient
Outcomes in the
Prevention and
Treatment of COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH'S REGIONAL
COPD
02/04/2014
$2,200.00
MEDICAL CENTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE 23rd Annual
02/04/2014
$16,130.00
CLINICAL
Scientific and
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Clinical Congress
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
Cardiovascular
02/04/2014
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
Pharmacology:
CONTINUING EDUCATION
Latest Updates in
Caring for the
Cardiac Patient
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MIDWEST CARDIOVASCULAR
Cardiology at the
02/04/2014
$5,000.00
RESEARCH FOUNDATION
Bix
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACCs 63rd Annual
02/05/2014
$100,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Scientific
Session (ACC.14)
Prevention
Learning Pathway
and Prevention
Pilot Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LA BIOMED
Cardiology Grand
02/05/2014
$5,000.00
Rounds: Updates
in ACS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEBRASKA ACADEMY OF
Ten Things You
02/05/2014
$5,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Didn't Learn
About COPD in
Class (Even If
You Were Paying
Attention
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINNESOTA SOCIETY OF
MSHP Annual
02/05/2014
$2,533.00
HEALTH-SYSTEM
Meeting 2014:
PHARMACISTS
Evidenced-based
Updates in the
Management of
Dyslipidemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
20th Annual
02/05/2014
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION
Interventional
Cardiology
Fellows Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Best of ACC.14:
02/05/2014
$50,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Take Home
Messages for the
Clinicians
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
ENDO 2014
02/06/2014
$40,000.00
Educational
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALL NYC EMERGENCY
All NYC Emergency
02/06/2014
$5,000.00
MEDICINE CONFERENCE,
Medicine
INC.
Conference; In
the Footsteps of
Giants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Annual Scientific
02/09/2014
$10,000.00
PHYSICIANS; PUERTO
Meeting
RICO CHAPTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Optimizing PCI
02/09/2014
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
Outcomes: A
Vision for 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
14th Annual
02/10/2014
$12,500.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Targeted
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Threapies of Lung
Cancer Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TENNESSEE ACADEMY OF
Breast and Ovarian
02/10/2014
$6,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PURDUE UNIVERSITY
A 2014 National
02/12/2014
$30,000.00
Educational
Initiative on
Therapeutics and
Rheumatology for
Rheumatology
State Societies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEST PENN ALLEGHENY
Cardiovascular
02/17/2014
$10,000.00
HEALTH SYSTEM, INC.
Medicine Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
12th International
02/18/2014
$25,000.00
HOSPITAL CENTER
Congress on
Targeted
Anticancer
Therapies (TAT)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BIBIKHAN FOUNDATION
7th Annual
02/18/2014
$5,000.00
Cardiovascular
Update--``A
Practical
Tutortial''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF GYNECOLOGIC
SGO 45th Annual
02/19/2014
$25,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Meeting on
Women's Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
02/19/2014
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
Conferences on
Cardiac
Regulatory
Mechanisms
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR UNIVERSITY
Emerging
02/20/2014
$17,460.00
MEDICAL CENTER DBA A.
Therapeutic
WEBB ROBERTS CENTER
Options for
Medullary Thyroid
Cancer and
Differentiated
Thyroid Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACADEMIA MEDICA DEL SUR- Cardiometabolic
02/20/2014
$20,000.00
FONDO EDUCACION MEDICA
Health Congress
CONTINUADA
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY MEDICAL
13th Annual
02/25/2014
$5,498.41
CENTER
Southeastern
Fellows Research
Skills Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF
19th Annual
02/25/2014
$5,000.00
CHICAGO
University of
Chicago Phase II
Consortium (UC
P2C) Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
60th Annual
02/25/2014
$25,000.00
ON THROMBOSIS AND
Meeting of the
HAEMOSTASIS
Scientific and
Standardization
Committee (SSC)
of the
International
Society on
Thrombosis and
Haemostasis
(ISTH)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF
Making Sense of
02/25/2014
$5,000.00
CHICAGO
the Sequence:
Genomics Primer
for Clinical
Cancer Genetic
Practitioners
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEST VIRGINIA ACADEMY
Dyslipidemia and
02/25/2014
$2,500.00
OF FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Atherosclerosis--
Reducing the Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
PediaLink
02/26/2014
$37,800.00
PEDIATRICS
Influenza Course
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
20th Annual
02/26/2014
$15,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Symposium
ASSOCIATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
2014 NAFC Annual
02/27/2014
$30,000.00
FREE and CHARITABLE
Summit
CLINICS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY
Cardiology 2014:
02/27/2014
$5,000.00
Advances in
Science and
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF
Cardiovascular
02/27/2014
$5,000.00
THE UNIVERSITY OF
Medicine and
WISCONSIN SYSTEM
Prevention Update
for Primary Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR VASCULAR
Society for
03/02/2014
$5,000.00
MEDICINE
Vascular Medicine
25th Anniversary
and Scientific
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
94th Annual
03/04/2014
$10,000.00
FOR THORACIC SURGERY
Meeting American
Association for
Thoracic Surgery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHI ST. LUKE'S HEALTH
Cardiology Grand
03/05/2014
$3,857.58
Rounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MIDWEST CARDIOVASCULAR
Cardiovascular
03/05/2014
$5,000.00
RESEARCH FOUNDATION
Interventions and
Practice
Guidelines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER
27th Cardiology
03/05/2014
$4,805.00
Spring Update
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Clinical
03/05/2014
$4,000.00
WASHINGTON
Cardiology Pearls
for Primary Care
Providers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
Faces and Cases:
03/06/2014
$50,000.00
PAIN MANAGEMENT
Assessing and
Managing People
With Complex
Chronic Pain
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
Pediatric Asthma
03/06/2014
$5,000.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
and Allergy
Updates for
Primary Care
Providers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
Boston Bacterial
03/06/2014
$2,500.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
Meeting 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
TCTMD 2014 Post
03/09/2014
$100,000.00
FOUNDATION
Conference Web
Cast Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
DAPT Dilemmas: A
03/09/2014
$66,913.46
FOUNDATION
Case-based
Roundtable
Tutorial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF BLACK
40th Anniversary
03/11/2014
$20,000.00
CARDIOLOGISTS
Annual Scientific
Sessions The
Ecology of
Cardiovascular
Disease in 2014:
Trends,
Challenges and
Targets for 2025
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE HOPE FOUNDATION
Spring 2014 SWOG
03/18/2014
$10,000.00
Group Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN LUNG
ALASD Asthma
03/18/2014
$2,500.00
ASSOCIATION OF THE
Educator
UPPER MIDWEST
Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Getting to Goal:
03/19/2014
$5,950.00
CONSULTANT PHARMACISTS
The Pharmacist's
FL CHAPTER
Role in Managing
Dyslipidemia and
Atherosclerosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE RESEARCH FOUNDATION
Cal For Grants CGA
03/19/2014
$2,000.00
CV 1404--Time
Critical
Diagnosis (TCD)
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY
Emory Practical
03/19/2014
$3,000.00
Intervention
Course (EPIC
2014)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
03/20/2014
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
Conference and
Seminar on
Hemostasis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA ALLERGY
2014 Annual
03/20/2014
$5,000.00
AND ASTHMA ASSOCIATION
Meeting of the
Pennsylvania
Allergy and
Asthma
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
Oncology Nursing
03/20/2014
$25,000.00
SOCIETY
Society 39th
Annual Congress
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RICHMOND UNIVERSITY
Lipid Management
03/20/2014
$1,400.00
MEDICAL CENTER
2014 Guidelines
and Beyond
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
5th Annual Johns
03/23/2014
$2,500.00
UNIVERSITY
Hopkins
Cardiovascular
Research Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
Fall 2014
03/23/2014
$5,000.00
ALLERGY ASTHMA AND
Symposium of the
IMMUNOLOGY
Los Angeles
Society of
Allergy, Asthma
and Clinical
Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
03/23/2014
$15,000.00
Working Group US
Chapter Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE SOCIETY FOR
2014 SCAI
03/23/2014
$15,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Transradial
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Interventional
INTERVENTIONS
Program (TRIP)
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASPEN LUNG CONFERENCE
Thomas L. Petty
03/24/2014
$5,000.00
Aspen Lung
Conference:
Rebuilding the
Injured Lung
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
ISHIB 2014 Annual
03/24/2014
$10,000.00
ON HYPERTENSION IN
Conference-
BLACKS INC.
Medical and
Social
Determinants of
Cardiometabolic
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ARKANSAS ACADEMY OF
67th Annual
03/24/2014
$3,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Scientific
Assembly of the
Arkansas Academy
of Family
Physicians
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
Current Advances
03/24/2014
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
in Cardiovascular
PENNSYLVANIA
Care 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. PETER'S HOSPITAL
Cardiology
03/25/2014
$3,000.00
Teaching Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHARLES R. DREW
18th Annual
03/26/2014
$25,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF MEDICINE
Conference
and SCIENCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2014 GRC on
03/27/2014
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Heterocyclic
Compounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ROCKEFELLER
Leptin and
03/30/2014
$25,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Metabolic
Disease: A
Special Symposium
on the 20th
Anniversary of
the Discovery of
Leptin
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
CSAAI's A
03/30/2014
$5,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Midsummer Night's
IMMUNOLOGY
Wheeze 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF NEW
PeerView Live,
04/01/2014
$353,000.00
MEXICO
Using Evidence-
Based Treatment
to Optimize
Control of
Elevated Serum
Triglycerides
(150202699)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THOMAS JEFFERSON
Jefferson Critical
04/01/2014
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Care Symposium: A
Multidisciplinary
Review of Current
Evidence and
Controversies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
35th Annual
04/01/2014
$3,000.00
ENDOCRINE SURGEONS
Meeting of the
American
Association of
Endocrine
Surgeons
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2014 Bioorganic
04/02/2014
$1,000.00
CONFERENCES
Chemistry Gordon
Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE NEW YORK
Seventh Annual
04/03/2014
$3,050.00
CARDIOLOGICAL SOCIETY,
Cardiac Care
INC.
Associate
Symposium 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
15th Annual
04/03/2014
$4,706.02
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Intensive Review
of Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Cardiology Update
04/06/2014
$4,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DIGNITY HEALTH ST.
16th Annual
04/06/2014
$6,000.00
BERNARDINE MEDICAL
Cardiac Symposium
CENTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2014 Conquer
04/09/2014
$24,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Merit
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MUNSTER MEDICAL
New Frontiers in
04/09/2014
$4,200.00
RESEARCH FOUNDATION
Cardiovascular
DBA COMMUNITY HOSPITAL
Disease 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2014 Gordon
04/09/2014
$2,000.00
CONFERENCES
Research
Conference:
Enzymes CoEnzymes
and Metabolic
Pathways
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE
2014 Mississippi/
04/09/2014
$5,000.00
PHYSICIANS--MISSISSIPP
Louisiana ACP
I CHAPTER
Educational and
Scientific
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICHAN SCHOOL OF
Live Symposium of
04/10/2014
$10,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
Complex Coronary,
SINAI
Valvular and
Vascular Cases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL FOUNDATION FOR
Clinical
04/13/2014
$25,000.00
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Vaccinology
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
The AAPA 2014
04/13/2014
$7,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Annual
Conference--Cardi
ology Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW JERSEY ACADEMY OF
Cardiovascular
04/13/2014
$5,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Controversies
JNC8 and
Cholesterol
Treatment
Guidelines (2014
Scientific
Assembly)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HUMBOLDT-DEL NORTE
Asthma Update
04/14/2014
$4,000.00
COUNTY MEDICAL SOCIETY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DANNEMILLER, INC.
Contemporary
04/16/2014
$50,000.00
Perspectives in
COPD: A
Pulmonologist's
Guide to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OKLAHOMA UNIVERSITY
17th Annual
04/16/2014
$3,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER--
Primary Care
OUHSC
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2014 Conquer
04/17/2014
$60,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Young
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Investigator
Award (YIA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
6th Annual E-
04/17/2014
$9,352.86
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Journal Club: The
Insights on
Biologics and New
Agents for
Rheumatic
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL FOUNDATION FOR
17th Annual
04/21/2014
$15,000.00
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Conference on
Vaccine Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
2014 ECOG-ACRIN
04/21/2014
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Spring Group
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
Contemporary T2DM
04/21/2014
$229,200.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Management: Focus
on Safety and
Efficacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CHEST FOUNDATION
The CHEST
04/21/2014
$35,000.00
Foundation
Diversity
Research/Women's
Respiratory
Health Awards
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MISSOURI ACADEMY OF
Hyperlipidemia
04/21/2014
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Lipidomics Impact
04/22/2014
$2,500.00
UNIVERSITY OF
on Cell Biology,
CALIFORNIA, SAN DIEGO
Inflammation and
Metabolic Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL MINORITY
11th Annual
04/23/2014
$30,000.00
QUALITY FORUM
National Summit
on Health
Disparities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
2014 Carolinas
04/24/2014
$20,000.00
COPD Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MICHIGAN STATE MEDICAL
Rheumatology
04/24/2014
$3,000.00
SOCIETY FOUNDATION
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAIN LINE HEALTH
Atherosclerosis:
04/24/2014
$5,000.00
Prevention of
Progression
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASE MANAGEMENT SOCIETY
CMSA 2014 Annual
04/27/2014
$15,000.00
OF AMERICA
Conference and
Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2014 Monthly
04/27/2014
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Oncology Tumor
Boards: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Arteriosclerosis,
04/27/2014
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Thrombosis, and
Vascular Biology
Scientific
Sessions 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
25th Annual
04/27/2014
$5,000.00
Cardiovascular
Interventions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Interventional
04/27/2014
$5,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Cardiology Board
Preparatory
Educational
Package
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TEXAS ONE VOICE: A
Designing
04/28/2014
$1,000.00
COLLABORATIVE FOR
Healthcare in
HEALTH AND HUMAN
Texas How the
SERVICES
Past and Present
will Guide the
Future
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
Cardiology Update
04/28/2014
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
2014: A Patient
PENNSYLVANIA
Management
Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2014 ASCO Annual
05/04/2014
$56,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Lung
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR CARE
Dyslipidemia and
05/06/2014
$25,000.00
MANAGEMENT
New Cholesterol
Guidelines: What
the Primary Care
Provider Needs to
Know
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Update in Allergy,
05/06/2014
$10,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Asthma and
IMMUNOLOGY
Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ACADEMY OF
Update in the
05/06/2014
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Management of
Dyslipidemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VASSAR BROTHERS MEDICAL
44th Annual
05/06/2014
$5,000.00
CENTER
Cardiology
Education Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ZOE ROSE MEMORIAL
2014 Preemie
05/06/2014
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION DBA PREEMIE
Parent Summit
PARENT ALLIANCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE 23rd Annual
05/07/2014
$25,000.00
CLINICAL
Scientific and
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Clinical Congress
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LOUISIANA SOCIETY OF
LSAAI 41st Annual
05/07/2014
$5,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Meeting
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAFP Assembly 60
05/07/2014
$13,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Minute Lecture
titled Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary
Disorder (COPD)
and Pulmonary
Function Testing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBUS COMMUNITY
2014 ASCO REVIEW
05/08/2014
$5,000.00
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
PROGRAM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Aspen Allergy
05/08/2014
$10,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Conference
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
29th Annual
05/11/2014
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Clinical
Conference on
Diabetes--Reducin
g Risks: Primary
and Secondary
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
20th Annual UCLA
05/11/2014
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Symposium
CALIFORNIA
Pulmonary
Function and
Exercise Testing:
Practical
Approaches for
the Healthcare
Practitioner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
The Changing
05/11/2014
$5,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Allergy Practice
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Caribbean Congress
05/12/2014
$5,000.00
EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS,
on Emergency
PUERTO RICO CHAPTER
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
19th Annual
05/13/2014
$6,613.34
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Diabetes Day:
Diabetes Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE REGENTS UNIVERSITY
UCLA Family
05/13/2014
$7,500.00
OF CALIFORNIA
Medicine
Refresher Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
ASCO Review
05/13/2014
$4,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIEDAD PUERTORRIQUENA
Puerto Rican
05/14/2014
$10,000.00
DE ENDOCRINOLOGIA Y
Endocrinology and
DIABETOLOGIA
Diabetes Society
Scientific
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL MEDICAL
Asthma as a Model
05/14/2014
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Chronic Illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2014 Lipoprotein
05/14/2014
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Metabolism Gordon
Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
Pharmacology
05/14/2014
$5,000.00
SOCIETY
Update:Integratin
g Advances into
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
2014 National
05/14/2014
$5,000.00
SERVICE COORDINATORS
Service
Coordinator
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAYO CLINIC ARIZONA
Cardiology Update
05/15/2014
$10,000.00
2014: The Heart
of the Matter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN CHEMICAL
2014 ACS National
05/18/2014
$1,000.00
SOCIETY--DIVISION OF
Medicinal
MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Chemistry
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHICAGO ASTHMA
Emergency
05/18/2014
$2,000.00
CONSORTIUM
Management of
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUFFOLK ACADEMY OF
31st Update in
05/19/2014
$3,000.00
MEDICINE
Allergy and
Immunology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY
Discussing Cases
05/19/2014
$20,000.00
with Diabetes
Experts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL MEDICAL
Evidence-Based
05/19/2014
$23,405.00
ASSOCIATION
Diagnosis and
Management of
Asthma and COPD:
Practical Tools
to Improve
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH SHORE LONG ISLAND
Post American
05/19/2014
$3,000.00
JEWISH HEALTH SYSTEM
Society of
Clinical Oncology
Update 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LAHEY CLINIC HOSPITAL,
Cardiovascular
05/19/2014
$6,000.00
INC.
Disease: State of
the Art 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2014
05/19/2014
$5,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Cardiovascular
Board Review for
Certification and
Recertification
Educational
Package
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW JERSEY ACADEMY OF
The Current
05/21/2014
$2,500.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Standards Of Care
and Treatment of
Diabetes (2014
Scientific
Assembly)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2014 Conquer
05/21/2014
$250,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Career
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Development Award
(CDA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
16th Annual Lynn
05/21/2014
$10,000.00
Sage Breast
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY OF
Lipid Management
05/21/2014
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
The Skinny on the
Fat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
1st Annual Duke
05/29/2014
$10,000.00
Preventive
Cardiology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2014 Alzheimer's
05/29/2014
$95,000.00
Association
International
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
2014 Updates in
05/29/2014
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Oncology: With
PENNSYLVANIA
Proceedings from
International
Medical Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Young Investigator
06/01/2014
$25,000.00
NEUROSCIENCE
Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
The Role of the
06/03/2014
$149,025.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Kidney in Glucose
Homeostasis and
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIVA PHYSICIANS
VIVA 14: Vascular
06/03/2014
$20,000.00
InterVentional
Advances
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF TOXICOLOGIC
Translational
06/04/2014
$3,000.00
PATHOLOGY
Pathology:
Relevance of
Toxicologic
Pathology to
Human Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UHS PROFESSIONAL
Gout and
06/04/2014
$100,825.00
EDUCATION PROGRAMS,
Hyperuricemia--Cl
INC.
inical Spectrum
and Management
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAFP Assembly 60
06/04/2014
$10,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Minute Lecture
titled Acute
Coronary Syndrome
and Angina
(Fundamentals)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAFP Assembly 60
06/04/2014
$10,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Minute Lecture
titled Acute
Coronary Syndrome
and Angina
(Advanced)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE NEPHCURE FOUNDATION
10th International
06/04/2014
$5,000.00
Podocyte
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
Mount Sinai
06/09/2014
$2,500.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
Division of
SINAI
Occupational
Medicine seminar
series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SWEDISH MEDICAL CENTER
Cardiology Update
06/09/2014
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
for Primary Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOSLIN DIABETES CENTER
The Institute of
06/11/2014
$15,000.00
Lifestyle
Medicine 2014
Educational
Activities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
ACS/STEMI: Focus
06/11/2014
$60,000.00
FOUNDATION
on Acute Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENN STATE COLLEGE OF
20th Annual
06/18/2014
$7,000.00
MEDICINE
Pennsylvania
Immunization
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASPMN 24th
06/18/2014
$10,000.00
PAIN MANAGEMENT
National
NURSING
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
APhA Pharmacy-
06/18/2014
$2,500.00
ASSOCIATION
Based
Immunization
Delivery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Mentors in
06/22/2014
$50,000.00
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PONCE MEDICAL SCHOOL
Advances in
06/24/2014
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Dyslipidemia and
Atherosclerosis
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Cardiovascular
06/25/2014
$15,000.00
EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS
Disease Track at
ACEP 2014
Scientific
Assembly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BRIGHAM AND WOMEN'S
BWH Thyroid
06/26/2014
$3,000.00
HOSPITAL INC.
Visiting
Professor and
Endocrine Grand
Rounds Speaker
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Clinical Allergy
06/26/2014
$5,000.00
for the
Practicing
Physician
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
Fall Programs
06/26/2014
$5,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
ASSOCIATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2014 Gordon
06/26/2014
$500.00
CONFERENCES
Research Seminar
on Synaptic
Transmission
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GREENWOOD LEFLORE
Call for Grants:
06/29/2014
$2,500.00
HOSPITAL
CGA Educating the
Delta on
Asthmatic
Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
06/29/2014
$2,000.00
CONFERENCE
Conference on
Multi-Drug Efflux
Systems
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
06/29/2014
$2,000.00
CONFERENCES
Conference: DNA
Topoisomerases in
Biology and
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALBANY COLLEGE OF
Heart to Heart:
06/30/2014
$14,000.00
PHARMACY AND HEALTH
Updates on
SCIENCES
Cardiovascular
Disease and the
Management of
Cholesterol and
Hypertension
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER MOLECULAR
Molecular
06/30/2014
$5,000.00
THERAPEUTICS RESEARCH
Therapeutics of
ASSOCIATION
Cancer Conference
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY
Vanderbilt
07/08/2014
$3,000.00
University
Hematology
Oncology
Educational
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL
Translating Neural
07/08/2014
$3,000.00
CORPORATION
Circuits and
Pathways into
Treatments
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY OF
Breast Cancer-
07/09/2014
$3,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Fight Like a Girl
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PROMEDICA ACADEMIC
After the
07/09/2014
$2,500.00
HEALTH CENTER
Diagnosis:
CORPORATION
Helping
Cardiopulmonary
Patients Succeed--
Approaches to
Stay Ahead of the
Curve
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2014 Breast Cancer
07/09/2014
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Symposium
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
Hyperlipidemia and
07/09/2014
$5,000.00
ASSOC. FOR CONTINUING
Hypertension in
EDUCATION
2014: What's New
in Treatment
Guidelines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DIABLO SOCIETY OF
Cost-Effective
07/10/2014
$5,600.00
HEALTH SYSTEM
Genotype-Guided
PHARMACISTS
Antiplatelet
Therapy with
Ticagrelor
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALAMO CITY CANCER
12th Annual Breast
07/10/2014
$1,500.00
COUNCIL
Cancer Conference
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
37TH Annual San
07/10/2014
$10,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
Antonio Breast
SAN ANTONIO SCHOOL OF
Cancer Symposium
MEDICINE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Best Practices in
07/15/2014
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
the Prevention
PHYSICIANS
and Management of
Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
(COPD)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
Advances in Care
07/17/2014
$3,000.00
CENTER
for the New
Millennium: 20th
Anniversary BRCA
Gene Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Current Treatments
07/17/2014
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
and Novel
PHYSICIANS
Strategies in the
Management of
Acute Coronary
Syndrome (ACS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MARSHA RIVKIN CENTER
10th Biennial
07/22/2014
$5,000.00
FOR OVARIAN CANCER
Ovarian Cancer
RESEARCH
Research
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF
Optimizing Oral
07/22/2014
$9,600.00
CONSULTANT PHARMACISTS
Antiplatelet
Therapy in Acute
Coronary Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Foundations for
07/22/2014
$10,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Practice
Excellence: Core
Curriculum for
the
Cardiovascular
Clinician 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
12th Annual World
07/23/2014
$100,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Congress on
Insulin
Resistance
Diabetes and
Cardiovascular
Disease--WCIRDC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Program Title
07/23/2014
$3,000.00
ENDOCRINE SURGEONS
Masters Course in
FOUNDATION
Endocrine Surgery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Acute Coronary
07/24/2014
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION
Syndromes,
Pharmacotherapy
and Shock/
Hemodynamic
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Town Hall and
07/24/2014
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION FDA
Clinical Trial
Design and
Interpretation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINNESOTA PHARMACISTS
MPhA Annual
07/24/2014
$2,150.00
ASSOCIATION
Meeting: MTM in
Cardiology Clinic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
6th Annual
07/29/2014
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Allergy, Asthma
IN ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
and ENT CME
IMMUNOLOGY
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Severe Asthma
07/29/2014
$22,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Workshop at the
IMMUNOLOGY
2014 ACAAI Annual
Scientific
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
16th World
07/29/2014
$30,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
The Affordable
07/29/2014
$22,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Care Act and
IMMUNOLOGY
Asthma Control
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DANA-FARBER CANCER
Dana-Farber Cancer
07/31/2014
$2,400.00
INSTITUTE
Institute's 10th
Annual
Postdoctoral and
Graduate Student
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
2014 NAHQ 39th
07/31/2014
$15,000.00
FOR HEALTHCARE QUALITY
Annual
Educational
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
2014 Top Ten
07/31/2014
$10,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
Advances in
SINAI
Clinical
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
COPD/Asthma Track
07/31/2014
$25,800.00
CHEST PHYSCIANS
at CHEST 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DREXEL UNIVERSITY
Hypertension
08/03/2014
$5,000.00
HighLights-ASH
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF
No Gout About It:
08/03/2014
$9,500.00
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
Targeted Provider
PROFESSIONALS
Education and
Training to
Screen,
Diagnosis, and
Manage Gout among
Female Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Tumor
08/03/2014
$10,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Immunology and
Immunotherapy: A
New Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE OHIO STATE
Sixth Annual
08/05/2014
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Contemporary
Multidisciplinary
Cardiovascular
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY
Update in
08/05/2014
$5,000.00
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
COPD Interactive
08/06/2014
$20,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Educational Game
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Updates in the
08/06/2014
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Treatment of
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Hypertriglyceride
mia: A Closer
Look at the Role
of Omega-3 Fatty
Acids
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
19th Annual Allied
08/07/2014
$2,500.00
Health Regional
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WESTERN SOCIETY OF
WSAAI 53rd Annual
08/07/2014
$15,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Scientific
IMMUNOLOGY
Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DELAWARE ACADEMY OF
Acute Coronary
08/07/2014
$3,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Syndromes: Acute
Myocardial
Infarction and
Unstable Angina
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
Addressing Racial
08/10/2014
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION
and Ethnic
Healthcare
Disparities in
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THOMAS JEFFERSON
Current Issues in
08/10/2014
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Coronary and
Structural Heart
Disease: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
University of
08/11/2014
$5,000.00
WASHINGTON CME OFFICE
Washington Topics
in Allergy and
Immunology
Teaching Series
2014-2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION OF THE
The Foundation of
08/11/2014
$50,000.00
NATIONAL LIPID
the National
ASSOCIATION
Lipid Association
Hunninghake FH
Abstract Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
NANN 30th Annual
08/13/2014
$10,000.00
NEONATAL NURSES
Educational
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASTRO 56th Annual
08/17/2014
$3,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Meeting
(ASTRO)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
SGLT2 Inhibitor
08/17/2014
$170,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Therapy in
Patients with
Mild to Moderate
Diabetic Kidney
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
Multidisciplinary
08/17/2014
$4,500.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
Breast Rounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
Contemporary T2DM
08/17/2014
$376,125.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Management: Focus
on Safety and
Efficacy (Live
Program)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MISSISSIPPI HEALTHCARE
STEMI Protocols
08/17/2014
$1,464.83
ALLIANCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Practical
08/19/2014
$144,399.00
DIABETES EDUCATORS
Applications of
Pramlintide in
Type 1 Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Novel Treatments
08/19/2014
$252,000.00
HEALTH-SYSTEM
for the
PHARMACISTS
Management of
Type 2 Diabetes:
Focus on SGLT2
Inhibitors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE SOCIETY FOR
SCAI 2014
08/19/2014
$50,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Interventional
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Cardiology
INTERVENTIONS
Fellows Courses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OLIGONUCLEOTIDE
10th Annual
08/19/2014
$10,000.00
THERAPEUTICS SOCIETY
Meeting of the
Oligonucleotide
Therapeutics
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR THE
Advances in Cancer
08/19/2014
$75,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Immunotherapy--Se
CANCER
ries of 5
Regional Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
The Sixth Annual
08/19/2014
$7,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Hospital Medicine
Boot Camp
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
CAll for Grants
08/21/2014
$25,800.00
CINCINNATI
Application (CGA)
CV14-1st Annual
Cincinnati
Collaborative
Cardiovascular
Consortium (C4):
Practical and
Contemporary
Cardiology 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY
Pulmonary,
08/27/2014
$3,000.00
Critical Care and
Sleep Medicine
Update 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
ISAM Textbook of
08/27/2014
$10,000.00
FOR AEROSOLS IN
Aerosol Medicine
MEDICINE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
Asthma and COPD
08/27/2014
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
2014
CONTINUING EDUCATION
(NPACE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
CHEST 2014 Lung
08/27/2014
$24,150.00
CHEST PHYSCIANS
Cancer Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Medical Oncology
08/28/2014
$3,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
and Hematology
CENTER
2014:
Multidisciplinary
Approaches that
Improve
Coordination of
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
37th Annual
08/28/2014
$5,000.00
Pulmonary and
Allergy Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOT-FOR-PROFIT HOSPITAL
Management and
08/28/2014
$2,400.00
CORPORATION
Prevention of
Acute
Exacerbation of
COPD (AECOPD)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
New Jersey--AACE
08/31/2014
$5,000.00
CLINICAL
7th Annual
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WILLIAM BEAUMONT
Practical and
08/31/2014
$2,000.00
HOSPITAL
Progressive
Updates in
Primary Care
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
47th Annual New
08/31/2014
$15,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
York
Cardiovascular
Symposium: Major
Topics in
Cardiology Today
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC Fellowships
09/02/2014
$43,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RUTGERS, THE STATE
Update in
09/02/2014
$7,500.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEW
Rheumatology 2014
JERSEY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHILDREN'S HEALTHCARE
Respiratory Update
09/02/2014
$3,000.00
OF ATLANTA
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND,
Patient-Focused
09/02/2014
$10,000.00
BALTIMORE FOUNDATION
Drug Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ANGIOGENESIS
World Congress on
09/02/2014
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
Angiogenesis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
New Therapeutic
09/02/2014
$20,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Insights/Advances
in Allergic
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Mammalian DNA
09/02/2014
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
Repair Gordon
Research
Conference and
Seminar 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ILLINOIS ACADEMY OF
Health Care Reform
09/04/2014
$2,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
and Care
Coordination
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EXCELLENCE IN
Rheumatology
09/04/2014
$25,000.00
RHEUMATOLOGY EDUCATION
Winter Clinical
Symposium 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF INFECTIOUS
Society of
09/04/2014
$5,000.00
DISEASES PHARMACISTS
Infectious
Diseases
Pharmacists
Research Grant
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR
CVIs 21st Annual
09/09/2014
$10,000.00
INSTITUTE OF
Cardiology
PHILADELPHIA
Update: Clinical
Management of
Heart Disease
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PROVIDENCE HOLY CROSS
Acute Coronary
09/09/2014
$1,900.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
14th Annual
09/14/2014
$10,000.00
Southeastern
Fellows Research
Skills and
Training Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PHILLIPS GILMORE
Atlanta Lung
09/14/2014
$3,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Cancer Symposium
COMMUNICATIONS, INC.
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
2014 ECOG-ACRIN
09/14/2014
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Fall Group
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF
Pharmacologic
09/14/2014
$10,000.00
SCIENCES
Resolution of
Inflammation as a
Novel Therapeutic
Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL COLLEGE OF
8th Annual
09/15/2014
$3,000.00
WISCONSIN
Translational
Oncology Research
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FRIENDS OF CANCER
Friends of Cancer
09/15/2014
$100,000.00
RESEARCH
Research 2014
programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
09/15/2014
$15,000.00
Working Group
Global Chapter
Meting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ORLANDO HEALTH
Advancements in
09/15/2014
$3,000.00
the Early
Detection and
Treatment of
Breast and
Gynecologic
Malignancies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
Severe Asthma
09/17/2014
$5,000.00
2014: A
Personalized
Approach To
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EAST TENNESSEE STATE
Asthma and Allergy
09/17/2014
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY RESEARCH
2014: What's New,
FOUNDATION
What's Hot
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2014 ACG
09/17/2014
$25,000.00
GASTROENTEROLOGY
Presidential
Poster Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTNERS HEALTHCARE
2014 Personalized
09/17/2014
$15,000.00
SYSTEM INC.
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
Turning the Tide
09/17/2014
$5,000.00
COALITION
Against Cancer
2014 National
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
Rheumatology Grand
09/21/2014
$5,000.00
CENTER
Rounds 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THYROID
Early Riser
09/21/2014
$125,900.00
ASSOCIATION
Symposium:
Medullary Thyroid
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SAFETY PHARMACOLOGY
14th Annual Safety
09/21/2014
$3,000.00
SOCIETY
Pharmacology
Society Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
19th Annual ASHP
09/23/2014
$10,000.00
HEALTH-SYSTEM
Conference for
PHARMACISTS
Leaders in Health-
System Pharmacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Scenes and
09/23/2014
$35,000.00
CLINICAL
Seminars on
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Hypoglycemia
Management:
Multidisciplinary
Approaches to
Improving Safety
for Patients with
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2014 NCCN Congress
09/23/2014
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Series: Utilizing
Guidelines to
Customize Patient
Care in Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CITY OF HOPE NATIONAL
Multidisciplinary
09/25/2014
$3,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Approaches to
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE DEUEL CONFERENCE ON
The 2015 Deuel
09/30/2014
$15,000.00
LIPIDS
Conference on
Lipids
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2014 ACR/ARHP
09/30/2014
$50,000.00
RHEUMATOLOGY
Annual Meeting
Gout Educational
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH AMERICAN SOCIETY
NASPGHAN Research
09/30/2014
$4,000.00
FOR PEDIATRIC
Skills Workshop
GASTROENTEROLOGY,
HEPATOLOGY AND
NUTRITION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR THE
SITC Workshop on
10/03/2014
$100,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Combination
CANCER
Immunotherapy:
Where Do We Go
From Here?
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LETTERS and SCIENCES
PARP Inhibition
10/07/2014
$275,478.44
for BRCA 1/2
Mutation-
Associated
Cancers and
Triple Negative
BC Advances in
Risk Reduction
and Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL
Taking on
10/07/2014
$5,000.00
CORPORATION
Tomorrow: Global
Pediatric
Innovation Summit
and Awards 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENZYME MECHANISMS
24th Enzyme
10/07/2014
$3,000.00
CONFERENCE, INC.
Mechanisms
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAMI MARYLAND
2014 NAMI Maryland
10/07/2014
$5,000.00
Annual Education
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Inhibition in the
10/07/2014
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
CNS Gordon
Research
Conference and
Seminar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Cardiometabolic
10/08/2014
$150,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Clinical
Community on
CardioSource/
ACC.org
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Managing Pain in
10/09/2014
$25,000.00
DIRECTORS OF NURSING
LTC Residents:
ADMINISTRATION/LTC,
Addressing
INC.
Opioiod-Induced
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Heart Innovation
10/09/2014
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL SOCIETY OF NEW
Medical Society of
10/09/2014
$2,500.00
JERSEY
New Jersey 2015
Physician
Advocacy
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PEDIATRIC ENDOCRINE
PES Parent,
10/13/2014
$50,000.00
SOCIETY
Patient and
Physician WEB
Education Program
for Lipodystrophy
in Children,
Adolescents, and
Adults
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
7th Focus on Lung
10/13/2014
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Cancer Conference
PENNSYLVANIA
and 4rd
CANPrevent Lung
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Merrill J. Egorin
10/13/2014
$10,000.00
TRANSLATIONAL ONCOLOGY
Workshop in
Cancer
Therapeutics and
Drug Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
The Oncologist CME
10/13/2014
$10,000.00
TRANSLATIONAL ONCOLOGY
Online Journal
Curriculum: Lung
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
Integrating
10/15/2014
$5,000.00
COALITION
Personalized
Medicine into
Health Care:
Solutions Summit
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIOMEDICAL SCIENCE
Hope Scholarship
10/16/2014
$7,500.00
CAREERS PROGRAM
2015-2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Fact vs Fact: The
10/21/2014
$25,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Cholesterol
Guidelines Debate
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. WEBB ROBERTS CENTER
The 41st Annual
10/22/2014
$5,000.00
OF BAYLOR HEALTH CARE
Williamsburg
SYSTEM, DALLAS
Conference on
Heart Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
COPD: What NPs in
10/22/2014
$20,000.00
NURSE PRACTITIONERS IN
Women's Health
WOMEN'S HEALTH
Need to Know
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR THE
SITC 29th Annual
10/22/2014
$10,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Meeting
CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DAIBETES TECHNOLOGY
Diabetes
10/22/2014
$10,000.00
SOCIETY
Technology
Meeting 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
2014-2015 AAPS
10/30/2014
$45,000.00
PHARMACEUTICAL
Sustaining
SCIENTISTS
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC
APNA 28th Annual
10/30/2014
$5,000.00
NURSES ASSOCIATION
Conference-
Building
Connections: PMH
Nursing
Perspectives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PEDIATRIC ENDOCRINE
PES Consensus
10/30/2014
$92,200.00
SOCIETY
statement on the
Management of
Lipodystrophy in
Children,
Adolescents, and
Adults
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LETTERS AND SCIENCES
Ovarian Cancer--
10/30/2014
$287,365.00
Evolution and
Evidence of
Emerging
Strategies (ISSS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CVA MEDICAL
Cardiovascular
11/02/2014
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Update 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
Vaccines: Past,
11/04/2014
$10,000.00
Present, and
Future
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF TOXICOLOGY
Society of
11/04/2014
$2,000.00
Toxicology Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR
CCMEP
11/04/2014
$10,000.00
THE CERTIFICATION OF
Certification
CME PROFESSIONALS
Exam for
Healthcare CE
Professionals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
Cardiovascular
11/05/2014
$50,000.00
HOSPITAL CENTER
Research
Technologies CRT
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Primary Care
11/05/2014
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION
Practitioner
(PCP) Attitudes
and Practices:
Testing Type-2
Diabetic Patients
for Chronic
Kidney Disease
(CKD) Survey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
Pathway To Stop
11/07/2014
$2,500,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
Optimizing the
11/10/2014
$11,250.00
ASSOCIATION
Management of
Acute Coronary
Syndromes through
the Transitions
of Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TEMPLE UNIVERSITY
43rd Annual
11/10/2014
$5,000.00
Philadelphia
Workshop on
Hemostasis,
Thrombosis and
Atherosclerosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOT-FOR-PROFIT HOSPITAL
Recognizing and
11/11/2014
$3,400.00
CORPORATION
Treating Acute
Coronary Syndrome-
Current Guideline
Based Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Chronic Total
11/11/2014
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Occlusion Summit
2015: A Live
Demonstration
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC
11/12/2014
$16,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
International
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Mentorship
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
15th Annual
11/12/2014
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Targeted
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Therapies of Lung
(IASLC)
Cancer meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Scientific
11/13/2014
$30,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Sessions 2014
Acute Coronary
Syndrome Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE JOHNS HOPKINS
The Johns Hopkins
11/13/2014
$138,261.57
UNIVERSITY
University
Allergy and
Clinical
Immunology
Fellowship
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
The 2nd Annual
11/16/2014
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
UCLA Diabetes
CALIFORNIA
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Annual
11/17/2014
$50,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Meeting--2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
American Society
11/17/2014
$25,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
of Hematolgoy
Scholar Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
The American
11/17/2014
$25,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
Society of
Hematology's
Bridge Award
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
2015 AAAAI Annual
11/18/2014
$30,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Meeting Allied
IMMUNOLOGY (AAAAI)
Health
Programming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC
Psychiatric
11/21/2014
$60,400.00
NURSES ASSOCIATION
Nursing E Series:
Bipolar Disorder
Across the
Lifespan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
New Paradigms in
12/01/2014
$2,500.00
CLINICAL
the Practice of
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS PR
Endocrinology
CHAPTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Outcomes
12/01/2014
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
through Evidence-
PHYSICIANS
Based Diagnosis
and Management of
Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
(COPD)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GYNECOLOGIC
3rd Semi Annual
12/02/2014
$10,000.00
ONCOLOGY GROUP
Meeting of NRG
ONCOLOGY
(Formerly GOG,
NSABP, RTOG)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ALLERGY, ASTHMA
Florida Allergy,
12/02/2014
$10,825.00
AND IMMUNOLOGY SOCIETY
Asthma and
Immunology
Society 2015
Annual CME
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
16th World
12/02/2014
$200,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer--ISS
(IASLC)
Association fee
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Evidence-based
12/02/2014
$23,795.71
SCHOOL NURSES, INC.
asthma care in
schools
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE METHODIST HOSPITAL
Cardiovascular
12/03/2014
$15,000.00
Fellows' Bootcamp
Laying the
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 20th Annual
12/03/2014
$85,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Conference
General Session:
Advancing the
Standard of
Cancer CareTM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Advances in the
12/03/2014
$100,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Treatment of
Ovarian and
Cervical Cancers:
Expert-
Facilitated Small
Group Discussions
of Challenging
Cases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE MOUNT SINAI
Complex Coronary
12/03/2014
$10,000.00
HOSPITAL
Cases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
The Johns Hopkins
12/03/2014
$150,000.00
UNIVERSITY
University School
of Medicine
eDiabetes Review
Volume 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ROME FOUNDATION
Rome IV: The
12/04/2014
$100,000.00
Functional
Gastrointestinal
Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF KENTUCKY
9th Platelet
12/04/2014
$10,000.00
COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
Colloquium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Conquer
12/04/2014
$30,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Merit
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Conquer
12/04/2014
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
International
Innovation Grant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2015 Annual
12/04/2014
$10,000.00
CANCER NETWORK NCCN
Nursing Program:
Advancing
Oncology Nursing
at the 20th NCCN
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2015 NCCN Oncology
12/04/2014
$10,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Fellows Program:
New Horizons in
Quality Cancer
Care at the 20th
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
STENO DIABETES CENTER A/ 28th European
12/04/2014
$20,000.00
S
Diabetic
Nephropathy Study
Group Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Improving Patient
12/04/2014
$110,000.00
HEALTH-SYSTEM
Outcomes:
PHARMACISTS
Maximizing the
Role of the GLP-1
Based Therapies
in Our Patients
with Type 2
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
ENDO 2015 Thyroid
12/04/2014
$55,000.00
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
XVI Curso
12/07/2014
$10,000.00
SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL
Intensivo de
CENTER
Diabetes,
Endocrinologia y
Enfermedades
Metabolicas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Advances in
12/07/2014
$10,000.00
CLINICAL
Medical and
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Surgical
Management of
Thyroid Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PAIN SOCIETY
2015 Fundamentals
12/07/2014
$35,000.00
of Pain
Management: An
Interdisciplinary
Primer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
2015 HOPA 11th
12/07/2014
$25,000.00
PHARMACY ASSOCIATION
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUMEN FOUNDATION
Lumen Global 2015
12/08/2014
$75,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Mentoring Program
12/08/2014
$10,000.00
NEONATAL NURSES
Toolkit for
Novice Nurse
Practitioners
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Conquer
12/08/2014
$250,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Career
CLINICAL ONOCLOGY
Development Award
(CDA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Conquer
12/08/2014
$10,500.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
International
Development and
Education Award
(IDEA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Applying the
12/08/2014
$525,980.00
Evidence for GLP-
1 Receptor
Agonists in Type
2 Diabetes:
Practice
Perspectives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FORCE--FACING OUR RISK
Joining FORCEs
12/08/2014
$50,000.00
OF CANCER EMPOWERED
Against
Hereditary Cancer
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Lipid Management
12/08/2014
$50,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Today: Unanswered
Questions and
Unquestioned
Answers--Live
Clinical Focus
Session at ACC.15
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
Access to Care:
12/09/2014
$11,250.00
ASSOCIATION
Addressing Health
Literacy in
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Diabetes Diagnosis
12/09/2014
$50,000.00
and Management
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Endocrine Fellows
12/09/2014
$70,000.00
Conference: Type
1 Diabetes Care
and Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLINICAL AND PATIENT
Clinical Issues in
12/09/2014
$368,966.00
EDUCATORS ASSOCIATION
Type 2 Diabetes:
Discussions and
Debates Around
GLP-1 Receptor
Agonists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACCs 64th Annual
12/09/2014
$100,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Scientific
Session--ACC.15
Acute Coronary
Syndromes
Clinical Learning
Pathway
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Conquer
12/10/2014
$60,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Young
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Investigator
Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Diabetes Masters
12/10/2014
$235,867.00
Series 2015 :
Solving the
Puzzle: Putting
the Pieces
Together to
Provide Quality
T2DM Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 ASCO Annual
12/10/2014
$112,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Lung
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL
Who s on First?
12/10/2014
$316,029.80
AND NURSING EDUCATION
What s on Second?
Identifying a
Line-up of Newer
Agents to
Individualize
Care for Your
Patient with T2DM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA STATE
Controlling Severe
12/11/2014
$236,659.94
UNIVERSITY
Asthma Today and
Tomorrow
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL
2015 Weinstein
12/11/2014
$5,000.00
CORPORATION
Cardiovascular
Development
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2015-2016 Monthly
12/11/2014
$35,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC
Oncology Tumor
Boards: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
ENDO 2015 Diabetes
12/14/2014
$30,000.00
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Case Challenges in
12/14/2014
$181,705.00
CLINICAL
T2D: Applying the
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
AACE Algorithm to
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CHEST FOUNDATION
The CHEST
12/15/2014
$180,000.00
Foundation COPD
Research Grant
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOSLIN DIABETES CENTER,
SGLT-2 Inhibitors
12/15/2014
$321,885.00
INC.
in Type 2
Diabetes:
Incorporating New
Approaches Into
Practice Through
an
Interdisciplinary
Exploration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN OSTEOPATHIC
The Path to Better
12/15/2014
$263,394.54
ASSOCIATION
T2DM Outcomes, A
Coordinated
Approach to
Patient-centered
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Optimizing
12/21/2014
$62,825.00
CINCINNATI
Outcomes in Type
2 Diabetes:
Integrating
Longer Acting GLP-
1 Receptor
Agonists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RICHMOND UNIVERSITY
Treatment-
12/22/2014
$1,100.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Refractory Gout
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL
Regional Systems
01/04/2015
$3,500,000.00
OF MEDICINE
Accelerator:
Implementation of
The American
Heart
Associations
Mission: Lifeline-
AMI Discharge and
Follow Up
Demonstration
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
You Say Do, I Say
01/06/2015
$150,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Don t:
Controversial
Debates in ACS--
Live Clinical
Focus Session at
ACC.15
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACC.15 Prevention
01/07/2015
$75,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Learning Pathway
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
American Heart
01/08/2015
$2,000,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Association
Cardiovascular
Genome Phenome
Study (CV-GPS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
American Heart
01/11/2015
$6,000,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Association s
Guideline
Transformation
and Optimization
(GTO) Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Post Conference
01/14/2015
$100,000.00
FOUNDATION
CME Webcast
Series 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GASTROINTESTINAL AND
The 2015 US GI and
01/14/2015
$35,000.00
LIVER ASSOCIATION OF
Liver Association
THE AMERICAS (GALA)
of the Americas
(GALA) Conference
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACCs 64th Annual
01/14/2015
$25,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Scientific
Session (ACC.15)
[emailprotected]
Learning Pathway
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2015 Gordon
01/14/2015
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
Research
Conference on the
Molecular and
Cellular Biology
of Lipids
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GEORGIA ASSOCIATION OF
Cardiology Track--
01/14/2015
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
How PAs Can
Impact Patient
Outcomes Across
Cardiovascular
Diseases (Part of
GAPA 2015 Spring
Conference)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Endocrine
01/15/2015
$5,000.00
CLINICAL
University:
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Disease
Management and
Technology Skills
for Fellows-in-
Training (Thyroid
Module)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
16th Annual
01/15/2015
$3,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
Practical
SAN ANTONIO SCHOOL OF
Applications of
MEDICINE
New Agents in
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
National Lipid
01/15/2015
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Association 2015
Lipid Academy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
2015 Masters in
01/15/2015
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Lipidology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY
Atlanta Clinical
01/18/2015
$15,000.00
Cardiology Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SCAI 2015
01/27/2015
$85,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Scientific
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Sessions
INTERVENTIONS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Thyroid Endocrine
01/28/2015
$10,000.00
Self-Assessment
Program 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
Scripps 35th
01/29/2015
$5,000.00
Annual
Conference:
Clinical
Hematology and
Oncology 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY
Boston Symposium
01/29/2015
$2,500.00
on Organic and
Bioorganic
Chemistry (BSOBC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
ACS/STEMI: Focus
01/29/2015
$60,000.00
FOUNDATION
on Acute Care at
SCAI 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Exploring Optimal
01/29/2015
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Antiplatelet
PHYSICIANS
Therapies in the
Management of
Acute Coronary
Syndrome (ACS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
21st Annual
01/29/2015
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION
Interventional
Cardiology
Fellows Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
01/29/2015
$15,000.00
Working Group US
Chapter Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
IOWA PHYSICIAN
Update on Lipid
01/29/2015
$6,500.00
ASSISTANT SOCIETY
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
Cardiovascular
02/01/2015
$25,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Risk Reduction:
ASSOCIATION
Leading the Way
in Prevention
(21st Annual
Symposium)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRIMARY CARE NETWORK,
Are Gout Goals
02/02/2015
$619,095.00
INC.
Achievable? The
Provider/ Patient
Alliance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
PCNA-Triglycerides
02/02/2015
$179,540.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
ASSOCIATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
National Lipid
02/02/2015
$120,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Association 2015
Scientific
Meeting Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Chest Pain
02/02/2015
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Coordinator Boot
Camp
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF
Cardiovascular
02/08/2015
$5,000.00
THE UNIVERSITY OF
Medicine and
WISCONSIN SYSTEM
Prevention Update
for Primary Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
6th Expert
02/09/2015
$5,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Strategies in
Endoscopy,
Gastrointestinal
and Liver
Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
2nd Cardiovascular
02/11/2015
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Symposium
PENNSYLVANIA/CME
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
APhA2015 Rise in
02/11/2015
$22,500.00
ASSOCIATION
Oral Oncologic
Medications
Creates New
Challenges in
Adherence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY
EPIC SEC Emory
02/11/2015
$25,000.00
Practical
Intervention
Course Southeast
Consortium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Advances in the
02/11/2015
$232,693.00
CANCER NETWORK
Treatment of
Ovarian and
Cervical Cancers:
Expert-
Facilitated Small
Group Discussions
of Challenging
Cases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Moores Cancer
02/12/2015
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Center 11th
CALIFORNIA
Industry/Academia
Translational
Oncology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
The Future of
02/12/2015
$10,000.00
Genomic Medicine
VIII
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DELAWARE ACADEMY OF
Hyperlipidemia
02/12/2015
$2,780.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE MASSACHUSETTS
29th Harvard
02/17/2015
$5,000.00
GENERAL HOSPITAL
Critical Issues
in Tumor
Microenvironment:
Angiogenesis
Metastasis and
Immunology Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KERN ASPEN LIPID
Emerging Therapies
02/17/2015
$10,000.00
CONFERENCE
for
Cardiovascular
Diseases: A
Dialogue Between
Academic and
Pharmaceutical
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ASSOCIATION OF
Acute Coronary
02/17/2015
$8,325.00
CONSULTANT PHARMACISTS
Syndrome;
Strategies to
Optimize
Transitions in
Care and Reduce
Readmissions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH'S REGIONAL
COPD
02/18/2015
$1,900.00
MEDICAL CENTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Issues with DAPT
02/18/2015
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION
Series 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
The Challenges of
02/19/2015
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
Asthma and COPD
CONTINUING EDUCATION
in Primary Care
(NPACE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
The 8th Annual
02/19/2015
$2,500.00
Womens
Cardiovascular
Health Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Atlanta Mission:
02/19/2015
$2,500.00
ASSOCIATION
Lifeline Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
How to Talk to
02/22/2015
$231,590.00
NURSE PRACTITIONERS
Your Patients
about Opioid-
induced
Constipation: A
Dialogue about
New Advances
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THYROID
American Thyroid
02/22/2015
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Association
Satellite
Symposium: ATA
Guidelines on
Medullary Thyroid
Cancer and
Pediatric Thyroid
Cancer
Highlights,
Controversies a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THOMAS JEFFERSON
3rd Annual
02/22/2015
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Jefferson Lung
Cancer Symposium
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
What's New in
02/22/2015
$95,085.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Asthma/COPD
Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEST PENN ALLEGHENY
Cardiovascular
02/22/2015
$10,000.00
HEALTH SYSTEM
Medicine Update
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
62nd Annual
02/23/2015
$10,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Advanced
Postgraduate
Course 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF GYNECOLOGIC
SGO Annual Meeting
02/23/2015
$50,000.00
ONCOLOGY
on Women's Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR UNIVERSITY
The 18th Annual
02/23/2015
$3,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER DBA A.
Tyler Breast
WEBB ROBERTS CENTER
Cancer Conferecne
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA ACADEMY OF
PAFP/F Live and
02/23/2015
$5,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Enduring CME
FOUNDATION
Primary and
Secondary
Prevention of
ASCVD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
Oncology Nursing
02/23/2015
$25,000.00
SOCIETY
Society 40th
Annual Congress
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
2015-2016 AAPS
02/23/2015
$50,000.00
PHARMACEUTICAL
Sustaining
SCIENTISTS
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASPEN LUNG CONFERENCE
Thomas L. Petty
02/24/2015
$15,000.00
Aspen Lung
Conference:Asthma
2015: Mechanisms
to Personalized
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. FRANCIS HOSPITAL--
Intravascular
02/26/2015
$7,000.00
U.S. CATHOLIC
Coronary Imaging
CONFERENCE
and Physiology
2015: A Clinical
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
NAPNAP Conference
02/26/2015
$7,500.00
PEDIATRIC NURSE
Sponsorship
PRACTITIONERS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
95th Annual
02/26/2015
$10,000.00
FOR THORACIC SURGERY
Meeting American
Association for
Thoracic Surgery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Session Support:
02/26/2015
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
CKD MANAGEMENT
ALONG THE
CONTINUUM: FROM
PREDIALYSIS TO
POLICY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CITY OF HOPE NATIONAL
15th Annual
03/01/2015
$5,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Rachmiel Levine
Diabetes and
Obesity Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2015
03/01/2015
$25,000.00
SOCIETY
International
Conference,
Fellows Track
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
2015 International
03/01/2015
$10,000.00
SOCIETY ATS
Conference--Selec
ted Topics in
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
Improving the
03/01/2015
$10,000.00
Quality of Care
for Patients with
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH'S REGIONAL
Year in Review in
03/01/2015
$3,700.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Acute Coronary
Syndromes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF
COPD9USA
03/02/2015
$40,000.00
THE UNIVERSITY OF
NEBRASKA DBA THE
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
MEDICAL CENTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2015
03/02/2015
$72,919.82
SOCIETY
International
Conference--Selec
ted Topics in
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
Best Practices in
03/02/2015
$72,161.00
Managing Patients
with COPD:
Emerging
Therapies and
Patient Education
Strategies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
DAPT Dilemmas: A
03/02/2015
$69,100.00
FOUNDATION
Case-Based
Roundtable
Tutorial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2015 Alzheimers
03/02/2015
$50,000.00
Association
Research
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 ASCO Annual
03/02/2015
$56,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Gynecologic
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Cancer Track:
Scientific and
Educational
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAPA Conference
03/02/2015
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
2015--CardiologyT
rack
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
The Post-ACS
03/04/2015
$100,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Patient:
ASSOCIATION
Adherence to
Critical
Therapies in the
Short- and Long-
Term
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
2015 Charitable
03/04/2015
$30,000.00
FREE AND CHARITABLE
Health Care
CLINICS
Education and
Training
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
High Throughput
03/04/2015
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Chemistry and
Chemical Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW YORK ACADEMY OF
Non-Motor
03/04/2015
$2,000.00
SCIENCES
Symptoms:
Unraveling the
``Invisible''
Face of Parkinson
s Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR PHYSICIAN
SPAP's 9th Annual
03/08/2015
$1,500.00
ASSISTANTS IN
Conference
PEDIATRICS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JDRF INTERNATIONAL
TypeOneNation
03/08/2015
$4,500.00
Research Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Solving Knowledge
03/08/2015
$3,000.00
CONFERENCE
Gaps in Drug
Metabolism and
Pharmacokinetic
Prediction,
Improving
Translational
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
Clinical Pearls in
03/09/2015
$2,500.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
Managing Diabetes
CONTINUING EDUCATION
in 2015
(NPACE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
Cardiovascular
03/09/2015
$11,500.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
Medicine 2015:
Updates for the
Practitioner
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Diabetes Sessions
03/10/2015
$25,000.00
CLINICAL
at Endocrine
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
University:
Disease
Management and
Technology Skills
for Endocrinology
Fellows in
Training
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEBRASKA ACADEMY OF
Gout 2015
03/10/2015
$1,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2015 Oncology
03/10/2015
$20,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Case Manager and
Medical Director
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Preclinical Form
03/11/2015
$500.00
CONFERENCES
and Formulation
for Drug
Discovery GRC/GRS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Annual
03/12/2015
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Meeting--2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE HOPE FOUNDATION
2015 SWOG Group
03/12/2015
$5,000.00
Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEAD AND NECK
American Head and
03/12/2015
$10,000.00
SOCIETY
Neck Society 2015
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOSTON CHILDREN'S
Pediatric Asthma
03/16/2015
$3,000.00
HOSPITAL
and Allergy
Updates for
Primary Care
Providers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
Managing Asthma
03/16/2015
$1,500.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
and COPD in 2015
CONTINUING EDUCATION
(NPACE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEALTHCARE ALLIANCE FOR
Essentials in
03/16/2015
$8,400.00
MEDICAL EDUCATION
Primary Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEST VIRGINIA ACADEMY
Opioid Induced
03/17/2015
$3,000.00
OF FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
2015 ECOG-ACRIN
03/18/2015
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
Spring Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 ASCO Annual
03/18/2015
$84,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Breast
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track:
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Scientific and
Educational
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Diabetes is
03/19/2015
$15,000.00
OSTEOPATHIC FAMILY
Primary
PHYSICIANS
Addressing
Primary Care
Clinical Gaps in
Diabetes
Management by
Partnering With
Experts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MERCY HEALTH SYSTEM
Care Transitions
03/19/2015
$5,000.00
SEPA
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE MEDICAL UNIVERSITY
10th Annual
03/19/2015
$5,000.00
OF SOUTH CAROLINA
Symposium
entitled the
Nephrology Update
for Primary Care
and Hospital
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2015 Alzheimer's
03/23/2015
$95,000.00
Association
International
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2015 Annual
03/23/2015
$25,000.00
TRANSLATIONAL ONCOLOGY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SWEDISH MEDICAL CENTER
Thyroid Cancer and
03/24/2015
$3,000.00
FOUNDATION
Parathyroid
Disease--A
Practical
Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF WOMEN'S
AWHONN Annual
03/24/2015
$7,500.00
HEALTH, OBSTETRIC AND
Convention
NEONATAL NURSES
(AWHONN)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2015 Proteins
03/24/2015
$3,000.00
CONFERENCES
Gordon Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE 24th Annual
03/25/2015
$30,000.00
CLINICAL
Scientifc and
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Clinical Congress
(Diabetes
portion)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ASSOCIATION FOR
AFTD's Annual
03/25/2015
$1,000.00
FRONTOTEMPORAL
Education
DEGENERATION (AFTD)
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRINITAS REGIONAL
Lung Cancer
03/25/2015
$1,750.00
MEDICAL CENTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INSTITUTE FOR PATIENT
2015 Premature
03/25/2015
$125,000.00
ACCESS
Infant Health
Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Young Investigator
03/25/2015
$25,000.00
NEUROSCIENCE
Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. DOMINIC--JACKSON
STOP STEMI and
03/25/2015
$25,000.00
MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
STOP STROKE
program by
Pulsara
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
Anti-cancer Drug
03/26/2015
$10,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Action and Drug
Resistance:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
2015 New England
03/26/2015
$3,000.00
Thyroid Club
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE 24th Annual
03/26/2015
$25,000.00
CLINICAL
Scientific and
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Clinical Congress
(Thyroid
sessions)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Cleveland Breast
03/26/2015
$5,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Cancer 2015:
Collaborating For
A Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OKLAHOMA HEART RESEARCH
26th Annual Update
03/26/2015
$2,500.00
AND EDUCATION
in Cardiology
FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
3rd Annual
03/29/2015
$5,000.00
CENTER
Experimental
Therapeutics in
Oncology: The
Road to
Personalized
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASE MANAGEMENT SOCIETY
CMSA 2015
03/29/2015
$15,000.00
OF AMERICA
Conference and
Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SCAI Complex
03/29/2015
$15,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Peripheral
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Vascular
INTERVENTIONS
Interventions
FOUNDATION
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Bringing Science
03/29/2015
$50,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
to Clinical
Practice: Best of
ACC 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
Live Symposium of
03/29/2015
$10,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
Complex Coronary
SINAI
Valvular and
Vascular Cases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASOCIACION
Metabolic Syndrome
03/30/2015
$1,500.00
PUERTORRIQUENA DE
Update:
GRADUADOS DE
Challenges in
UNIVERSIDADES
Preventive
ESPANOLAS-APGUE
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Breast Symposium
03/30/2015
$3,250.00
PITTSBURGH
2015: Updates in
the Management of
Breast Cancer/
Breast Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
6th Annual Johns
03/30/2015
$2,500.00
UNIVERSITY
Hopkins
Cardiovascular
Research Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR VASCULAR
Society for
03/30/2015
$5,000.00
MEDICINE
Vascular Medicine
26th Annual
Scientific
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
Updates in COPD
03/30/2015
$3,200.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
2015
CONTINUING EDUCATION
(NPACE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CHRIST HOSPITAL
The FETCH
03/31/2015
$5,000.00
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CHEST FOUNDATION
The CHEST
03/31/2015
$30,000.00
Foundation Lung
Cancer Clinical
Research Grant
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW YORK MEDICAL
Systemic Treatment
03/31/2015
$2,500.00
COLLEGE
of Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CENTER OF
8th Annual
03/31/2015
$5,000.00
EXCELLENCE IN
Cardiovascular
EDUCATION
Update- A
Practical
Tutorial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH'S HOSPITAL
4th Annual Arizona
04/01/2015
$15,000.00
AND MEDICAL CENTER
Diabetes Series:
Focus on
Treatment
Advances, Patient-
Centered Care,
Obesity and Other
Comorbidities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Annual Meeting of
04/01/2015
$5,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
the Felix
CENTER
Rutledge Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GOUT AND URIC ACID
Gout and Uric Acid
04/01/2015
$70,000.00
EDUCATION SOCIETY
Education Society
Roundtable:
Elevating the
Severity of Gout
and Improving
Access to Public
Education and
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIVA PHYSICIANS
VIVA 15: Vascular
04/01/2015
$20,000.00
InterVentional
Advances
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
University of
04/02/2015
$20,000.00
WASHINGTON
Washington
Allergy and
Immunology
Fellowship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON ACADEMY OF
26th Annual
04/06/2015
$1,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Recertification
Review Course and
Spring Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Advances in Lung
04/07/2015
$5,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Cancer: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
Molecular,
04/08/2015
$10,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Structural and
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Clinical Aspects
of VK and VK-
Dependent
Proteins
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
FASEB conference
04/08/2015
$5,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
on Genetic
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Recombination and
Genome
Rearrangements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS WHITTIER
Emerging
04/09/2015
$30,000.00
DIABETES INSTITUTE
Therapeutic
Trends to
Optimize Diabetes
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2015
04/09/2015
$5,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Interventional
Cardiology Board
Preparatory
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN FEDERATION FOR
2015 Eastern
04/12/2015
$2,500.00
MEDICAL RESEARCH
Regional Meeting
of the American
Federation for
Medical Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PONCE MEDICAL SCHOOL
Overcoming
04/12/2015
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Obstacles to
Reduce Acute
Coronary Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOUTH CAROLINA ASTHMA
Midlands Regional
04/12/2015
$3,000.00
ALLIANCE
Asthma Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PHARMACY QUALITY
Measuring What
04/13/2015
$12,500.00
ALLIANCE (PQA, INC.)
Matters:
Improving Care
and Driving the
Next Generation
of Performance
Measures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
The Comprehensive
04/13/2015
$283,155.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Management of DM--
Focus on SGLT2
Inhibitors and
Combination
Therapy--Emerging
Concepts of Renal
Effects
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY
Wheezin', Sneezin'
04/14/2015
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION OF AMERICA,
and Itchin' in
ALASKA CHAPTER
Alaska
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Individualizing
04/14/2015
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Treatment
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Strategies to
Improve Patient
Outcomes in the
Management of
Type 2 Diabetes
(T2DM)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MIDMICHIGAN MEDICAL
Valley Diabetes
04/15/2015
$2,500.00
CENTER--MIDLAND
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF BOSTON
Opioid Induced
04/15/2015
$117,200.00
UNIVERSITY DBA BOSTON
Constipation: A
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
Neglected
MEDICINE
Complication
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTNERS HEALTHCARE
World Medical
04/15/2015
$50,000.00
SYSTEM
Innovation Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE
CANCER COMPLEXITY:
04/15/2015
$5,000.00
OF TECHNOLOGY
Heterogeneity in
Tumor Progression
and Drug Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASN Kidney Week--
04/16/2015
$55,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
CKD Learning
Pathway Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Leading Care
04/19/2015
$15,000.00
FOR HEALTHCARE QUALITY
Transitions:
Improving Quality
in Safety Across
the Healthcare
Continuum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
12th FASEB Summer
04/19/2015
$7,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Research
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Conference on
``Proteases in
Hemostasis and
Vascular
Biology''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASPMN 25th
04/20/2015
$20,000.00
PAIN MANAGEMENT
National
NURSING
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
5th International
04/20/2015
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Symposium on Lung-
CALIFORNIA
Sparing Therapies
for Malignant
Pleural
Mesothelioma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2015 Medicinal
04/20/2015
$3,000.00
CONFERENCES
Chemistry Gordon
Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2015
04/21/2015
$50,000.00
SOCIETY
International
Conference--Selec
ted Topics in
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OKLAHOMA UNIVERSITY
18th Annual
04/21/2015
$1,500.00
HEALTH SCIENCES CENTER
Primary Care
Update 2015
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OKLAHOMA UNIVERSITY
18th Annual
04/21/2015
$1,500.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
Primary Care
COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
Update 2015-
Ovarian Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
LIPID MAPS
04/21/2015
$7,500.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Meeting:
CALIFORNIA
Lipidomics Impact
on Cancer,
Metabolic and
Inflammatory
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Knights of the
04/21/2015
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION
Roundtable 2015:
Challenging AMI
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOUSTON METHODIST
Cardiovascular
04/21/2015
$15,000.00
HOSPITAL
Fellows' Bootcamp-
Laying the
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Seventh Annual
04/22/2015
$3,250.00
PITTSBURGH
Multidisciplinary
Thyroid Cancer
Symposium:
Integrating the
New ATA
Guidelines into
Clinical Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
36th Annual
04/22/2015
$3,000.00
ENDOCRINE SURGEONS
Meeting of the
American
Association of
Endocrine
Surgeons
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY HEALTH
Closing the Gap on
04/22/2015
$20,000.00
SYSTEM
Medication
Management,
Discharge
Preparedness and
Readmissions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
ASCO Review
04/23/2015
$3,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SWEDISH MEDICAL CENTER
Annual Oncology
04/23/2015
$3,000.00
FOUNDATION
Symposium:
Personalized
Medicine--Genetic
Testing, Targeted
Molecular Therapy
and WHole Patient
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OKLAHOMA UNIVERSITY
18th Annual
04/23/2015
$1,500.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
Primary Care
COLLEGE OF MEDICINE
Update: COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Update on
04/23/2015
$4,000.00
Gynecologic
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Cardiology Update
04/23/2015
$4,000.00
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE,
ST. LOUIS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW YORK ACADEMY OF
Emerging
04/27/2015
$5,000.00
SCIENCES
Approaches to
Cancer
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LYMPHOMA RESEARCH
Lymphoma Research
04/27/2015
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION
Foundation Immune
Checkpoint
Inhibitor
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
Yale Cancer Center
04/28/2015
$5,000.00
Oncology Series--
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MOUNT CARMEL HEALTH
2015 ASCO REVIEW
04/28/2015
$3,000.00
SYSTEM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
Breast Cancer
04/28/2015
$3,000.00
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY
Management 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
4th Annual Chicago
04/28/2015
$6,000.00
Cardiovascular
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DIGNITY HEALTH ST.
17th Annual
04/29/2015
$6,000.00
BERNARDINE MEDICAL
Cardiac
CENTER
Symposium:
Advances in
Cardiovascular
Disease 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2015 Gordon
04/29/2015
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Conference on
Heterocyclic
Compounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
Regulatory and
04/29/2015
$2,500.00
FOR COMPUTATIONAL
Systems Genomics,
BIOLOGY INC.
with DREAM
Challenges
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
Yale ASCO Review
04/30/2015
$3,000.00
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF VERMONT
OBESITY AND
04/30/2015
$5,000.00
AND STATE AGRICULTURAL
METABOLISM: An
COLLEGE
Emerging Frontier
in Lung Health
and Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SWEDISH MEDICAL CENTER
The Transradial
04/30/2015
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
Approach: A Case-
based and Hands-
on Training
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MONTEFIORE MEDICAL
Achieving Balance:
05/03/2015
$161,500.00
CENTER
Practical
Management
Strategies for
Opioid-Induced
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CALIFORNIA SOCIETY OF
CSAAI 23rd Annual
05/05/2015
$3,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA, AND
Educational
IMMUNOLOGY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
Advanced Thyroid
05/06/2015
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Master Class
PENNSYLVANIA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER MOLECULAR
Molecular
05/06/2015
$5,000.00
THERAPEUTICS RESEARCH
Therapeutics of
ASSOCIATION
Cancer
Conference, 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH SHORE LONG ISLAND
Post American
05/07/2015
$3,000.00
JEWISH HEALTH SYSTEM
Society of
INC.
Clinical Oncology
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Update in Allergy,
05/12/2015
$5,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Asthma and
IMMUNOLOGY
Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALBERT EINSTEIN
Complex
05/14/2015
$5,000.00
HEALTHCARE NETWORK
Angioplasty
Symposium
Exchange
Philadelphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
The Oncologist CME
05/17/2015
$10,000.00
TRANSLATIONAL ONCOLOGY
Online Journal
Curriculum:
Breast Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANENBERG CENTER FOR
PosterPerspectives
05/18/2015
$25,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
: Research
EISENHOWER
Developments in
NSCLC / 2015 ASCO
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WESTERN ASSOCIATION
Hitting the
05/18/2015
$12,500.00
GYNECOLOGIOC
targets in
ONCOLOGISTS
Gynecologic
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THYROID
ATA Early Riser
05/19/2015
$129,500.00
ASSOCIATION
Symposium: New
Modalities to
Treat Medullary
Thyroid Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Issues with DAPT:
05/19/2015
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION
A Case-based
Roundtable with
the Experts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LAHEY CLINIC HOSPITAL,
Cardiovascular
05/19/2015
$6,000.00
INC.
Disease State of
the Art 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACC Cardiovascular
05/19/2015
$5,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Board Review for
Certification and
Recertification
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER RESEARCH
Immunotherapy for
05/19/2015
$75,000.00
INSTITUTE
the Oncology
Nurse
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
05/20/2015
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
Conference;
Hormone dependent
cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY
Boston Symposium
05/21/2015
$3,500.00
on Organic and
Bioorganic
Chemistry (BSOBC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Anemia,
05/21/2015
$190,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Erythropoeisis,
and the
Nephrologist
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER RESEARCH
2015 International
05/24/2015
$50,000.00
INSTITUTE
Cancer
Immunotherapy
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ZOE ROSE MEMORIAL
2015 Preemie
05/24/2015
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Parent Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION INC
4th Semi Annual
05/26/2015
$20,000.00
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
(formerly GOG,
NSABP, RTOG)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLINICAL CARE OPTIONS
Immunotherapy for
05/26/2015
$25,000.00
Cancer Track: CCO
Independent
Conference
Highlights of the
2015 ASCO Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACADEMIA MEDICA DEL SUR
Non-Small Cell
05/26/2015
$3,000.00
Lung Cancer:
Current Therapy
and Promising New
Regimens
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN
ANMS 10th
05/26/2015
$6,400.00
NEUROGASTROENTEROLOGY
Postgraduate
AND MOTILITY SOCIETY
Course in
Gastroenterology
and
Neurogastroentero
logy in Clinical
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEO ROUNDTABLE ON
Prostate Cancer
05/27/2015
$30,000.00
CANCER, INC.
DREAM Challenge
Winning Teams
Educational Grant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-CHANGE
Big Data in Cancer
05/27/2015
$25,000.00
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION
Rational
05/27/2015
$10,000.00
Combination
Targeted
Therapies for
Gynecologic
Cancers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF COLUMBIA
Lung Cancer 2015:
05/27/2015
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY IN THE CITY
New Discoveries,
OF NEW YORK
New Directions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOT-FOR-PROFIT HOSPITAL
Lung Cancer
05/27/2015
$1,900.00
CORPORATION
Screening in 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OLIGONUCLEOTIDE
11th Annual
05/31/2015
$7,500.00
THERAPEUTICS SOCIETY
Meeting of the
Oligonucleotide
Therapeutics
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Best of ASCO
05/31/2015
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meetings
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Outcomes
06/02/2015
$101,800.00
DIABETES EDUCATORS
for Women With
Type 2 Diabetes
Individualizing
Evidence-Based
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Chronic Kidney
06/02/2015
$75,000.00
FOUNDATION
Disease and the
Primary Care
Practitioner:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
17th Annual
06/02/2015
$15,000.00
BALTIMORE FOUNDATION,
International
INC.
Meeting of the
Institute of
Human Virology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
2015 Updates in
06/03/2015
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Oncology: With
PENNSYLVANIA
Proceedings from
International
Medical Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MELANOMA RESEARCH
Melanoma Research
06/03/2015
$112,280.00
FOUNDATION
Foundation CURE
OM Junior
Fellowship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN OSTEOPATHIC
Optimizing Anti-
06/04/2015
$357,790.00
ASSOCIATION
platelet Therapy
and Secondary
Prevention
Strategies in
Acute Coronary
Syndromes The
Role of the
Primary Care
Practice
(150203494)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
Workshop on
06/09/2015
$30,000.00
FOR STEM CELL RESERACH
Clinical
Translation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NURSE PRACTITIONER
The Latest in
06/10/2015
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATES FOR
Asthma and COPD
CONTINUING EDUCATION
(NPACE)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
IMPACT Care
06/10/2015
$74,987.00
ASSOCIATION FOUNDATION
Transformation
Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
Advances in Breast
06/11/2015
$10,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Cancer Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
Advances in
06/11/2015
$10,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Ovarian Cancer
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Symposium--Asthma,
06/11/2015
$50,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
COPD and Asthma-
IMMUNOLOGY
COPD Overlap
Syndrome (ACOS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CASE MANAGEMENT SOCIETY
Improving
06/11/2015
$6,265.00
OF AMERICA
Medication
Adherence in the
COPD Patient
through Greater
Patient
Engagement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
California Chapter
06/16/2015
$20,000.00
CLINICAL
of the American
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Association of
Clinical
Endocrinologists
Presents: Hot
Topics in
Diabetes and
Endocrinology for
Primary Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ACADEMY OF
Update on COPD and
06/16/2015
$4,300.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Asthma Management
INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
2015 AAFP FMX
06/16/2015
$13,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Assembly 60
Minute Lecture
titled Acute
Coronary Syndrome
and Angina
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACEP Pediatric
06/17/2015
$2,500.00
EMERGENCY PHYSICAINS
Emergency
Medicine Special
Interest Section
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR
FGO Genetics
06/18/2015
$35,000.00
GYNECOLOGIC ONCOLOGY
Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FRIENDS OF CANCER
2015 Friends of
06/22/2015
$100,000.00
RESEARCH
Cancer Research
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DIVISION OF MEDICINAL
Division of
06/23/2015
$2,500.00
CHEMISTRY
Medicinal
Chemistry Program
American Chemical
Society 250th
National Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RECTOR AND VISITORS OF
Vasculata 2015
06/24/2015
$10,000.00
THE UNIVERSITY OF
VIRGINIA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Preventing
06/24/2015
$48,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Exacerbations of
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF ASTHMA
The Asthma Team:
06/24/2015
$5,000.00
EDUCATORS
Making Wishes
Come True
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE MASSACHUSETTS
30th Annual
06/24/2015
$5,000.00
GENERAL HOSPITAL
Critical Issues
In Tumor
Microenvironment:
Angiogenesis,
Metastasis and
Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL MEDICAL
The National
06/24/2015
$3,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Medical
Association
Asthma Update:
Evidence-Based
Diagnosis and
management of
Asthma--Practical
Tools to Improve
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Reducing
06/25/2015
$12,500.00
MANAGED CARE
Exacerbations in
PHYSICIANS
the Treatment and
Management of
Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
(COPD)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
Pharmacology
06/30/2015
$15,000.00
SOCIETY
Updates in
Oncology Practice
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UC BERKELEY FOUNDATION
IGI CRISPR
06/30/2015
$10,000.00
Workshop: Routes
to Designer
Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
13th Annual World
07/01/2015
$100,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Congress on
Insulin
Resistance
Diabetes and
Cardiovascular
Disease--WCIRDC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTNERS HEALTHCARE
2015 Personalized
07/02/2015
$25,000.00
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Patient
07/02/2015
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Outcomes with
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Novel Treatments
in the Management
of
Hypertriglyceride
mia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW YORK CITY SOCIETY
Practical
07/07/2015
$9,500.00
OF HEALTH- SYSTEM
considerations
PHARMACISTS
for using novel
oral antiplatelet
agents in
patients with
acute coronary
syndromes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
EGFR Diagnostic
07/09/2015
$201,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Expert Consensus
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UB FOUNDATION
Recent Advances in
07/09/2015
$2,500.00
ACTIVITIES, INC.
the
pathophysiology
and management of
type 2 diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
APhA's Pharmacist
07/14/2015
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION
and Patient
Centered Diabetes
Care Certificate
Training Program
National
Offerings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-NCI-EORTC
07/14/2015
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Molecular Targets
and Cancer
Therapeutics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
Mid-Atlantic
07/14/2015
$49,381.58
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
Nephrology Young
MEDICINE
Investigators'
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOUTH DAKOTA ACADEMY OF
COPD: diagnosis
07/14/2015
$3,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
and optimum
treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOUTHERN SOCIETY FOR
15th Annual SSCI
07/15/2015
$43,940.49
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION
Nephrology Young
Investigators'
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
2015 London
07/16/2015
$5,000.00
Cardiovascular
Device Innovation
Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Updates in
07/19/2015
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Rheumatology 2015
CALIFORNIA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
13th Annual
07/21/2015
$34,698.53
UNIVERSITY OF
Nephrology Young
CALIFORNIA
Investigator's
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2015 SITC
07/22/2015
$50,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
International
CANCER
Symposium on
Cancer
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC 2015 Global
07/22/2015
$25,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Regulatory Summit
CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN/SCCA 2015
07/26/2015
$10,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Thoracic Oncology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Named Postdoctoral
07/26/2015
$120,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Cancer
CANCER
Immunotherapy in
NSCLC Clinical
Fellowship Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Gout: Bridging
07/26/2015
$163,946.00
FOR CONTINUING
Knowledge Gaps in
EDUCATION
Diagnosis and
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2015 NCCN Immuno-
07/26/2015
$35,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Oncology Webinar
Series for
Pharmacists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
EPC--Updates in
07/28/2015
$10,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Pulmonary
IMMUNOLOGY
Disease: Current,
Relevant and
Interactive
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
11th Annual
07/29/2015
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION
National Young
Investigator's
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
Immuno-Oncology: A
07/29/2015
$30,000.00
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
Revolution in
MEDICINE
Cancer Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GEORGIA CHAPTER OF THE
2015 Scientific
07/30/2015
$5,000.00
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Meeting
CARDIOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Outcomes
08/02/2015
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
with
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Individualized
Treatment
Strategies in the
Management of
Advanced Non
Small-Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HACKENSACK UNIVERSITY
Fifth Annual Heart
08/03/2015
$5,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
and Vascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
Early Intervention
08/06/2015
$149,515.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
in The Continuum
of Hyperglycemia--
The Role of
Initial
Combination
Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Primer on Tumor
08/10/2015
$15,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Immunology and
CANCER
Cancer
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN/SCCA 2015
08/11/2015
-$2,005.40
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Thoracic Oncology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Breast Cancer
08/11/2015
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Symposium:
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Enhancing
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Clinical Care
through
Collaboration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
Management of
08/11/2015
$242,009.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Gout:
Individualizing
the Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BREATHE CALIFORNIA OF
Advancing the
08/16/2015
$3,000.00
LOS ANGELES COUNTY
diagnosis and
management of
COPD with a focus
on COPD
exacerbations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL ACADEMY FOR
8th Annual
08/17/2015
$35,000.00
MEDICAL EDUCATION
Perspectives in
Rheumatic
Diseases
presented by
Rheumatology
News, Internal
Medicine News,
Family Practice
News
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
17th Annual Lynn
08/17/2015
$10,000.00
Sage Breast
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Cardiovascular
08/17/2015
$10,000.00
EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS
Disease Track at
ACEP 2015
Scientific
Assembly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
NANN 31st Annual
08/19/2015
$10,000.00
NEONATAL NURSES
Educational
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
2nd Annual
08/19/2015
$25,000.00
CINCINNATI
Cincinnati
Collaborative
Cardiovascular
Symposium (C4)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE/ACE
08/20/2015
$99,804.71
CLINICAL
Scientific and
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Clinical Review
of DKA and the
Effects of SGLT2
Inhibitors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
TAS: Allergy,
08/23/2015
$1,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Asthma and
IMMUNOLOGY
Immunology
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NAMI MARYLAND
NAMI Maryland 2015
08/25/2015
$5,000.00
Annual Education
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONNECTICUT PHARMACISTS
Insights, Pearls,
08/25/2015
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATION
and Perspectives--
An Update in the
Management of
Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Plenary Session--
08/25/2015
$50,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Updates in Severe
IMMUNOLOGY
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
08/26/2015
$10,000.00
Working Group
Global Chapter
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENN STATE UNIVERSITY
Skin, Bones,
08/26/2015
$5,000.00
Hearts and
Private Parts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAS HEALTH
Roundtable
08/27/2015
$37,462.15
FOUNDATION
Discussion on
Decreasing the
Burden of
Influenza in
Latin America
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DANA-FARBER CANCER
11th Annual
08/27/2015
$2,500.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Postdoctoral and
Graduate Student
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
IOWA PHYSICIAN
COPD Board Review
08/27/2015
$2,000.00
ASSISTANT SOCIETY
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR COLLEGE OF
Breast Cancer
08/30/2015
$3,000.00
MEDICINE
Research and
Education Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR COLLEGE OF
Metastatic Breast
08/30/2015
$3,500.00
MEDICINE
Cancer Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
Top Ten Advances
08/30/2015
$10,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
in Clinical
SINAI
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF
In the Era of
09/01/2015
$125,000.00
COMMUNITY CANCER
Value: The
CENTERS
Importance of
Patient
Navigation,
Psychosocial
Distress
Screening, and
Survivorship Care
Planning Programs
in the Community
C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA STATE
Constipation:
09/02/2015
$142,387.00
UNIVERSITY
Improving
Outcomes With
Individualized,
Evidence-based
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SIDNEY KIMMEL MEDICAL
2nd Annual Current
09/03/2015
$5,000.00
COLLEGE AT THOMAS
Issues in
JEFFERSON UNIVERSITY
Coronary and
Structural Heart
Disease: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
48th Annual New
09/08/2015
$15,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
York
Cardiovascular
Symposium: Major
Topics in
Cardiology Today
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASTRO's 57th
09/09/2015
$10,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
38th Annual
09/14/2015
$5,000.00
Pulmonary and
Allergy Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH'S REGIONAL
Acute Myocardial
09/14/2015
$1,700.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Infarction:
Guidelines,
Controversies and
Updates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF BOSTON
Head and Neck
09/15/2015
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Cancer Symposium:
From Pathways to
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Cancer Genetics:
09/15/2015
$3,000.00
SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL
Going Beyond the
CENTER
Guidelines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
38TH Annual San
09/15/2015
$25,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
Antonio Breast
AT SAN ANTONIO
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR UNIVERSITY
The 42nd Annual
09/15/2015
$8,500.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Williamsburg
Conference on
Heart Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Comprehensive
09/15/2015
$3,500.00
WASHINGTON
Hematology and
Oncology Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR
NCQA Quality Talks
09/15/2015
$25,000.00
QUALITY ASSURANCE
and 25th
Anniversary
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
Acute Myocardial
09/15/2015
$1,400.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
Infarction:
SINAI
Guidelines,
Controversies and
Updates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2015 Breast Cancer
09/16/2015
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Symposium
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Proceedings
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT HEALTH SCIENCE
38th Annual San
09/16/2015
$35,000.00
CENTER SAN ANTONIO
Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium--
Basic Science
Forum/Poster
Discussion
Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AULTMAN HOSPITAL
Aultman Hospital's
09/17/2015
$2,500.00
15th Annual
Cancer Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Recognizing
09/20/2015
$209,619.96
EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS
Diabetic
Emergencies: Will
You Be Ready?
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
Best of the World
09/21/2015
$10,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
CancerLinQ: Real-
09/21/2015
$400,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
time Learning
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Intelligence
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Network for
Quality
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNG CANCER INITIATIVE
Advanced
09/22/2015
$3,000.00
OF NC
Laboratory
Testing Across
Cancer Types:
Everything you
need to know
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CAROLINAS HEALTHCARE
27th Annual Fall
09/22/2015
$3,000.00
SYSTEM
Foliage Cancer
Conference
``Update on Lung
Cancer''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
TRANSFORMING
09/23/2015
$2,000.00
MEDICINE:
Evidence-Driven
mHealth
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WESTERN SOCIETY OF
WSAAI 54th Annual
09/23/2015
$10,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Scientific
IMMUNOLOGY
Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2016 Conquer
09/23/2015
$120,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Young
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Investigator
Award (YIA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN
2015 AACI/CCAF
09/28/2015
$10,000.00
CANCER INSTITUTES
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2016 Conquer
09/29/2015
$40,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Merit
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
2016 NAHN
09/29/2015
$10,000.00
HISPANIC NURSES
Leadership
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
2015 AAFP FMX
09/30/2015
$5,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Assembly 60
Minute Lecture
titled Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
(COPD) and
Pulmonary
Function Testing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
2nd Annual Case-
09/30/2015
$5,000.00
Based Coronary
and Structural
Heart
Intervention
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
44th Annual
10/04/2015
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Philadelphia
PENNSYLVANIA
Workshop on
Hemostasis,
Thrombosis and
Artherosclerosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
ECOG-ACRIN Fall
10/05/2015
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
2015 Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PHARMACY QUALITY
Getting to the
10/05/2015
$3,500.00
ALLIANCE (PQA, INC)
Core: Building
and Implementing
Core Measures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR UNIVERSITY
Immune Checkpoint
10/07/2015
$5,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Inhibitors in the
Treatment of
Selected Tumor
Types: A New
Prospective
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS SINAI MEDICAL
4th Annual New
10/07/2015
$5,000.00
CENTER
Therapeutics in
Oncology: The
Road to
Personalized
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENN STATE UNIVERSITY
Skin, Bones,
10/07/2015
$5,000.00
Hearts and
Private Parts
(two conferences)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDIANA UNIVERSITY
Performance
10/07/2015
$5,000.00
Improvement with
Point of Care
Clinical Decision
Making App in non-
ST segment
elevation
myocardial
infarction
(NSTEMI) patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
Update In
10/08/2015
$15,000.00
HOSPITAL CENTER
Rheumatology
2015: New
Diagnostic Tests
and Treatments
for Clinical
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW YORK STATE
New York State
10/08/2015
$2,500.00
OSTEOPATHIC MEDICAL
Osteopathic
SOCIETY
Medical Students
Health Policy
Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
2015 Oncologic
10/11/2015
$5,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
Emergency
CENTER
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PANCREATIC
46th Annual
10/11/2015
$10,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Meeting of the
American
Pancreatic
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY
2nd Annual Update
10/15/2015
$3,000.00
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
in Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY
State of the Art
10/15/2015
$3,000.00
Management of
Lung Cancer
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL UNIVERSITY OF
2nd Annual
10/18/2015
$10,000.00
SOUTH CAROLINA
Comprehensive
Stroke and
Cerebrovascular
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2015
10/19/2015
$25,000.00
RHEUMATOLOGY
Musculoskeletal
Ultrasound Course
for
Rheumatologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LOUISIANA STATE
LSUHSC
10/20/2015
$3,500.00
UNIVERSITY HEALTH
Cardiovascular
SCIENCES CENTER IN NEW
Centers Joint
ORLEANS
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Achieving
10/20/2015
$389,000.00
DIABETES EDUCATORS
Partnerships and
Improving
Outcomes in Your
Diabetes Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
The Truth of the
10/21/2015
$284,438.73
Matter: An
Evidence-Based
Review of the
Newer
Antihyperglycemic
Agents for T2DM:
a hot seat
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2016 Basal Ganglia
10/21/2015
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Gordon Research
Conference:
Emerging Views of
Cellular and
Circuit Diversity
Within the Basal
Ganglia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
Lung Cancer 2015:
10/22/2015
$3,000.00
HOSPITAL CENTER
A Shifting
Management
Paradigm with
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL QUALITY FORUM
NQF Measure
10/22/2015
$100,000.00
Incubator
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2016 Gordon
10/26/2015
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Research
Conference on
Heterocyclic
Compounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Scientific
10/26/2015
$30,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Sessions 2015
Dedicated Track
on Acute Coronary
Syndrome: Current
and Emerging
Interventions and
Future Directions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INOVA HEALTH CARE
Inova Heart and
11/03/2015
$15,000.00
SERVICES
Vascular
Institute 2016
Interventional
Cardiology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
17th Annual
11/04/2015
$20,000.00
CLINICAL
Intensive Course
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
on Diabetes,
Endocrinology,
and Metabolic
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLDWIDE INITIATIVE
Novel Therapies in
11/05/2015
$77,050.00
FOR DIABETES EDUCATION
Type 2 Diabetes
Mellitus
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE/ACE
11/05/2015
$79,500.00
CLINICAL
Comprehensive
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Diabetes
Algorithm 2015
Mobile App
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
GRC Mutagenesis
11/05/2015
$3,500.00
CONFERENCE
meeting 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
InPractice
11/09/2015
$49,000.00
SOCIETY
Oncology Nursing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTNERS HEALTHCARE
World Medical
11/22/2015
$50,000.00
SYSTEM INC.
Innovation Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-IASLC Joint
11/22/2015
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Conference on the
Molecular Origins
of Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
Cardiovascular
11/22/2015
$10,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Risk Reduction:
ASSOCIATION
Leading the Way
in Prevention
(22nd Annual
Symposium)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
National Lipid
11/22/2015
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Association 2016
Lipid Academy
Course Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
National Lipid
11/22/2015
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Association 2016
Masters in
Lipidology Course
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE DEUEL CONFERENCE ON
The 2016 Deuel
11/24/2015
$20,000.00
LIPIDS
Conference on
Lipids
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
APhA2016
11/25/2015
$11,500.00
ASSOCIATION
Respiratory
Update:
Guidelines, Novel
Inhalers and More
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
2016 World
12/01/2015
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Congress on
CALIFORNIA
Continuing
Professional
Development:
Advancing
Learning and Care
in the Health
Professions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NASPGHAN FOUNDATION
Appropriate Use of
12/01/2015
$185,000.00
Proton Pump
Inhibitors in the
Treatment of
Pediatric
Patients with
GERD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF BOSTON
A COPD Quality
12/01/2015
$139,644.64
UNIVERSITY
Improvement
Consortium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR
Evolution and
12/03/2015
$200,000.00
GYNECOLOGIC ONCOLOGY
Revolution of
PARP Targeting in
Gynecologic
Malignancies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN FEDERATION FOR
2016 Western
12/03/2015
$5,000.00
MEDICAL RESEARCH
Regional Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
University of
12/06/2015
$19,942.22
WASHINGTON
Washington
Allergy and
Immunology
Fellowship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2016 Congress
12/09/2015
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Series: Breast
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
2016
12/10/2015
$10,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Multidisciplinary
Head and Neck
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 21st Annual
12/10/2015
$75,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Conference
General Session:
Advancing the
Standard of
Cancer CareTM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Annual
12/10/2015
$125,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Meeting--2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN FEDERATION FOR
2016 Southern
12/10/2015
$5,000.00
MEDICAL RESEARCH
Regional Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2016 Nursing
12/13/2015
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Program:
Advancing
Oncology Nursing
at the NCCN 21st
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
16th Targeted
12/13/2015
$82,500.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Therapy meeting
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
on Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN
Opioid-Induced
12/13/2015
$192,601.00
GASTROENTEROLOGICAL
Constipation:
ASSOCIATION
Recognition and
Optimal
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KANAWHA COUNTY
Mobile Integrated
12/14/2015
$50,000.00
EMERGENCY AMBULANCE
Health Program:
AUTHORITY
Emphasis on
Community
Paramedicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
PDL1 Atlas
12/14/2015
$120,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2016 Conquer
12/15/2015
$500,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of the American
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Society of
Clinical Oncology
Mission Endowment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CATAMOUNT MEDICAL
PatientGPS :
12/16/2015
$74,841.86
EDUCATION, LLC
Clinical Paths in
the Management of
Patients with
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
APhA 2016 Hot
12/16/2015
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Topics in
Dyslipidemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE SCRIPPS RESEARCH
27th Annual
12/16/2015
$1,500.00
INSTITUTE
Frontiers in
Chemistry
Symposium at The
Scripps Research
Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Behind the
12/17/2015
$10,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Guidelines:
Insights into the
Standard of Care
in Oncology 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2016 Oncology
12/17/2015
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Fellows Program:
New Horizons in
Quality Cancer
Care at the NCCN
21st Annual
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL LIPID
National Lipid
12/17/2015
$30,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Association 2016
Scientific
Meeting Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PEDIATRIC INFECTIOUS
Pediatric
12/20/2015
$55,000.00
DISEASES SOCIETY
Infectious
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Diseases Society
FOUNDATION (PIDSERF)
Fellowship Awards
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE VANDERBILT
Cardiology 2016:
12/20/2015
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Advances in
Science and
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR
Quality
12/22/2015
$20,000.00
CONTINUING EDUCATION
Improvement
IN THE HEALTH
Education (QIE)
PROFESSIONS
Initiative
National Training
and Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MARYLAND SOCIETY FOR
Update on Gout and
01/04/2016
$1,625.00
THE RHEUMATIC DISEASES
Pseudogout
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION
5th Semi Annual
01/05/2016
$20,000.00
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
(formerly GOG,
NSABP,RTOG)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
The James R.
01/05/2016
$5,000.00
CENTER
Klinenberg, MD
Symposium on
Rheumatic
Diseases: Hot
Topics in
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNGEVITY FOUNDATION
LUNGevity
01/06/2016
$25,000.00
Foundation
Scientific and
Clinical Research
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Chronic Total
01/07/2016
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Occlusion Summit
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUMEN FOUNDATION
Lumen Global 2016
01/10/2016
$35,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
St. Francis
01/10/2016
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
Imaging Course
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Epidemiology and
01/12/2016
$10,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Prevention--Lifes
tyle and
Cardiometabolic
Health 2016
Scientific
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Beyond
01/14/2016
$22,696.65
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Revascularization
for CLI-The Role
of
Pharmacotherapy
Satellite
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR
CVIs 4th Annual
01/14/2016
$2,500.00
INSTITUTE OF
Interventional
PHILADELPHIA
Cardiovascular
Medicine: The
Crossroads of
Interventional
and Clinical
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE
Testing to Target
01/19/2016
$288,885.00
COLLEGE OF PHARMACY
in Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer:
Managed Care
Perspectives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR VASCULAR
Society for
01/20/2016
$20,000.00
MEDICINE
Vascular Medicine
27th Annual
Scientific
Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHIOHEALTH
1st Bi-Annual
01/20/2016
$2,500.00
OhioHealth Acute
Cardiovascular
Care Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Immunotherapy of
01/24/2016
$40,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Cancer for the
CANCER
Workshop on
Biomarkers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHEAST GEORGIA
8th Annual
01/25/2016
$2,500.00
MEDICAL CENTER INC.
Northeast Georgia
Regional STEMI
Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CALIFORNIA THORACIC
COPD: A TEAM
01/26/2016
$5,000.00
SOCIETY
APPROACH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Issues with DAPT:
01/28/2016
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION
A case-based
guide to optimal
antiplatelet
therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GASTROINTESTINAL AND
The 2016 US GI and
01/28/2016
$16,000.00
LIVER ASSOCIATION OF
Liver Association
THE AMERICAS INC.
of the Americas
(GALA) Conference
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2016 Lipoprotein
01/28/2016
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
Metabolism Gordon
Research
Conference and
Gordon Research
Seminar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAPM 32nd Annual
01/31/2016
$25,000.00
PAIN MEDICINE
Meeting 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
DCRI Evidence to
02/01/2016
$10,000.00
Practice Series:
Interventional
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACCs 65th Annual
02/01/2016
$50,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Scientific
Session (ACC.16)
Acute Coronary
Syndromes
Clinical Learning
Pathway
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
LIPID MAPS
02/01/2016
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Meeting:
CALIFORNIA
Lipidomics Impact
on Metabolic,
Cancer,
Cardiovascular
and Inflammatory
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCOTTSDALE HEALTHCARE
2016 Scottsdale
02/02/2016
$2,500.00
FOUNDATION
Interventional
Forum (SIF 2016)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
02/02/2016
$15,000.00
Working Group
U.S. Chapter
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY
EPIC SEC Emory
02/03/2016
$20,000.00
Practical
Intervention
Course--Southeast
Consortium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
DMS 2016:
02/07/2016
$235,318.22
Initiating the
Conversation:
Sharing
Perspectives on
Advances in T2DM
Treatment to
Improve Patient-
Centered Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2016 ASCO Annual
02/07/2016
$56,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Lung
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SCAI 2016
02/14/2016
$25,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Scientific
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Sessions
INTERVENTIONS
FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF HOSPITAL
Hospital Medicine
02/14/2016
$15,000.00
MEDICINE
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEAD AND NECK
American Head and
02/17/2016
$50,000.00
SOCIETY
Neck Society 9th
International
Conference on
Head and Neck
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL EDUCATION GROUP
Clinical Issues in
02/18/2016
$411,613.00
Type 2 Diabetes:
Consensus and
Controversies
Around
Intensifying
Noninsulin
Therapy.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYU POST-GRADUATE
Seminar in
03/01/2016
$5,000.00
MEDICAL SCHOOL
Advanced
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW MEXICO THORACIC
44th Annual New
03/01/2016
$5,000.00
SOCIETY
Mexico Lung
Disease
Symposium--50
Shades of Blue
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
14th International
03/01/2016
$10,000.00
HOSPITAL CENTER
Congress on
Targeted
Anticancer
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
FASEB Conference
03/01/2016
$6,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
on Genome
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Engineering
Cutting-Edge
Research and
Application
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DIVISION OF MEDICINAL
Division of
03/01/2016
$2,500.00
CHEMISTRY
Medicinal
Chemistry Program
251st ACS
National Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Personalizing
03/01/2016
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Therapy for
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Improved Patient
Outcomes in the
Management of
Advanced Non
Small-Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2016
03/01/2016
$20,000.00
SOCIETY
International
Conference--Selec
ted Topics in
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ASSOCIATION FOR
Building an
03/01/2016
$2,500.00
FRONOTOTEMPORAL
Infrastructure to
DEGENERATION
Support FTLD
Therapeutic
Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON ACADEMY OF
27th Annual
03/01/2016
$1,750.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Recertification
Review Course and
Spring Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
41st Annual
03/01/2016
$35,000.00
SOCIETY
Oncology Nursing
Society Congress
and Pharmacology
Highlights
regional program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Chemical
03/01/2016
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Approaches for
Unraveling
Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Medicinal
03/01/2016
$3,000.00
CONFERENCE
Chemistry Gordon
Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
2016 Charitable
03/01/2016
$30,000.00
FREE AND CHARITABLE
Health Care
CLINICS
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE HOPE FOUNDATION
2016 SWOG Group
03/01/2016
$10,000.00
Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
2016 Hematology/
03/01/2016
$25,000.00
PHARMACY ASSOCIATION
Oncology PHarmacy
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
New Developments
03/03/2016
$65,763.00
INSTITUTE INC.
in the Treatment
of COPD: Updates
From San
Francisco
(150203884)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN
11th Postgraduate
03/03/2016
$10,000.00
NEUROGASTROENTEROLOGY
Course on GI
AND MOTILITY SOCIETY
Motility and
Neurogastroentero
logy in Clinical
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAPA Conference
03/03/2016
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
2016--Allergy/
Immunology and
Pulmonology Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
03/07/2016
$3,000.00
CONFERENCE
Conference on
Cyclic Nucleotide
Phosphodiesterase
s: Mechanisms of
PDE Nano-Domain
Control and
Impacts on
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2016
03/07/2016
$70,000.00
SOCIETY
International
Conference--Selec
ted Topics in
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL
CoNNCT Workshop
03/07/2016
$2,000.00
HOSPTIAL
(Collaborative
Novel-Novel
Cancer Therapies)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLLEGIUM
31st Symposium of
03/08/2016
$10,000.00
INTERNATIONALE
the Collegium
ALLERGOLOGICUM
Internationale
Allergologicum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Outcomes
03/08/2016
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
in the Management
PHYSICIANS
and Treatment of
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Identifying New
03/08/2016
$25,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Strategies to
PHYSICIANS
Optimize the
Management and
Treatment of COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHEASTERN SECTION OF
NESACS Advances in
03/08/2016
$1,500.00
THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL
Chemical Sciences
SOCIETY, INC.
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2016
03/08/2016
$30,000.00
SOCIETY INC.
International
Conference--Selec
ted Topics in
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
4th Annual Yale
03/08/2016
$15,000.00
COPD Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ALLERGY, ASTHMA
Florida Allergy,
03/14/2016
$15,000.00
AND IMMUNOLOGY SOCIETY
Asthma and
Immunology
Society 2016
Annual CME
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Keep your patients
03/14/2016
$25,000.00
CONNECTICUT
``moving''--An
Overview of
Treatment Options
for Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UHS PROFESSIONAL
32nd Annual
03/14/2016
$10,000.00
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS,
Congress of
INC.
Clinical
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
CKD-Related Anemia
03/17/2016
$100,050.00
FOUNDATION
and
Cardiovascular
Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UHS-PROFESSIONAL
1st Annual
03/23/2016
$5,000.00
EDUCATION PROGRAMS
Advances in Pain
INC.
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
03/23/2016
$1,000.00
CONFERENCE
Conference on
Cyclic Nucleotide
Phosphodiesterase
s: Mechanisms of
PDE Nano-Domain
Control and
Impacts on
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OUHSC COLLEGE OF
19th Annual
03/24/2016
$1,500.00
MEDICINE OFFICE OF CPD
Primary Care
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TENNESSEE ACADEMY OF
Spring Fling 2016--
03/27/2016
$3,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Asthma and COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2016
03/28/2016
$10,000.00
SOCIETY INC.
International
Conference--Fello
w Track Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLORADO ALLERGY AND
Biologics in the
03/29/2016
$3,000.00
ASTHMA SOCIETY
Treatment of
Respiratory
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOARD OF REGENTS FOR
Updates in
03/29/2016
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
Rheumatology:
Gout and
Hyperuricemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER RESEARCH
2016 International
04/06/2016
$50,000.00
INSTITUTE
Cancer
Immunotherapy
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PAIN SOCIETY
2016 Pain Care for
04/07/2016
$10,000.00
Primary Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2016 Alzheimer's
04/10/2016
$50,000.00
Association
Research
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER MOLECULAR
Molecular
04/10/2016
$1,500.00
THERAPEUTICS RESEARCH
Therapeutics of
ASSOCIATION
Cancer Conference
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AAPS Sustaining
04/10/2016
$50,000.00
PHARMACEUTICAL
Sponsorship
SCIENTISTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DINORA INC.
Lupus 2016
04/10/2016
$25,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
American
04/10/2016
$3,000.00
OF PHARMACOMETRICS
Conference on
Pharmacometrics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOWARD
11th Kenneth
04/11/2016
$3,375.00
UNIVERSITYHOSPITAL
Austin Annual
Rheumatology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
2016 ECOG-ACRIN
04/11/2016
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Spring Group
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Arteriosclerosis,
04/11/2016
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Thrombosis and
Vascular Biology
Peripheral
Vascular Disease
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
AUA2016 Highlights
04/11/2016
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION EDUCATION
in Bladder Cancer
and RESEARCH INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
National Kidney
04/11/2016
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
Foundation s
Ninth Annual Mid-
Atlantic First
Year Renal
Fellows Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THOMAS JEFFERSON
5th Annual
04/11/2016
$3,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Palliative Care
Spring Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBUS NCORP
2016 ASCO REVIEW
04/12/2016
$2,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2016 Alzheimer's
04/12/2016
$45,000.00
Association
International
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2016-2017 Monthly
04/12/2016
$49,008.06
CANCER NETWORK
Oncology Tumor
Boards: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
Advances in Lung
04/13/2016
$3,000.00
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH
TRIO-US and UCLA
04/14/2016
$3,000.00
IN ONCOLOGY-US, INC.
Annual Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
Yale ASCO Review
04/17/2016
$2,000.00
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC 31st Annual
04/17/2016
$300,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Meeting
CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2016 Primer on
04/17/2016
$50,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Tumor Immunology
CANCER
and Cancer
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC Fellowship/
04/18/2016
$43,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Young
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Investigator
Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASTRO 2016 58th
04/18/2016
$10,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
18th Annual Lynn
04/18/2016
$10,000.00
Sage Breast
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
GAIN (EnGAiging an
04/19/2016
$500,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Inter-
Disciplinary Team
for NSCLC
Diagnosis,
Personalized
Assessment, and
Treatment)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
11th Biennial
04/21/2016
$10,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Ovarian Cancer
Research
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
14th Annual World
04/21/2016
$75,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Congress on
Insulin
Resistance
Diabetes and
Cardiovascular
Disease--WCIRDC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-CHANGE
Catalyzing Change
04/24/2016
$50,000.00
in Big Data and
Value in Cancer
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2016 ASCO Pre-
04/24/2016
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Annual Meeting
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Seminar: How to
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Integrate Tumor
Immunotherapy
into Your
Clinical Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Southern Salt,
04/24/2016
$3,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Water, and Kidney
Club 57th Annual
Scientific
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2016 Best of ASCO
04/24/2016
$30,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meetings
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASPMN 26th
04/24/2016
$15,000.00
PAIN MANAGEMENT
National
NURSING
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
American Society
04/24/2016
$2,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
of Clinical
AT SAN ANTONIO SOM
Oncology (ASCO)
2016 Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
ASCO Review
04/25/2016
$2,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
15th Annual
04/27/2016
$10,000.00
Southeastern
Fellows Research
Skills and
Training Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
2nd Annual Acing
05/02/2016
$5,000.00
CENTER
the GI Board
Exam: The
Ultimate High-
Speed Review
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY
Harnessing the
05/03/2016
$220,000.00
RESEARCH INSTITUTE,
Body's Immune
INC.
System to Treat
Cancer: the
Promise of
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Scientific
05/03/2016
$35,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Sessions 2016
Dedicated Track
on Acute Coronary
Syndromes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
ISN Global Kidney
05/04/2016
$30,000.00
OF NEPHROLOGY
Health Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY
Boston Symposium
05/04/2016
$2,500.00
on Organic and
Bioorganic
Chemistry (BSOBC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
11th Biennial
05/04/2016
$15,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Ovarian Cancer
Research
Symposium,
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD ALLERGY
WAO International
05/09/2016
$30,000.00
ORGANIZATION
Scientific
Conference 2016:
Travel Grants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION
6th Semi Annual
05/10/2016
$5,000.00
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
(formerly GOG,
NSABP,RTOG)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Cardiovascular
05/10/2016
$5,000.00
PHYSICIANS OF INDIAN
Seminar
ORIGIN (AAPI)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Cardiovascular
05/12/2016
$20,000.00
EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS
Disease Track at
ACEP 2016
Scientific
Assembly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Expanding the
05/15/2016
$190,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Therapeutic
Armamentarium for
Treatment of
Anemia of Kidney
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BLADDER CANCER ADVOCACY
2016 Bladder
05/15/2016
$25,000.00
NETWORK
Cancer Think Tank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
2016 PCNA Fall
05/16/2016
$5,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Learning Series:
ASSOCIATION
Diabetes and CVD:
Managing Patients
with High-Risk
and Co-Morbid
Conditions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN
2016 AACI/CCAF
05/18/2016
$10,000.00
CANCER INSTITUTES
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSIDAD CENTRAL DEL
Role of the
05/19/2016
$2,000.00
CARIBE, INC.
Multidisciplinary
Care Team in
Personalizing
Treatment for Non-
Small Cell Lung
Cancer:
Addressing Tissue
Acquisition,
Diagnosis, and
Perso
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE LEUKEMIA AND
2016 Waldenstrom's
05/24/2016
$3,000.00
LYMPHOMA SOCIETY, INC.
Roadmap Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASH Scholar Award
05/25/2016
$50,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Conference on
05/25/2016
$35,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Tumor Immunology
and Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
13th Annual
05/26/2016
$2,000.00
Oncology Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DANA FARBER CANCER
International
06/02/2016
$10,000.00
INSTITUTE
Workshop on
Waldenstroms
macroglobulinemia
and symposia on
Multiple myeloma
(IWWM9)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FRIENDS OF CANCER
2016 Friends of
06/05/2016
$100,000.00
RESEARCH
Cancer Research
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTNERS HEALTHCARE
Massachusetts
06/08/2016
$4,771.88
SYSTEM, INC.
General Hospital
Multidisciplinary
Breast Rounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIVA PHYSICIANS, INC.
VIVA 16: Vascular
06/12/2016
$25,000.00
InterVentional
Advances
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO
Sex Differences
06/16/2016
$35,000.00
DENVER, CENTER FOR
Across the
WOMEN'S HEALTH HEALTH
Lifespan: A Focus
RESEARCH
on Metabolism
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF
Immunotherapy:
06/20/2016
$40,000.00
THE UNIVERSITY OF
Transformation of
NEBRASKA
Therapies for
Blood Cancer a
satellite
symposium held in
conjunction with
the 2016 ASH
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIVA PHYSICIANS, INC.
The Blockbuster at
06/21/2016
$69,100.00
VIVA 16
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
COPD Learning
06/22/2016
$40,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE FELLOWS
Third Annual
06/23/2016
$278,000.00
FOUNDATION
Endocrine Fellows
Foundation
Research Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY
American Cancer
06/30/2016
$163,500.00
INC.
Society Post-
Doctoral Research
Fellowship
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Breathing New Air
07/03/2016
$10,000.00
OSTEOPATHIC
into the
INTERNISTS, INC.
Treatment of COPD
and Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
39th Annual San
07/03/2016
$75,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
Antonio Breast
AT SAN ANTONIO SCHOOL
Cancer Symposium
OF MEDICINE--OFFICE OF
CME
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
Evaluation and
07/04/2016
$94,011.50
Treatment of
Severe Asthma:
The Role of
Biologic and
Directed
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL MEDICAL
Chronic
07/04/2016
$150,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
Interdisciplinary
Diagnostic and
Treatment
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
07/10/2016
$1,440.00
CONFERENCE
Seminar in
Microbial Toxins
and Pathogenesis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
34th Annual Aspen
07/13/2016
$5,200.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Allergy
IMMUNOLOGY
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2016 Protein
07/13/2016
$5,000.00
CONFERENCE
Processing
Trafficking and
Secretion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
New Cancer
07/14/2016
$35,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Immunotherapy
CANCER
Agents in
Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMINISTRATORS OF THE
16th Annual SSCI
07/14/2016
$49,939.06
TULANE EDUCATIONAL
Nephrology Young
FUND
Investigators'
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW YORK ACADEMY OF
Targeting
07/18/2016
$15,000.00
SCIENCES
Inflammation and
Podocytopathy in
Chronic Kidney
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC 2016 Workshop
07/19/2016
$150,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
on Challenges,
CANCER
Insights, and
Future Directions
for Mouse and
Humanized Models
in Cancer
Immunology and
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL
31th Annual
07/21/2016
$10,000.00
HOSPITAL
Critical Issues
In Tumor
Microenvironment:
Angiogenesis,
Metastasis and
Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
Transcatheter
07/21/2016
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Cardiovascular
Therapeutics
(TCT) 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PEPTIDE THERAPEUTICS
11th Annual
07/26/2016
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION
Peptide
Therapeutics
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASN Kidney Week--
07/27/2016
$20,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
CKD Learning
Pathway Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR DNA Repair:
07/31/2016
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Tumor Development
and Therapeutic
Response
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2016 Congress
08/01/2016
$50,000.00
CANCER NETWORK INC.
Series:
Immunotherapies
in Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS SINAI MEDICAL
Pancreatic Cancer
08/03/2016
$3,000.00
CENTER
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2016 Congress
08/04/2016
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK INC.
Series: Utilizing
Guidelines to
Customize Patient
Care in Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Managing Severe
08/04/2016
$12,500.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Asthma in Adults
IMMUNOLOGY
and Children
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ILLINOIS ACADEMY OF
Tenth Annual
08/07/2016
$54,768.91
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Family Medicine
Chief Residents
2016 Summit:
Intensifying
Diabetes
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Advanced Non-Small
08/10/2016
$100,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Cell Lung Cancer
Patient
Management
Simulator
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE 2016 Balance
08/11/2016
$233,374.80
CLINICAL
of Evidence:
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Considering the
Clinical Impact
of Newer
Antihyperglycemic
Agents for the
Treatment of Type
2 Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOUSTON METHODIST
4th Annual Houston
08/11/2016
$3,000.00
HOSPITAL
Methodist Cancer
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE AMERICAN
AASLD/EASL HBV
08/14/2016
$3,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Treatment
STUDY OF LIVER
Endpoints
DISEASES
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY
Wheezin', Sneezin'
08/15/2016
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION OF AMERICA,
and Itchin' in
ALASKA CHAPTER
Alaska
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DANA-FARBER CANCER
Dana-Farber Cancer
08/15/2016
$2,500.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Institute's 12 th
Annual
Postdoctoral and
Graduate Student
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL VIRUS NETWORK
3rd Annual Short
08/16/2016
$5,000.00
INC.
Course for
emerging leaders
in Medical
Virology of the
Global Virus
Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Eastern Pulmonary
08/21/2016
$8,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Conference 2016
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CURATORS OF THE
2017 Midwest
08/25/2016
$35,260.00
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI
Nephrology
Fellows Research
Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Mammalian DNA
08/25/2016
$2,000.00
CONFERENCES
Repair Gordon
Research
Conference and
Seminar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
The 21st Annual
08/28/2016
$3,000.00
Regional Allied
Health
Conference:
Current
Perspectives in
Asthma, Allergy
and Pulmonary
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNGEVITY FOUNDATION
LUNGevity
08/28/2016
$25,000.00
Foundation
Science and
Clinical Research
Roundtable, Part
II
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
14th Annual
08/29/2016
$49,509.01
UNIVERSITY OF
Nephrology Young
CALIFORNIA
Investigator's
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
18th Annual
09/01/2016
$5,000.00
BALTIMORE FOUNDATION,
International
INC.
Meeting of the
Institute of
Human Virology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC 17th Wolrd
09/04/2016
$82,500.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer--
International
Mentorship Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USF HEALTH PROFESSIONS
Update in Allergy
09/07/2016
$3,000.00
CONFERENCING
and Immunology
CORPORATION
2016 Symposium
and
Rhinolarngoscopy
Hands-On Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF NEW
Update and Review
09/07/2016
$2,500.00
MEXICO
of Internal
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
GI Motility and
09/08/2016
$1,500.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
Functional GI
Disease: Evidence
vs. Consensus
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACT's 37th Annual
09/08/2016
$5,000.00
TOXICOLOGY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
12th Annual
09/11/2016
$5,000.00
COALITION
Personalized
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN
1st Annual
09/13/2016
$5,000.00
CALIFORNIA
Southern
California Kidney
Symposium:
``Slowing the
Progression of
Kidney Disease:
From Bench to
Bedside''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Optimizing
09/21/2016
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Outcomes in
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Advanced Non-
Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC):
Integrating Novel
Personalized
Therapy into the
Treatment
Paradigm
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
2016 JADPRO Live
09/22/2016
$100,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
at APSHO
EISENHOWER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTNERS HEALTHCARE
Massachusetts
09/22/2016
$5,000.00
SYSTEM, INC.
General Hospital
Multidisciplinary
Breast Rounds
2016-2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
09/22/2016
$7,800.00
Working Group
Global Chapter
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
Allergy Grand
09/25/2016
$2,846.55
UNIVERSITY
Rounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
09/25/2016
$126,500.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Fellowship in
Ovarian Cancer
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PHARMACY QUALITY
PQA Leadership
09/25/2016
$5,000.00
ALLIANCE (PQA, INC.)
Summit 2016 The
I's Have It!
Insights into
Innovations,
Integration and
Implementation
Strategies for
Medication Use
Measurement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2017 Congress
09/27/2016
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK INC.
Series : Breast
Cancer with
Updates from the
2016 San Antonio
Breast Cancer
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE SCRIPPS RESEARCH
28th Annual
09/27/2016
$1,500.00
INSTITUTE
Frontiers in
Chemistry
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION INC.
7th Semi Annual
09/28/2016
$20,000.00
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
(formerly; GOG,
NSABP, RTOG)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
Global CME program
09/28/2016
$25,000.00
FEDERATION OF HEAD AND
of IFHNOS
NECK ONCOLOGIC
SOCIETIES
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARKER INSTITUTE FOR
PICI Cancer
09/28/2016
$30,000.00
CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY
Immunotherapy
Workshops
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIEDAD PUERTORRIQUE A
Endocrinology Now
10/02/2016
$5,000.00
DE ENDOCRINOLOG A Y
and Then SPEDs
DIABETOLOGIA
40th Anniversary
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Cancer Genetics:
10/03/2016
$5,000.00
SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL
Finding Meaning
CENTER
in Tumor and
Germline Genomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
12th Annual
10/03/2016
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION
National Young
Investigator's
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
The Fourth
10/05/2016
$5,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
International
CENTER
Conference on
Cancer and the
Heart
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Translational
10/05/2016
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Control of
Cancer: A New
Frontier in
Cancer Biology
and Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
14th Annual World
10/05/2016
$25,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Congress on
Insulin
Resistance
Diabetes and
Cardiovascular
Disease (WCIRDC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
5th Annual New
10/06/2016
$5,000.00
CENTER
Therapeutics in
Oncology: The
Road to
Personalized
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Behind the
10/06/2016
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK INC.
Guidelines:
Insights into the
Standard of Care
in Oncology 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Chronic Kidney
10/06/2016
$139,980.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Disease and
Cardiovascular
Disease: Best
Practices to
Improve Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
Fall 2016 ECOG-
10/09/2016
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
ACRIN Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC 17th World
10/09/2016
$170,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 Conquer
10/10/2016
$40,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Merit
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARTERS HEALTHCARE
Massachusetts
10/10/2016
$5,000.00
SYSTEM, INC.
General Hospital
Cancer Center
Grand Rounds
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSIDAD CENTRAL DEL
Redefining Cancer
10/11/2016
$5,000.00
CARIBE, INC.
Treatment
Paradigms in Non-
Small Cell Lung
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RUSH UNIVERSITY MEDICAL
Expert Insights
10/18/2016
$5,000.00
CENTER
and Key Nursing
Considerations:
Treating and
Caring for
Patients with
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL EDUCATION GROUP
GOLD COPD:
10/18/2016
$75,000.00
Continuum of Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 22nd Annual
10/18/2016
$100,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Conference:
Improving the
Quality,
Effectiveness,
and Efficiency of
Cancer CareTM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2016 Chabner
10/19/2016
$10,000.00
TRANSLATIONAL ONCOLOGY
Colloquium:
Answering the Big
Questions in
Cancer Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEMATOLOGY ONCOLOGY
2017 Hematology
10/26/2016
$27,500.00
PHARMACY ASSOCITATION
Oncology Pharmacy
Association q
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
10th Biennial
10/27/2016
$10,000.00
EOSINOPHIL SOCIETY,
Symposium
INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 ASCO-SITC
11/03/2016
$13,750.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Clinical Immuno-
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Oncology
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Symposium
Proceedings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR GEORGETOWN
LUNG CANCER 2016:
11/03/2016
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL
Progress and
Future Directions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
18th Annual
11/03/2016
$15,000.00
CLINICAL
Intensive Course
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS INC.
on Diabetes,
Endocrinology,
and Metabolic
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Mammalian DNA
11/03/2016
$3,000.00
CONFERENCES
Repair Gordon
Research
Conference and
Seminar
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
11/08/2016
$73,238.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Fellowships in
Lung Cancer
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENN STATE UNIVERSITY
Cases from the
11/08/2016
$30,000.00
Community:
Investigator
Perspectives on
Emerging Research
and Patients with
Advanced Prostate
Cancer: A 2017 GU
Cancers Symposium
ISS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA ON
Genomic
11/08/2016
$5,000.00
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR
Instability and
BIOLOGY
DNA Repair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RENAL PHYISICIANS
RPA 2017 Annual
11/10/2016
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
11/13/2016
$253,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Fellowships in
Immuno-oncology
Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WINGATE UNIVERSITY
AmCare Pharmacy
11/21/2016
$500.00
SCHOOL OF PHARMACY
Forum of North
Carolina
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR NEURO-
21st Annual
11/28/2016
$26,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Meeting of the
Society for Neuro-
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LYMPHOMA RESEARCH
Lymphoma Research
12/01/2016
$105,000.00
FOUNDATION
Foundation
Postdoctoral
Fellowship Grant
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
PARP Inhibition in
12/01/2016
$45,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Ovarian Cancer:
Integrating Basic
Science, Clinical
Data, and the
Patient Voice to
Enhance Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA
2017 Keystone
12/01/2016
$25,000.00
Symposia
Directors' Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOSTON UNIVERSITY
Are You Asking the
12/04/2016
$149,275.00
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE--
Question?
OFFICE OF CME
Strategies for
Engaging the
Patient in the
Diagnosis and
Management of
Opioid-Induced
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL EDUCATION GROUP
Comprehensive Pain
12/04/2016
$324,107.00
Management in
Palliative Care:
Relieving the
Burden of Opioid-
Induced
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 Conquer
12/04/2016
$500,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of the American
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Society of
Clinical Oncology
Mission Endowment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Annual
12/04/2016
$150,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Meeting- 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF GYNECOLOGIC
Clinical
12/04/2016
$50,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Management of New
Biologics and
Immunotherapies
in Gynecologic
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF GYNECOLOGIC
Genetic Counseling
12/04/2016
$210,575.00
ONCOLOGY
in Gynecologic
Oncology: What
Advanced
Practitioners
Need to Know
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS DIVISION
Mid-Atlantic
12/04/2016
$50,000.00
OF NEPHORLOGY
Nephrology Young
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
EGFR Atlas
12/04/2016
$380,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
2017 IASLC WCLC
12/04/2016
$150,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Association-
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Satellite Fee
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FRIENDS OF CANCER
2017 Friends of
12/04/2016
$100,000.00
RESERACH
Cancer Research
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
2017 Oncologic
12/06/2016
$5,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
Emergency
CENTER
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 Genitourinary
12/08/2016
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
(GU) Cancers
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Symposium:
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Translating
Research to Value-
Based and Patient-
Centric Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2017 Alzheimer's
12/08/2016
$50,000.00
Association
Research
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2017 Alzheimer's
12/08/2016
$45,000.00
Association
International
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER RESEARCH
Cancer Research
12/11/2016
$50,000.00
INSTITUTE
Institute's
Irvington
Postdoctoral
Fellowship
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 ASCO-SITC
12/11/2016
$60,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Clinical Immuno-
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Oncology
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 11th Annual
12/12/2016
$15,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Congress:
Hematologic
MalignanciesTM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
ISN World Congress
12/12/2016
$130,000.00
OF NEPHROLOGY
of Nephrology
2017--WCN 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE 26th Annual
12/12/2016
$50,000.00
CLINICAL
Scientific &
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
Clinical
Congress--Diabete
s Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
National Kidney
12/12/2016
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Foundation s
Tenth Annual Mid-
Atlantic First
Year Renal
Fellows Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Diabetes Masters
12/13/2016
$50,000.00
Series 2017:
Negotiating the
Therapeutic
Terrain: Steps to
Identifying
Individualized
Treatment
Approaches for
Patients With
T2DM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Making the
12/14/2016
$50,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Connection
CALIFORNIA
between Patients
and Providers: A
Modern Approach
to the Treatment
of Type 1 and
Type 2 Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF
Cancer
12/14/2016
$20,000.00
SCIENCES
Immunotherapy:
Frontiers in
Cancer
Immunotherapy and
Quantitative
Approaches in
Immuno-Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
44th Annual Family
12/19/2016
$2,792.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Medicine
CALIFORNIA LOS ANGELES
Reffresher
Course"
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RUTGERS, THE STATE
Rutgers
12/19/2016
$61,728.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEW
Pharmaceutical
JERSEY
Industry
Fellowship
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 Conquer
12/21/2016
$192,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Young
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Investigator
Award (YIA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2017 Oncology
12/21/2016
$35,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Fellows Program:
New Horizons in
Quality Cancer
Care at the NCCN
22nd Annual
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
1st Annual Heart
12/21/2016
$100,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
in Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC 17th World
12/21/2016
$92,500.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRIMARY CARE EDUCATION
11th Annual Chief
12/21/2016
$50,000.00
CONSORTIUM
Residents Summit
on Intensifying
Diabetes
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN NEPHROLOGY
ANNA 2017 National
12/21/2016
$20,000.00
NURSES ASSOCIATION
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
2017 Charitable
12/21/2016
$30,000.00
FREE AND CHARITABLE
Health Care
CLINICS
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASN Kidney Week
12/21/2016
$37,500.00
NEPHROLOGY
Educational
Session Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASN Kidney Week
12/21/2016
$15,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Early Program
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASN Select
12/21/2016
$20,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Streamed Session
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
Emerging
12/27/2016
$100,000.00
ASSOCIATION EDUCATION
Immunotherapeutic
AND RESEARCH INC.
Agents for the
Treatment of
Bladder Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
2016 American
01/04/2017
$150,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
Society of
Hematology Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RUTGERS, THE STATE
Severe Asthma:
01/04/2017
$225,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEW
Clinical
JERSEY
Phenotypes and
the Emerging Age
of Personalized
Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF BOSTON
A Better Life for
01/05/2017
$100,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Your Severe
Asthma Patients:
Targeted
Therapies for
Fewer
Exacerbations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
Personalized
01/06/2017
$345,500.00
Medicine in
Severe Asthma:
Applying Emerging
Data and
Treatments to
Everyday Clinical
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARKER INSTITUTE FOR
Streamlining
01/18/2017
$60,000.00
CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY
Toxicity
Management
Guidelines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ALLERGY, ASTHMA
FAAIS 2017 Annual
01/25/2017
$20,000.00
AND IMMUNOLOGY SOCIETY
CME Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYU POST-GRADUATE
Asthma, Airways
01/26/2017
$20,000.00
MEDICAL SCHOOL
and Environment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Preventing Acute
01/29/2017
$15,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Exacerbations
PHYSICIANS, INC.
though Novel
Insights in
Treatment
Strategies for
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
39th Annual
01/29/2017
$20,000.00
National Jewish
Health Pulmonary
and Allergy
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
Best of World
01/29/2017
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
Severe Asthma
02/01/2017
$16,300.00
2016: A
Personalized
Approach To
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
2017
02/01/2017
$50,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Multidisciplinary
Thoracic Cancers
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL MEDICAL
Implementing the
02/01/2017
$75,000.00
ASSOCCIATION
New GOLD
Guidelines:
Interdisciplinary
Management of
Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
as a Chronic
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR
Cardiovascular
02/01/2017
$25,000.00
INNOVATIONS FOUNDATION
Innovations 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2017
02/01/2017
$70,000.00
SOCIETY INC.
International
Conference--Selec
ted Topics in
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
23rd Annual
02/01/2017
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Interventional
Cardiology
Fellows Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
13th Annual
02/01/2017
$283,830.79
Respiratory
Disease Young
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON HOSPITAL
Cardiovascular
02/02/2017
$30,000.00
CENTER CORPORATION
Research
Technologies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONNECTICUT PHARMACISTS
Breathe Easy: An
02/02/2017
$2,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Overview of
Inhalers for the
Management of
Asthma and COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAPA 2017--Allergy/
02/06/2017
$7,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS,
Immunology and
INC.
Pulmonology
Tracks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Immuno-Oncology
02/07/2017
$75,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Therapeutics for
Renal Cell
Carcinoma and
Bladder Cancer:
Integrating the
Latest
Developments Into
Clinical Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Annual
02/09/2017
$100,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Meeting--2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 Conquer
02/12/2017
$253,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Career
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Development Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYU POST-GRADUATE
NYU Seminar in
02/13/2017
$10,000.00
MEDICAL SCHOOL
Advanced
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Cardio Renal
02/14/2017
$2,500.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
Connections--2nd
AT SAN ANTONIO
Annual Cardio-
Renal Conference
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
Translational
02/14/2017
$2,500.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Research Cancer
PENNSYLVANIA
Centers
Consortium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEAD AND NECK
AHNS 2017 Annual
02/14/2017
$25,000.00
SOCIETY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
02/15/2017
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Conference on
Drug Metabolism
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
COPD Now: Applying
02/15/2017
$199,618.33
New Guidelines
and Effective
Strategies in
Diagnosis,
Treatment and
Management to
Everyday Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HUMBOLDT-DEL NORTE
COPD
02/15/2017
$2,100.00
CONSORTIUM FOR CME
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 ASCO Annual
02/15/2017
$84,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Lung
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Model Systems,
02/15/2017
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
Emerging
Technologies and
Precision
Medicine in
Arrhythmia
Research and
Therapeutic
Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH'S REGIONAL
Acute Coronary
02/15/2017
$4,200.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN CHEMICAL
Division of
02/16/2017
$3,000.00
SOCIETY DIVISION OF
Medicinal
MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Chemistry Program
253rd ACS
National Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2017 Advances in
02/16/2017
$500,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Cancer
CANCER
Immunotherapy
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
02/16/2017
$5,000.00
Working Group US
Chapter Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CALIFORNIA ACADEMY OF
Addressing the
02/16/2017
$3,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Needs of the ACS
Patient
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
DAPT Dilemmas: A
02/19/2017
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Case-based
Roundtable
Tutorial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDIANA ACADEMY OF
Managing Severe
02/19/2017
$3,921.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Asthma in the
Family
Physician's
Office
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
The Emerging Role
02/19/2017
$188,600.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
of Molecular
EISENHOWER
Testing in an Era
of Precision
Medicine--NSCLC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
The Emerging Role
02/19/2017
$188,600.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
of Molecular
EISENHOWER
Testing in an Era
of Precision
Medicine--Ovarian
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
Scripps 37th
02/20/2017
$5,000.00
Annual
Conference:
Clinical
Hematology and
Oncology 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
The Great K Debate
02/21/2017
$100,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Continues:
Updates and
Controversies in
Heart Failure
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2017 Gordon
02/22/2017
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Conference on
Medicinal
Chemistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
17th Annual
02/22/2017
$33,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Targeted
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Therapies of lung
Cancer Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AHNS Head and
02/22/2017
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Neck Cancer
Conference:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY
Wheezin', Sneezin'
02/22/2017
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION OF AMERICA,
and Itchin' in
ALASKA CHAPTER
Alaska
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FASEB SCIENCE RESEARCH
FASEB Autoimmunity
02/22/2017
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF CLINICAL
Federation of
02/23/2017
$15,000.00
IMMUNOLOGY SOCIETIES
Clinical
INC.
Immunology
Societies Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF
Biennial
03/02/2017
$50,000.00
THE UNIVERSITY OF
International
NEBRASKA
Workshop on
Chronic
Lymphocytic
Leukemia (XVII
iwCLL 2017)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Change in
03/02/2017
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION, INC.
Albuminuria and
GFR as End Points
for Clinical
Trials in Early
Stages of Chronic
Kidney Disease: A
Scientific
Workshop
Sponsored by the
National Kidney
Foundation,
European
Medicines Agency
and the US Food
and Drug
Administration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN RESPIRATORY
56th RESPIRATORY
03/05/2017
$18,000.00
CARE FOUNDATION
CARE Journal
Conference
Respiratory
Medications for
COPD and Adult
Asthma:
Pharmacologic
Actions to
Clinical
Applications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACAAI member
03/05/2017
$40,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
publication--Alle
IMMUNOLOGY
rgyWatch
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
The Enduring
03/05/2017
$2,500.00
CONFERENCE
Potential of
Heterocycles as
Synthetic
Targets, Cellular
Probes, and Drug
Candidates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE REGENTS OF THE
35th Carl M.
03/06/2017
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Pearson Memorial
CALIFORNIA
Symposium
Frontiers of
Rheumatology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Staphylococcal
03/06/2017
$5,000.00
CONFERENCES--STAPHYLOC
Gordon Research
OCCAL DISEASES
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLD SPRING HARBOR
Cell Death
03/07/2017
$2,500.00
LABORATORY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
Lupus: What's
03/08/2017
$334,625.00
CENTER
Next? Examining
Mechanisms,
Monitoring, and
Medication
Updates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2017 Fellows
03/09/2017
$20,000.00
SOCIETY
Track Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOSTON UNIVERSITY
EFFECTIVE ASTHMA
03/11/2017
$100,000.00
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE,
MANAGEMENT IN
CME
PRIMARY CARE:
Severity
Assessment,
Guidelines, and
New Therapy
Options
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA STATE
Innovations in
03/12/2017
$2,500.00
UNIVERSITY
Allergy, Asthma
and Immunology
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC SCLC
03/14/2017
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
workshop
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
(IASLC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF BOSTON
A Better Life for
03/14/2017
$321,485.44
UNIVERSITY
Your Severe
Asthma Patients:
Targeted
Therapies for
Fewer
Exacerbations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Clostpath 10
03/16/2017
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Asthma Fellows
03/20/2017
$5,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Multidisciplinary
03/20/2017
$24,354.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Management Of
Severe Asthma: It
Takes A Village
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Asthma Learning
03/21/2017
$79,573.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Track--CHEST 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
COPD Learning
03/22/2017
$73,765.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THOMAS JEFFERSON
10th Annual Young
03/26/2017
$11,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ACADEMY OF
Diagnoses and
03/27/2017
$8,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
treatment for
INC.
Acute coronary
syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC's Toxicity
03/27/2017
$50,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Managment
CANCER
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOUSTON METHODIST
Cardiology for the
03/27/2017
$8,000.00
HOSPITAL
Non-Cardiologist
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEST PENN ALLEGHENY
Cardiovascular
03/28/2017
$3,000.00
HEALTH SYSTEM INC.
Medicine Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
28th Annual
03/29/2017
$5,000.00
CARDIOLOGY PUERTO RICO
Meeting of the
CHAPTER
ACC Puerto Rico
Chapter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOWARD UNIVERSITY
The Kenneth Austin
03/30/2017
$2,500.00
12th Annual
Rheumatology
Symposium at
Howard University
Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN RADIUM SOCIETY
99th Annual
04/02/2017
$10,000.00
Meeting of the
American Radium
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TENNESSEE ACADEMY OF
Spring Fling 2017:
04/03/2017
$2,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Optimizing
Outcomes in
Patients with
Opioid Induced
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Navigating a
04/04/2017
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Complex Treatment
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Landscape in
Advanced Non-
Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC):
Individualizing
Therapy for
Improved Patient
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Improving the
04/06/2017
$149,000.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Physical and
Mental Well-Being
of Patients With
COPD: Integrating
Pharmacotherapy
With Pulmonary
Rehabilitation
and Self-
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
UPDATES ABOUND!
04/06/2017
$374,606.00
CLINICAL
Latest and
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS INC.
Greatest in
Practical
Application of
Cardiovascular
Outcomes for
Diabetes Drugs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL EDUCATION GROUP
Overcoming
04/06/2017
$289,267.50
Challenges in
Cancer Pain
Management:
Engaging With
Patients About
Opioid-Induced
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AAPS Sustaining
04/09/2017
$50,000.00
PHARMACEUTICAL
Sponsorship
SCIENTISTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF
14th International
04/10/2017
$10,000.00
CHICAGO CENTER FOR
Ultmann Chicago
CONTINUING MEDICAL
Lymphoma
EDUCATION
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Hematologic
04/10/2017
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Malignancies:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE HOPE FOUNDATION
2017 SWOG Group
04/11/2017
$10,000.00
Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
2017 PCNA FAll
04/11/2017
$25,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Regional
ASSOCIATION
Education
Programs:
Cardiometabolics:
Focus on New
Medications and
Risk Reduction
Benefits and
Protection
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY SCHOOL
Updates in the
04/12/2017
$5,000.00
OF MEDICINE
Management of
Head and Neck
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2017 Congress
04/16/2017
$50,000.00
CANCER NETWORK INC.
Series : Lung
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
42nd Annual ONS
04/16/2017
$50,000.00
SOCIETY
Congress and
Oncology Updates
Regional Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SWEDISH MEDICAL CENTER
Annual Oncology
04/16/2017
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
Symposium:
Innovations in
Gynecologic
Cancer Care--
Prevention to
Survivorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Master Class for
04/18/2017
$10,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Oncologists--Brea
EISENHOWER
st Cancer Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Master Class for
04/18/2017
$10,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Oncologist--Genit
EISENHOWER
ourinary Cancers
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Oral Oncolytics
04/18/2017
$50,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Adherence
EISENHOWER
Resource Center:
An Educational
Platform for
Advanced
Practitioners in
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BLADDER CANCER ADVOCACY
2017 Bladder
04/18/2017
$35,000.00
NETWORK
Cancer Think Tank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SCAI 2017
04/23/2017
$50,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Scientific
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Sessions
INTERVENTIONS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
BRCA1, BRCA2 and
04/23/2017
$20,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Beyond: An Update
PENNSYLVANIA
on Hereditary
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER MOLECULAR
Molecular
04/24/2017
$2,000.00
THERAPEUTICS RESEARCH
Therapeutics of
ASSOCIATION
Cancer Research
Conference 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
2017 Lung SPORE
04/24/2017
$30,000.00
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
ECOG-ACRIN Spring
04/24/2017
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
2017 Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Hormone Receptor-
04/25/2017
$20,111.61
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Positive Advanced
Breast Cancer:
Challenges and
New Treatment
Options
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL THYROID
2017 ITOG Annual
04/25/2017
$5,000.00
ONCOLOGY GROUP
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
Breast Cancer
04/25/2017
$3,000.00
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY
Management 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
2017 Cleveland
04/26/2017
$5,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Breast Cancer
Summit:
Collaborating For
A Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
16th Annual
04/27/2017
$10,000.00
Southeastern
Fellows Research
Skills and
Training Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE UNIVERSITY
Yale ASCO Review
05/01/2017
$5,000.00
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Acute Management
05/02/2017
$573,560.00
INSTITUTE INC.
of Immune-Related
Adverse Events in
Cancer Patients
Receiving
Immunotherapies:
Essential
Guidance for
Emergency
Medicine
Specialists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
EAC 2017 Update in
05/04/2017
$10,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Allergy, Asthma
IMMUNOLOGY
and Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
The Real Deal:
05/07/2017
$162,855.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Translating
Cardiovascular
Outcomes Data
into Best
Practices in Type
2 Diabetes
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
EACR-AACR-SIC
05/08/2017
$50,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Special
Conference 2017:
The Challenges of
Optimizing Immuno-
and Targeted
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2017 Best of ASCO
05/09/2017
$120,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meetings
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Making the
05/10/2017
$200,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Connection
CALIFORNIA
Between Patients
and Providers--A
Modern Approach
to the Treatment
of Type 1 and
Type 2 Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
05/11/2017
$1,500.00
CONFERENCE
Conference:
Hormone-Dependent
Cancer:
Functional
Insight and
Clinical
Application
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
29th Annual
05/14/2017
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION
Transcatheter
Cardiovascular
Therapeutics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
DAPT and Triple
05/14/2017
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Therapy: A Case-
based Guide to
Optimal
Antiplatelet
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINNESOTA PHARMACISTS
Treating Acute
05/15/2017
$3,500.00
ASSOCIATION
Coronary Syndrome
(ACS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
Live Symposium of
05/15/2017
$5,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
Complex Coronary,
SINAI
Valvular and
Vascular Cases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Acute Coronary
05/17/2017
$5,000.00
CRITICAL CARE NURSES
Syndrome New
SEPA CHAPTER
Guidelines and
Therapeutic
Options
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Integration of
05/18/2017
$50,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Immunotherapy
EISENHOWER
into the
Treatment of
Solid Tumors and
Hematologic
Malignancies:
Considerations
for Advanced
Practitioners in
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. FRANCIS HOSPITAL
Contemporary
05/18/2017
$3,300.00
Dilemmas in Anti
Platelet Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEMORIAL SLOAN
2017 MSK Cardio-
05/18/2017
$5,000.00
KETTERING CANCER
Oncology
CENTER
Symposium:
Cardiovascular
Health and
Disease During
and After Cancer
Therapy--A Case
Based Curriculum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
05/18/2017
$8,000.00
CONFERENCE
Seminar and
Conference on
Lung Development,
Injury and Repair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Next Generation
05/18/2017
$2,000.00
CONFERENCES
Computer-Aided
Medicine Design:
Going Beyond
Traditional
Targets,
Pathways,
Modalities,
Agents and
Techniques
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
13th Annual
05/19/2017
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Biomarkers in
CALIFORNIA
Heart Failure and
Acute Coronary
Syndromes:
Diagnosis,
Treatment and
Devices Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNGEVITY FOUNDATION
LUNGevity
05/22/2017
$40,000.00
Foundation
Science and
Clinical Research
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
Breast Cancer: New
05/22/2017
$20,000.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
Horizons, Current
Controversies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2017-2018 Monthly
05/25/2017
$50,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Oncology Tumor
Boards: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN LUNG
LungForce Expo
05/28/2017
$1,000.00
ASSOCIATION IN
MISSOURI
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Cardiovascular
06/03/2017
$150,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Risk in Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASTRO 2017 59th
06/04/2017
$25,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION,
8th Semi Annual
06/04/2017
$20,000.00
INC.
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAFP FMX 60-minute
06/04/2017
$33,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Interactive
Lecture and 60-
Minute Problem-
Based Learning
Workshop titled
Acute Coronary
Syndromes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
6th Annual Chicago
06/04/2017
$10,000.00
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MERCY HOSPITAL
Catholic Health
06/04/2017
$5,000.00
FOUNDATION
8th Annual
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Lung Cancer
06/06/2017
$50,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Learning Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2017 Primer on
06/06/2017
$50,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Tumor Immunology
CANCER
and Cancer
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2017 Workshop on
06/07/2017
$150,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Single Cell
CANCER
Techniques in
Immunology and
Cancer
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2018 SITC-
06/07/2017
$120,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
AstraZeneca
CANCER
Postdoctoral
Cancer
Immunotherapy in
Combination
Therapies
Clinical
Fellowship Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH
TRIO-US AND UCLA
06/08/2017
$5,000.00
IN ONCOLOGY-US, INC.
Annual Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACS DIVISION OF
Division of
06/08/2017
$2,000.00
MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Medicinal
Chemistry Program
254th ACS
National Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SAINT FRANCIS HOSPITAL
53rd Annual Robert
06/11/2017
$3,000.00
AND MEDICAL CENTER
M. Jeresaty,
M.D.,
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYU POST-GRADUATE
Women and Cancer:
06/12/2017
$5,000.00
MEDICAL SCHOOL
From Screening to
Survivorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
Antiplatelet
06/12/2017
$10,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Therapy Post-ACS:
ASSOCIATION
Choosing the
Right Therapy for
the Right
Duration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
Turning the Tide
06/13/2017
$10,000.00
COALITION
Against Cancer
Through Sustained
Medical
Innovation 2017
National
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
The Present and
06/13/2017
$177,230.00
INSTITUTE
the Future of
Cancer
Immunotherapy
Biomarkers:
Assessing
Challenges,
Opportunities,
and Implications
for athologists
(150204581)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACEP17
06/13/2017
$15,000.00
EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS
Cardiovascular
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BINAYTARA FOUNDATION
5th International
06/14/2017
$5,000.00
Conference on
Advances in
Hematology and
Oncology (ICAHO
2017)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
19th Annual Lynn
06/14/2017
$15,000.00
Sage Breast
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Special
06/14/2017
$35,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Conference on
Tumor Immunology
and Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COPD FOUNDATION INC.
COPD10USA
06/14/2017
$6,800.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
Duke Heart Center
06/15/2017
$5,000.00
General
Cardiology
Update--A Case-
Based Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
2017 TN M:L STEMI
06/19/2017
$10,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE TRANSVERSE MYELITIS
2017 Rare Neuro-
06/19/2017
$5,000.00
ASSOCIATION
immune Disorders
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC--Lung Cancer
06/19/2017
$1,605,600.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Education
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Acute Coronary
06/20/2017
$125,000.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Syndrome: Getting
to the Heart of
the Matter for
Pharmacists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USF HEALTH PROFESSIONS
inPractice
06/21/2017
$30,000.00
CONFERENCING
Oncology 2017-
CORPORATION
2018: Breast and
Gynecologic
Cancers Tracks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USF HEALTH PROFESSIONS
inPractice
06/21/2017
$20,000.00
CONFERENCING
Oncology 2017
CORPORATION
2018: Lung Cancer
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GLOBAL EDUCATION GROUP,
The Role of
06/22/2017
$10,000.00
LTD.
Antiplatelet
Therapy in the
Short- and Long-
term Management
of Highrisk
Patients with ACS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
FASEB Autoimmunity-
06/22/2017
$5,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Additional
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Funding for Grant
#73697
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE LEUKEMIA AND
Precision and
06/27/2017
$25,000.00
LYMPHOMA SOCIETY, INC.
emerging Medicine
for Hematological
Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF ASTHMA
Unraveling Current
06/27/2017
$10,000.00
EDUCATORS
Asthma Challenges
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2017 Oncology
06/27/2017
$40,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Case Manager and
Medical Director
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COPD FOUNDATION
PRAXIS and the
06/27/2017
$120,000.00
COPD Readmissions
Institute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
New Paradigms in
06/28/2017
$158,250.00
FOUNDATION, INC.
the Treatment of
Hyperkalemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
9th Allergy,
06/28/2017
$5,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Asthma and ENT
IN ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
CME
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2017 Congress
06/29/2017
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Series :
Biomarkers 101 (4
Live Webinars and
4 Enduring
Webinars)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF
Association of
06/29/2017
$10,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Physician
IN ONCOLOGY INC.
Assistants in
Oncology 20th
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
TSAAI 2017 Annual
07/02/2017
$3,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Meeting
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ACADEMY OF
Rashes, joints and
07/02/2017
$3,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
ANA: 2017 Lupus
update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEILL CORNELL MEDICINE
Emerging
08/01/2017
$20,000.00
Immunological
Themes in
Oncology,
Metabolism and
Inflammation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE DIATRIBE FOUNDATION
Glycemic Outcomes
08/01/2017
$25,000.00
Beyond A1c
Consensus
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF
PARP Inhibitors:
08/02/2017
$90,000.00
THE UNIVERSITY OF
Their Role in the
NEBRASKA MEDICAL
Treatment of
CENTER DBA UNMC CENTER
Ovarian Cancer
FOR CONTINUING EDU
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNGEVITY FOUNDATION
HCP Attitudes
08/03/2017
$91,800.00
toward Re-biopsy
of Lung Cancer
Patients Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEART FAILURE SOCIETY
Clinical Care
08/03/2017
$150,000.00
OF AMERICA INC.
Crossroads:
Navigating the
Intersection of
Heart Failure and
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
35th Annual Aspen
08/03/2017
$10,000.00
ALLERGY ASTHMA AND
Allergy
IMMUNOLOGY
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIOCONDUCTOR FOUNDATION
Bioconductor
08/03/2017
$2,000.00
OF NA INC.
Conference 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Orienteering on
08/09/2017
$795,250.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
the Complex
Treatment
Landscape for
EGFR-Mutant
NSCLC: Latest
Evidence to Guide
Clinical
Decisions in
Everyday
Community
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ANGIOGENESIS
xME: Targeted
08/10/2017
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION
Therapy,
Immunotherapy,
and the Chronic
Lymphocytic
Leukemia
Microenvironment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 12th Annual
08/21/2017
$75,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Congress:
Hematologic
MalignanciesT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
08/21/2017
$253,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Fellowships in
Hematology-
Oncology Research
(Lymphoma)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Master
08/21/2017
$340,120.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Class and
Practicum Live at
IASLC 2017 CMSTO:
New Options and
Evolving
Strategies for
Hitting the
Target in EGFR-
Mutant NSCLC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASH Meeting on
08/22/2017
$60,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
Hematologic
Malignancies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Addressing Unmet
08/22/2017
$270,630.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Needs in Lung
Cancer With
Rational
Immunotherapy-
Based Approaches:
Evidence and
Practicalities
(150204646)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Integrating
08/22/2017
$304,174.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Immunotherapy
into a Multimodal
Treatment
Approach
(150204726)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE FELLOWS
Fourth Annual
08/23/2017
$250,000.00
FOUNDATION
Endocrine Fellows
Research Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
59th ASH Annual
08/24/2017
$250,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAYO CLINIC ARIZONA
Acute and Chronic
08/31/2017
$5,000.00
Leukemias 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
Innovations in the
08/31/2017
$1,500.00
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY
Management of
Lung Cancer:
Immunotherapy,
targeted
therapies and
minimally
invasive
techniques
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNEBERG CENTER FOR
JADPRO Live at
08/31/2017
$25,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
APSHO 2017:
EISENHOWER
Managing Side
Effects of Cancer
Patients Treated
With
Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND,
UPDATE: Thoracic
08/31/2017
$5,000.00
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
Oncology 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR COLLEGE OF
Breast Cancer
09/03/2017
$3,000.00
MEDICINE. BREAST
Research and
CENTER
Education Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Grant Writing
09/03/2017
$10,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Workshop
CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
2017 Gigi Shaw
09/07/2017
$3,500.00
COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS
Arledge
AND SURGEONS, DEPT. OF
Conference on
SURGERY
Pancreatic
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUPUS RESEARCH
Lupus Research
09/11/2017
$25,000.00
ALLIANCE, INC.
Alliance 2017
Annual Scientific
Conference--Forum
for Discovery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DANA FARBER CANCER
Dana-Farber Cancer
09/13/2017
$2,500.00
INSTITUTE
Institute's 13th
Annual
Postdoctoral and
Graduate Student
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF
The Evolving Role
09/13/2017
$20,000.00
COMMUNITY CANCER
of the Oncology
CENTERS
Pharmacist in the
Management of Non-
small Cell Lung
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Pharmacy Updates:
09/14/2017
$50,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
A Webinar Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CINCINNATI CHILDREN'S
4th CURED EGID
09/18/2017
$5,000.00
Research
Conference and
Patient Education
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
OncologyConsults.c
09/19/2017
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY
om Integrating
Immunotherapy
into SCCHN Care:
Implications for
the
Multidisciplinary
Oncology Care
Team
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PROSTATE CANCER
24th Annual
09/19/2017
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION
Scientific
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PANCREATIC
48th Annual
09/19/2017
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Meeting of the
American
Pancreatic
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAYO CLINIC ARIZONA
Mayo Clinic Cancer
09/20/2017
$5,000.00
Center Thoracic
Oncology Update
State of the Art
Evaluation and
Management of
Thoracic Cancers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Behind the
09/24/2017
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Guidelines:
FOUNDATION (NCCN)
Insights into the
Standard of Care
in Oncology 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR HEART
21st Annual Heart
09/25/2017
$10,000.00
FAILURE INC.
Failure 2017-An
Update on Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO/
Sex Differences
10/02/2017
$30,000.00
CENTER FOR WOMEN'S
across the
HEALTH RESEARCH
Lifespan: A Focus
on Metabolism
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LYMPHOMA RESEARCH
Adherence and Oral
10/02/2017
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION
Therapies in
Lymphoma and CLL
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
ECOG-ACRIN 2017
10/02/2017
$15,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
Fall Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SCAI 2017
10/02/2017
$35,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Interventional
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Cardiology
INTERVENTIONS
Fellows Course
FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Emerging Therapies
10/04/2017
$5,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
in Oncology From
CENTER
Phase I and
Beyond
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
Best of 18th World
10/05/2017
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer
(WCLC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
Assessing the
10/09/2017
$75,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Educational Needs
of Urologic Care
Team in the area
of Bladder Cancer
and Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLORADO ALLERGY AND
CAAS October 2017
10/09/2017
$3,343.10
ASTHMA SOCIETY
``State of the
Art Approaches to
Asthma Diagnosis
and Treatment''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
Top Ten Advances
10/12/2017
$5,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
in Clinical
SINAI
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE MASSACHUSETTS
Boston
10/12/2017
$4,000.00
GENERAL HOSPITAL
Angiogenesis
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Anemia in Kidney
10/16/2017
$155,550.00
NEPHROLOGY
Diseases: Beyond
the Usual
Suspects
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Updates in
10/16/2017
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Rheumatology
CALIFORNIA, UCSD
2017: Highlights
OFFICE OF CME
from the ACR and
EULAR Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FLORIDA ACADEMY OF
Acute Coronary
10/16/2017
$7,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEBRASKA ACADEMY OF
Acute Coronary
10/16/2017
$7,500.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Syndrome: A
Review of
Diagnostic
Criteria, and
Treatment Options
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PEPTIDE THERAPEUTICS
12th Annual
10/18/2017
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION
Peptide
Therapeutics
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA ON
Cancer
10/18/2017
$15,000.00
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR
Immunotherapy:
BIOLOGY
Combinations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE
Beyond the
10/24/2017
$30,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Guidelines:
Investigator
Perspectives on
Current Clinical
Issues and
Ongoing Research
in the Management
of Advanced
Prostate Cancer--
An ISS Held as a
Premium Ancillary
Educational Event
During the 2018
Genitourinary
Cancers Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF TUFTS
2017 Tufts Cancer
10/26/2017
$2,500.00
COLLEGE
Symposium,
Transforming
Therapeutic
Outcomes:
Innovations in
Cancer Modeling
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR GEORGETOWN
Lung Cancer 2017:
10/26/2017
$7,500.00
MEDICAL CENTER INC.
Progress and
Future Directions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
American College
10/29/2017
$5,000.00
TOXICOLOGY
of Toxicology
38th Annual
Meeting,
Symposium 6:
Early Career
Professionals'
Forum: Current
Topics in
Toxicology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC's connectED
11/01/2017
$500,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF TRUSTREES
Stanford Review of
11/06/2017
$5,000.00
OF THE LELAND STANFORD
the 59th Annual
JUNIOR UNIVERSITY
American Society
of Hematology
Meeting 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Rheumatology
11/07/2017
$15,000.00
CINCINNATI
Winter Clinical
Symposium 2018
(RWCS 2018)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT HEALTH SAN ANTONIO
40TH Annual San
11/07/2017
$75,000.00
(UTHSCSA)
Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION INC.
9th Semi Annual
11/08/2017
$20,000.00
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN AACR ASCO
11/08/2017
$710,115.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Stage III NSCLC
Practical
Application of
Immune Checkpoint
Inhibition After
Chemoradiotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER RESEARCH
CRI Irvington
11/08/2017
$50,000.00
INSTITUTE
Postdoctoral
Fellowship
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MID-ATLANTIC SECTION OF
2017 Society for
11/09/2017
$10,000.00
THE AMERICAN
Basic Urologic
UROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
Research (SBUR)
and European
Society for
Urological
Research (ESUR)
joint Fall
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEST PENN ALLEGHENY
Twelfth Annual
11/09/2017
$8,000.00
HEALTH SYSTEM DBA
Nemacolin
ALLEGHENY GENERAL
International
HOSPITAL
Asthma Conference
An Interactive
Forum on Patient
Care, Therapy,
and Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Request for 2017
11/14/2017
$5,000.00
CALIFORNIA BERKELEY
Funding for the
FOUNDATION
Forum for
Collaborative
Research's
Program on HBV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
2018
11/14/2017
$35,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Multidisciplinary
(ASTRO)
Head and Neck
Cancer Symposium:
Expanding
Treatment
Horizons
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Hematology 2017:
11/15/2017
$75,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
the ASH Education
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Leukemia Research
11/15/2017
$5,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
Meeting
CENTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
2018 Highlights of
11/15/2017
$100,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
ASHr in North
America
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 Conquer
11/16/2017
$40,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Merit
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 ASCO-SITC
11/21/2017
$60,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Clinical Immuno-
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Oncology
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
New York
11/21/2017
$5,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Scientific
11/22/2017
$160,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Workshop on
Change in
Albuminuria and
GFR as End Points
for Clinical
Trials in Early
Stages of Chronic
Kidney Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView
11/27/2017
$50,000.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
MasterClass--Prac
ticum Live at
ASCO GI The Quest
to Win Through
Science in
Pancreatic Cancer
From Sequencing
Current Options
to Testing Novel
Approaches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GUTHY JACKSON
ECTRIMS 2017 NMO
11/29/2017
$6,000.00
CHARITABLE FOUNDATION
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AALAS FOUNDATION
Student and
11/30/2017
$5,000.00
Teacher Public
Educational
Outreach
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Biology of Acute
12/01/2017
$5,000.00
CONFERENCE
Respiratory
Infection Gordon
Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LEUKEMIA RESEARCH
Hollis Brownstein
12/03/2017
$100,000.00
FOUNDATION
Research Grants
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2017 ACR/ARHP
12/03/2017
$75,000.00
RHEUMATOLOGY
Annual Meeting
Lupus Educational
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
40th Annual
12/04/2017
$20,000.00
National Jewish
Health Pulmonary
and Allergy
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA ON
2018 Keystone
12/04/2017
$25,000.00
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR
Symposia
BIOLOGY
Directors' Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
Diabetes is
12/04/2017
$40,568.50
ASSOCIATION
Primary Digital
Program on
Cardiovascular
Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2017 ACLAM Grants
12/04/2017
$4,000.00
LABORATORY ANIMAL
MEDICINE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOUTHERN MEDICAL
Medical Dilemmas
12/05/2017
$2,500.00
ASSOCIATION
in Patient Care
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE NORTH AMERICAN 3RS
Virtual Education
12/06/2017
$8,000.00
COLLABORATIVE
Community Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 Conquer
12/10/2017
$500,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Mission
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Endowment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 Genitourinary
12/10/2017
$60,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
(GU) Cancers
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Symposium:
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Translating
Evidence to
Multidisciplinary
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 Conquer
12/10/2017
$256,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Young
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Investigator
Award (YIA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
15th Annual
12/10/2017
$40,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Nephrology Young
CALIFORNIA
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
Mid Atlantic
12/10/2017
$50,000.00
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
Nephrology Young
MEDICINE
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ILLINOIS ACADEMY OF
The 12th Annual
12/11/2017
$54,771.32
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Chief Residents
Summit on
Intensifying
Diabetes
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2018 ACR
12/11/2017
$50,000.00
RHEUMATOLOGY
Rheumatology
Courses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
FastForward
12/12/2017
$25,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Corporate
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE DEUEL CONFERENCE ON
The 2018 Deuel
12/13/2017
$5,000.00
LIPIDS
Conference on
Lipids
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
FASEB SRC
12/13/2017
$5,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Immunoreceptors
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
and Immunotrerapy
(FASEB)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Request for 2018
12/13/2017
$10,000.00
CALIFORNIA BERKELEY
Funding for the
FOUNDATION
Forum for
Collaborative
Research's
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Conference
12/14/2017
$5,000.00
CONFERENCE
on Drug
Resistance 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION FOR WOMEN
Innovation and
12/17/2017
$25,000.00
IN SCIENCE
Inclusion: Women
at the Forefront
of STEM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIRGINIA BIOTECHNOLOGY
MedImmune
12/17/2017
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Chairman's Circle
Membership
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
The Lung
12/20/2017
$5,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Epithelium in
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Health and
SRC
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENGINEERING CONFERENCES
Cell Culture
12/21/2017
$10,000.00
INTERNATIONAL
Engineering XVI
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNYSLVANIA SOCIETY
2018 PSBR
12/24/2017
$2,000.00
FOR BIOMEDICAL
Membership
RESEARCH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
Roundtable in
12/24/2017
$4,000.00
SCIENCES
Science and
Welfare of
Laboratory Animal
Use
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018
01/02/2018
$30,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Gastrointestinal
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
(GI) Cancers
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Symposium:
Multidisciplinary
Care: Local
Practice, Global
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-IASLC Joint
01/02/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Conference on the
Molecular Origins
of Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
14th Annual
01/02/2018
$299,608.49
Respiratory
Disease Young
Investigators'
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CHEST FOUNDATION
CHEST Foundation
01/02/2018
$55,000.00
Research Award in
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
Implementation of
01/04/2018
$300,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
diagnostic and
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
molecular
guidelines in low-
middle income
regions for
targeted
therapies in
NSCLC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH
9th International
01/09/2018
$2,500.00
CAROLINA AT CHAPEL
Symposia for the
HILL
CGRP Family
Peptides
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
The Intersection
01/14/2018
$95,000.00
CINCINNATI
Between COPD and
Cardiometabolic
Comorbidities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
13th Annual
01/14/2018
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
National Young
Investigator
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
WSAAI 2018: 56th
01/17/2018
$15,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Annual Scientific
IMMUNOLOGY (ACAAI)
Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-SNMMI Joint
01/18/2018
$10,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Conference on
State-of-the-Art
Molecular Imaging
in Cancer Biology
and Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
2018 Oncologic
01/23/2018
$10,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
Emergency
CENTER
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Exploring the
01/25/2018
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Challenges of
PHYSICIANS
Severe Asthma:
Understanding
Appropriate
Treatment
Strategies for
Improved Patient
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER RESEARCH
Cancer
02/05/2018
$10,000.00
INSTITUTE
Immunotherapy
Consortium
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Advancing
02/11/2018
$200,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Knowledge to
EISENHOWER
Practice
Optimizing Severe
Asthma Care in
the Age of
Biologics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA STATE
PeerView Live at
02/12/2018
$104,507.00
UNIVERSITY
the 2018 ASCO
Annual Meeting,
The Arrival of
Novel Agent
Classes in B-Cell
Non-Hodgkin
Lymphoma: A
Personal Guide to
Integrating New
Therapy into
Patient Care
(150204877)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Clinical Advances
02/13/2018
$75,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES
and Case Studies
in Immune
Checkpoint
Inhibitors in
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2018 Oncology
02/14/2018
$35,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Fellows Program:
New Horizons in
Quality Cancer
CareT at the NCCN
23rd Annual
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDY HEMATOLOGY
2018 Indy
02/14/2018
$10,000.00
EDUCATION, INC.
Hematology Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
14th International
02/14/2018
$20,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Symposium on
Sjogrens Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
Scripps 38th
02/14/2018
$25,000.00
Annual Clinical
Hematology and
Oncology
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CHEST FOUNDATION
CHEST Foundation
02/14/2018
$35,000.00
Research Award in
Severe Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Clinical
02/14/2018
$100,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES
Management of
Novel Therapies
for Hematological
Malignancies (5
Regional lectures
by APSHO/JADPRO)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView inVision,
02/14/2018
$64,125.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
``Targeted
Treatment in
Severe Asthma:
Moving Toward
Precision
Medicine''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLLEGIUM
32nd Symposium of
02/14/2018
$10,000.00
INTERNATIONALE
the Collegium
ALLERGOLOGICUM
Internationale
Allergologicum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
Immuno-Oncology:
02/14/2018
$60,490.00
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY
Scientific
Updates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
COPD Basics: An
02/14/2018
$100,000.00
Integrated
Approach to Best
Practices in Five
Healthcare
Networks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAYO CLINIC ARIZONA
Clinical
02/14/2018
$15,000.00
Multidisciplinary
Hematology and
Oncology: The
15th Annual
Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
18th Targeted
02/14/2018
$55,100.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Therapy meeting
STUDY OF LUNG CACEER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Master
02/14/2018
$299,330.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Class and
Practicum Live at
CHEST 2018, ``New
Avenues in Asthma
Management:
Finding the Right
Patients for
Targeted
Therapies''
(150205033)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Chronic
02/15/2018
$232,979.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Hyperkalemia
Management and
Outcomes in CKD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
Alzheimer's
02/15/2018
$45,000.00
Association
International
Conference, AAIC
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY
Wheezin', Sneezin'
02/16/2018
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION OF AMERICA--
and Itchin' in
ALASKA CHAPTER
Alaska
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
New Agents and
02/18/2018
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Emerging
PHYSICIANS
Strategies in
Advanced Breast
Cancer: Patient-
Centric
Navigation in the
Age of
Personalized Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE
PeerView inPlay,
02/18/2018
$145,730.00
UNIVERSITY
``The Role of the
Eosinophil in
COPD:
Implications for
Personalized Care
and Novel
Treatments''
(150205058)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
3rd Annual Duke
02/19/2018
$2,500.00
Heart Center/DCRI
Fellows'
Presentation
Skills Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Novel Treatment
02/19/2018
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Strategies in the
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Management of
Ovarian Cancer: A
Closer Look at
the Role of PARP
Inhibitors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2018 Fellows
02/19/2018
$10,000.00
SOCIETY INC.
Track Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
Cardiovascular
02/20/2018
$30,000.00
HOSPITAL CENTER
Research
Technologies
(CRT) Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
The Southeastern
02/21/2018
$2,500.00
Fellows Research
Skills and
Training Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2018
02/21/2018
$30,000.00
SOCIETY INC.
International
Conference--Selec
ted Sessions in
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
15th Annual
02/22/2018
$25,000.00
Fundamentals of
Diabetes
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
FDA-AACR-ASTRO:
02/22/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Clinical
Development of
Drug-Radiotherapy
Combinations
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
Advances in
02/25/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Malignant
Lymphoma (AACR/
ICML ``off year''
conference in US)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BLADDER CANCER ADVOCACY
2018 Bladder
02/25/2018
$35,000.00
NETWORK
Cancer Think Tank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2018 Gordon
02/27/2018
$5,000.00
CONFERENCE
Research Council
on New Antibiotic
Discovery and
Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RUTGERS, THE STATE
Treat-to-Target
02/28/2018
$124,857.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEW
and Targeted
JERSEY
Therapy: The
Evolving State of
Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
Diabetes is
03/01/2018
$300,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Primary Core
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Annual
03/01/2018
$225,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Meeting--2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
A Severe Asthma
03/01/2018
$322,170.00
Roadmap for
Improved
Diagnosis and
Personalized
Treatment--A
Guided Workflow
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
California Chapter
03/01/2018
$10,000.00
CLINICAL
of the American
ENDOCRINOLOGITS
Association of
Clinical
Endocrinologists
Presents Hot
Topics in
Diabetes and
Endocrinology for
Primary Care 2018
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 23rd Annual
03/02/2018
$100,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Conference:
Improving the
Quality,
Effectiveness,
and Efficiency of
Cancer CareTM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EASTERN VIRGINIA
Turning the Tide
03/04/2018
$5,000.00
MEDICAL SCHOOL
on Diabetes 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF
15th International
03/05/2018
$25,000.00
CHICAGO
Ultmann Chicago
Lymphoma
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Innovating
03/05/2018
$300,000.00
CLINICAL
Diabetes Care-Use
ENDOCRINOLOGISTS
of Real-Time Data
to Transform
Clinical Practice
and Optimize
Patient Glucose
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
24th Annual
03/05/2018
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION
Interventional
Cardiology
Fellows Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PHARMACISTS
APhA2018 Your
03/05/2018
$5,000.00
ASSOC
Annual Diabetes
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
DAPT Dilemmas: A
03/05/2018
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION
Case-Based
Roundtable at
Fellows 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
Japanese
03/05/2018
$40,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Urological
Association (JUA)
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN Foundation
03/06/2018
$171,801.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Young
Investigator
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PURDUE UNIVERSITY
Can You Do It
03/06/2018
$377,342.00
OFFICE OF CONTINUING
Better?--A Unique
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION
Approach to
Enabling Improved
Asthma Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC Workshop on
03/06/2018
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Neopadjuvant
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Therapy in Lung
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNT HEALTH SCIENCE
Filling the Gaps
03/07/2018
$4,750.00
CENTER
in Asthma Care--
Lessons Learned
from Asthma411
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Updates in
03/07/2018
$155,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Precision
EISENHOWER
Medicine
Elevating the
Treatment of
Severe,
Eosinophilic
Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
27th Annual
03/07/2018
$63,052.00
CLINICAL
Scientific and
ENDOCRINOLOGITS
Clinical
Congress--Diabete
s Sessions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Support for NCCN
03/08/2018
$60,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Distribution of
the NCCN Clinical
Practice
Guidelines in
Oncology (NCCN
Guidelinesr) for
Management of
Immunotherapy-
Related
Toxicities Pocket
Guides
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOARD OF REGENTS OF THE
2018 Pan Pacific
03/11/2018
$125,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
Lymphoma
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
Fifth Annual
03/11/2018
$5,000.00
Clinical Advances
in Heart Failure
and Arrhythmias
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHEAST GEORGIA
10th Annual
03/12/2018
$2,500.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Northeast Georgia
STEMI Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
HOPA 14th Annual
03/12/2018
$30,000.00
PHARMACY ASSOCIATION
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 ASCO Annual
03/12/2018
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Breast
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 ASCO Annual
03/12/2018
$30,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Genitourinary
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Cancer Tracks
Bundle: Prostate
and Nonprostate
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GUTHY JACKSON
The Guthy-Jackson
03/12/2018
$25,000.00
CHARITABLE FOUNDATION
Industry Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Making the
03/13/2018
$200,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Connection
CALIFORNIA
Between Patients
and Providers: A
Comprehensive
Overview of the
Modern Treatment
Strategies For
People With Type
1 and Type 2
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Cardiovascular
03/13/2018
$232,979.00
FOUNDATION
Risk in Patients
with Chronic
Kidney Disease
(CKD): The Impact
of Anemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACADEMY OF MANAGED CARE
The Immuno-
03/13/2018
$35,000.00
PHARMACY
Oncology Pipeline
and the Managed
Care
Considerations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC
03/13/2018
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Immunotherapy
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACS DIVISION OF
255th ACS National
03/13/2018
$5,000.00
BIOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY
Meeting and
Exposition (BIOT
Division)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
12th Biennial
03/14/2018
$15,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Ovarian Cancer
Research
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Arteriosclerosis,
03/18/2018
$2,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Thrombosis and
Vascular Biology
| Peripheral
Vascular Disease
2018Scientific
Sessions,
Vascular
Discovery: From
Genes to Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RILITE FOUNDATION
Lupus 21st Century
03/18/2018
$25,000.00
2018 Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
RHEUMATOLOGIC
4th International
03/19/2018
$10,000.00
DERMATOLOGY SOCIETY
Conference on
INC.
Cutaneous Lupus
Erythematosus
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOWARD UNIVERSITY
13th Annual
03/19/2018
$2,500.00
Kenneth Austin
Rheumatology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF GYNECOLOGIC
SGO Lunch and
03/20/2018
$125,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Learn
Contemporary
Ovarian Cancer:
Keys to Therapies
and Integrated
Learning
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LYMPHOMA RESEARCH
Mantle Cell
03/20/2018
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION
Lymphoma
Scientific
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER MOLECULAR
Molecular
03/21/2018
$5,000.00
THERAPEUTICS RESEARCH
Therapeutics of
ASSOCIATION
Cancer Research
Conference 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
PCNA's 24th Annual
03/22/2018
$10,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Symposium
ASSOCIATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASPEN LUNG CONFERENCE
Thomas Petty Aspen
03/22/2018
$25,000.00
Lung Conference/
Translating
Resilience and
Pathogenesis to
Personalized
Therapy for COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Master Class for
03/22/2018
$24,246.27
HEALTH SCIENCES
Oncologists--Hema
tology Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Clinical Advances
03/25/2018
$15,000.00
MANAGED CARE
in the Diagnosis,
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Treatment and
Management of
COPD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR SURGICAL
American Head and
03/25/2018
$15,000.00
FELLOWSHIPS
Neck Society
Annual Meeting--
Evaluating Head
and Neck Cancer
Care Through
Evidence Based
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
Duke Debates:
03/25/2018
$15,000.00
Controversies in
the Management of
Patients with
Hematologic
Malignancies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
Mount Sinai
03/29/2018
$7,500.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
Division of
SINAI
Occupational
Medicine Seminar
Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
04/01/2018
$2,500.00
CONFERENCE
Conference:
Mutagenesis--Mech
anisms of
Intrinsic and
Induced Genome
Instability
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF
Frontiers in
04/02/2018
$25,000.00
CHICAGO
Precision
Medicine for
Inherited
Cancers: From
Risk Assessment
to Targeted
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE
PeerView Live:
04/02/2018
$73,575.00
UNIVERSITY
``Unraveling the
Complex Treatment
Landscape for
Prostate Cancer:
Guidance for
Delivering
Evidence-Based,
Patient-Centered
Care''
(150204517)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2018 Gordon
04/03/2018
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Research
Conference on
Medicinal
Chemistry
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
2018 Cleveland
04/03/2018
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Breast Cancer
Summit:
Collaborating for
a Cure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE
New Directions in
04/04/2018
$124,611.00
UNIVERSITY
the Management of
Recurrent Ovarian
Cancer: Focus on
PARP Inhibitors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION FOR
Advancing Patient
04/04/2018
$416,900.00
MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY
Care in NSCLC:
Breaking Down
Barriers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
2018 Diabetes Day
04/04/2018
$5,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
23rd Annual
Symposium New
Frontiers in
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Master
04/04/2018
$370,100.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Class and
Practicum Live at
ASH 2018:
``Exploring the
Present and
Future of BTK
Inhibition in B-
cell
malignancies:
Expert Insights
on Practical
Implications for
Patient
Management''
(150205092)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
AUA2018
04/04/2018
$150,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Highlights:
Immunotherapy in
GU Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Master Class for
04/05/2018
$19,391.02
HEALTH SCIENCES
Oncologists--Wome
n's Cancer Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FRIENDS OF CANCER
Friends of Cancer
04/08/2018
$100,000.00
RESEARCH 2018
Research Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE HOPE FOUNDATION
2018 SWOG Group
04/08/2018
$10,000.00
Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 ASCO Annual
04/09/2018
$45,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Gynecologic
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Cancer Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LAHEY CLINIC HOSPITAL,
Cardiovascular
04/09/2018
$5,000.00
INC.
Disease State of
the Art 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOARD OF REGENTS FOR
Dissecting the
04/11/2018
$75,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
Decision:
Documenting and
Discussing the
Clinical Practice
Patterns of
Hematologic
Oncology
Investigators in
the Management of
Chronic
Lymphocytic
Leukemia--An ISS
Held in
Conjunction with
the 2018 Pan
Pacific Lymphoma
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF BOSTON
CVD AND RENAL
04/11/2018
$109,420.00
UNIVERSITY
DISEASE IN T2DM:
Pivotal Role of
Physician
Assistants in
Patient
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 Conquer
04/12/2018
$253,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Career
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Development Award
(CDA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
CHEST 2018 Post
04/12/2018
$25,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Graduate Program
on Difficult to
Treat Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
ECOG-ACRIN 2018
04/12/2018
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
Spring Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUPUS FOUNDATION OF NEW
Lupus Medical and
04/15/2018
$5,000.00
ENGLAND
Educational
Symposim
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEART FAILURE SOCIETY
Future Leaders in
04/16/2018
$10,000.00
OF AMERICA INC.
Heart Failure
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF CME
Applying the
04/17/2018
$313,595.00
INC.
Latest Evidence
to Improve Care
for Patients with
HR+/HER2-
Metastatic Breast
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
Practical
04/17/2018
$5,000.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
Considerations
ACTING THROUGH THE
and Rationale for
DEPARTMENT OF GCE
Immunotherapy
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AACE 27th Annual
04/17/2018
$30,000.00
CLINICAL
Scientific &
ENDOCRINOLOGITS
Clinical
Congress--Cardiov
ascular Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
2nd Annual Heart
04/18/2018
$50,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
in Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SCAI 2018
04/18/2018
$40,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Scientific
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Sessions
INTERVENTIONS
featuring
FOUNDATION
Controversies in
Interventional
Pharmacology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
STEMI Protocol
04/18/2018
$3,730.00
ASSOCIATION
Stakeholder
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALZHEIMER'S ASSOCIATION
2018 Research
04/19/2018
$50,000.00
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PURDUE UNIVERSITY
Critical
04/23/2018
$575,210.00
Conversations on
Bruton's Tyrosine
Kinase Inhibitor
Development and
Use in B-Cell
Malignancies (CCO
GR Pgm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Severe Asthma
04/23/2018
$60,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Shared Decision
IMMUNOLOGY
Making Tool
Instructional
Video
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Symposium--A
04/23/2018
$80,375.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Personalized
IMMUNOLOGY
Approach to
Managing Patients
with Uncontrolled
Asthma / Shifting
Paradigms in
Management of
Severe Asthma:
Pathogenesis,
Phenotypes and
Personalized
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR HEALTH, INC.
2018 MedStar
04/24/2018
$15,000.00
Health System
Prostate Cancer
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT HEALTH SAN ANTONIO
3rd Annual Cardio
04/24/2018
$5,000.00
Renal Connections
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR HEALTH, INC.
Enhancing Health
04/24/2018
$10,000.00
System
Initiatives
Utilizing
Clinical Advances
to Optimize the
Diagnosis and
Treatment of
Prostate Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Best Practices in
04/25/2018
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
the Management of
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Advanced Non-
Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC):
Individualizing
Therapy for
Optimized Patient
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF BOSTON
CVD AND RENAL
04/25/2018
$49,000.00
UNIVERSITY
DISEASE IN T2DM:
Individualizing
Therapeutic
Options to Reduce
Comorbid Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 Best of ASCO
04/25/2018
$120,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meetings
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN CHEMICAL
Recovery of
04/26/2018
$10,000.00
SOCIETY, DIVISION OF
Biological
BIOCHEMICAL
Products XVIII
TECHNOLOGY, RECOVERY
Conference
OF BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN RADIUM SOCIETY
American Radium
04/26/2018
$10,000.00
Society 100th
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY
Midwest Islet Club
04/26/2018
$2,500.00
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEST PENN ALLEGHENY
2018
04/29/2018
$5,000.00
HEALTH SYSTEM, INC.
Cardiovascular
DBA ALLEGHENY GENERAL
Medicine Update
HOSPITAL
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
Diabetes Update
04/30/2018
$5,000.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
2018
ACTING THROUGH THE
DEPARTMENT OF GCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASPEN CANCER CONFERENCE
33rd Aspen Cancer
04/30/2018
$10,000.00
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
6th Annual
04/30/2018
$20,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Scientific
PENNSYLVANIA/PERELMAN
Symposium: BRCA1,
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT
BRCA2 and Beyond:
THE UNIVERSITY OF PA
An Update on
Hereditary Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN
2018 AACI/CCAF
05/01/2018
$15,000.00
CANCER INSTITUTES
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
2018 ONS Annual
05/01/2018
$50,000.00
SOCIETY
Congress and two
Regional
Conferences
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
2018 New Advances
05/03/2018
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
in Lung Cancer:
PENNSYLVANIA/PERELMAN
Stretching the
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT
Envelope
THE UNIVERSITY OF PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEMATOLOGY ONCOLOGY
Immuno oncology
05/06/2018
$35,000.00
PHARMACY ASSOCIATION
Educational
Modules for
Oncology
Pharmacists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CANCER RESEARCH
2018
05/06/2018
$50,000.00
INSTITUTE
International
Cancer
Immunotherapy
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Pancreatic
05/06/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Cancer: Advances
in Science and
Clinical Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ALLIANCE FOR CLINICAL
2018 Group
05/07/2018
$40,000.00
TRIALS IN ONCOLOGY
Meetings
FOUNDATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2018
05/07/2018
$40,000.00
SOCIETY INC.
International
Conference--Selec
ted Sessions in
Lung Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
2018 ASH Meeting
05/08/2018
$50,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
on Lymphoma
Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNGEVITY FOUNDATION
LUNGevity
05/08/2018
$50,000.00
Foundation
Scientific and
Clinical
Roundtable--
Streamlining
Clinical Trials
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
HOPA Early Career
05/08/2018
$60,000.00
PHARMACY ASSOCIATION
Research Grant
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live at
05/09/2018
$323,020.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
ASTRO 2018--The
Era of
Immunotherapy in
Stage III NSCLC
(150205115)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRUSTEES OF THE
2018 Breast Cancer
05/09/2018
$5,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Clinical Case
PENNSYLVANIA/PERELMAN
Series: The Year
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT
in Review
THE UNIVERSITY OF PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEART FAILURE SOCIETY
2018 HFSA Board
05/09/2018
$15,000.00
OF AMERICA INC.
Certification
Review Course in
Advanced Heart
Failure and
Transplant
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Immuno-Oncology
05/10/2018
$25,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Biomarkers State
CANCER
of the Art
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAPA 2018 Annual
05/10/2018
$10,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HDL WORKSHOP
HDL Workshop 2018
05/10/2018
$5,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUPUS RESEARCH
Lupus Research
05/10/2018
$25,000.00
ALLIANCE, INC.
Alliance 2018
Annual Scientific
Conference--Forum
for Discovery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOARD OF REGENTS FOR
Dissecting the
05/13/2018
$200,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
Decision:
Documenting and
Discussing the
Clinical Practice
Patterns of
Hematologic
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
24th Annual San
05/13/2018
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Diego Heart
CALIFORNIA
Failure Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Intensive Review
05/15/2018
$10,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
of Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2018 Heterocyclic
05/15/2018
$2,000.00
CONFERENCE
Gordon Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
30th Annual
05/16/2018
$40,000.00
FOUNDATION
Transcatheter
Cardiovascular
Therapeutics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
2018 Family
05/16/2018
$19,000.00
FAMILY PHYSICIANS
Medicine
Experience
Interactive
Lecture titled
Acute Coronary
Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HUNTSVILLE HOSPITAL
RSS Breast Cancer
05/16/2018
$2,000.00
FOUNDATION
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF
2018 WCIO
05/20/2018
$15,000.00
INTERVENTIONAL
ONCOLOGY (SIO)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
University of
05/20/2018
$24,300.00
WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF
Washington Topics
MEDICINE
in Allergy and
Immunology
Teaching Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION
10th Semi Annual
05/21/2018
$20,000.00
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
(formerly NCI
cooperatives
groups, GOG,
NSABP, RTOG)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
20th Annual Lynn
05/21/2018
$15,000.00
Sage Breast
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
Molecular Biology
05/22/2018
$15,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
in Clinical
Oncology Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO
Precision Medicine
05/23/2018
$20,000.00
in Autoimmunity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live at
05/23/2018
$313,240.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
CAP18: Molecular
Testing for EGFR
Mutations in the
Context of a
Changing
Treatment
Landscape,
Evolving Testing
Options, and New
Guidelines
(150205165)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
2018 Lung Cancer
05/23/2018
$15,000.00
SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL
SPORE Workshop
CENTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACEP18, ACEP
05/23/2018
$20,000.00
EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS
National
Scientific
Assembly--Cardiov
ascular Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOSPITAL QUALITY
Advances in the
05/23/2018
$222,127.50
FOUNDATION, LLC
Management of
Acute and Chronic
Hyperkalemia: An
Update for
Emergency
Medicine,
Hospitalists and
Healthcare
Providers (MD, PA
and CRNP)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2018 Cardiac
05/23/2018
$5,000.00
CONFERENCE
Regulatory
Mechanisms Gordon
Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 ASCO Annual
05/24/2018
$30,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Head and
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Neck Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 ASCO Pre-
05/24/2018
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Annual Meeting
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Seminar: New
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Drugs in Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF CLINICAL
18th Annual
05/24/2018
$10,000.00
IMMUNOLOGY SOCIETIES
Meeting of the
Federation of
Clinical
Immunology
Societies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2018-2019 Monthly
05/24/2018
$75,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Oncology Tumor
Boards: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WINTHROP UNIVERSITY
3rd Annual NYU
05/24/2018
$3,000.00
HOSPITAL
Winthrop Breast
Health Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2018 ASCO Annual
05/27/2018
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Lung
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MISSOURI ACADEMY OF
Updates in
05/30/2018
$3,000.00
PHYSICIANS ASSISTANTS
Treating Chronic
Obstructive
Pulmonary
Disorder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Emergency Medicine
06/03/2018
$568,470.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
and Immuno-
Oncology
Intersect:
Recognizing and
Managing Immune-
Related Adverse
Effects in the
Emergency
Department
(150205075)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2018 Oncology
06/03/2018
$40,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Case Manager and
Medical Director
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
ASTRO 2018 60th
06/03/2018
$50,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
2018 Pittsburgh
06/04/2018
$10,000.00
PITTSBURGH
International
Lung Conference--
Pulmonary
Medicine: Basic
Biology and Novel
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AEGEAN CONFERENCES,
2nd International
06/05/2018
$5,000.00
INC.
Conference on
Tissue Repair,
Regeneration, and
Fibrosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SYNAPTIV, INC.
Atlanta Lung
06/05/2018
$20,000.00
Cancer Symposium
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
NSCLC Treatment in
06/05/2018
$38,885.00
TRANSLATIONAL ONCOLOGY
the Era of
Precision
Medicine: Case-
Based Insights
from ASCO 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Traveling Master
06/06/2018
$390,030.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Class for
Emergency
Medicine
Specialists:
Urgent Care of
Patients
Receiving Cancer
Immunotherapy:
Recognition and
Management of
Immune-Mediated
Adverse Reactions
in the ED
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS
33rd Annual
06/06/2018
$15,000.00
OF HARVARD COLLEGE
Critical Issues
In Tumor
Microenvironment:
Angiogenesis,
Metastasis and
Immunology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KERN ASPEN LIPID
Metabolic
06/06/2018
$10,000.00
CONFERENCE
Regulation of
Immunity,
Cardiometabolic
Diseases and
Cancer: New
Theraepeutic
Approaches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF TOXICOLOGIC
STP 37th Annual
06/06/2018
$3,000.00
PATHOLOGY
Symposium:
KEEPING IT RENAL
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WEILL CORNELL MEDICAL
2nd Annual
06/10/2018
$15,000.00
COLLEGE
International
Conference
Immunotherapy
Radiotherapy
Combinations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2018 COPD Learning
06/10/2018
$5,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2018
06/10/2018
$27,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Interdisciplinary
Program--Lung
Cancer: 2018
Update in Staging
and Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Breathing New Air
06/10/2018
$20,400.00
OSTEOPATHIC INTERNISTS
into the
Treatment of COPD
and Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE RECTOR AND VISITORS
PREP2018 Symposium
06/10/2018
$5,000.00
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF
VIRGINIA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR NEURO-
3rd CNS Anticancer
06/11/2018
$15,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Drug Discovery
and Development
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
2018 JADPRO Live:
06/12/2018
$50,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
The Annual APSHO
EISENHOWER
Meeting--Sequenci
ng Therapies in
Indolent
Lymphomas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACOI 2018 Annual
06/12/2018
$33,782.00
OSTEOPATHIC INTERNISTS
Convention and
Scientific
Sessions:
Addressing Unmet
Needs in Type 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Moving Toward A
06/13/2018
$59,912.00
CINCINNATI
New Standard of
Care: Checkpoint
Inhibitors in
Advanced
Urothelial Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
Reducing
06/13/2018
$178,188.13
DIABETES EDUCATORS
Cardiovascular
Risk in T2DM with
SGLT2 Inhibitors
and GLP1-Receptor
Antagonists:
Translating
Evidence into
Patient Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR NEURO-
23rd Annual
06/13/2018
$75,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Scientific
Meeting of the
Society for Neuro-
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2018 Lung Cancer
06/13/2018
$70,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Learning Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Request for 2018
06/14/2018
$5,000.00
CALIFORNIA BERKELEY
Funding for the
FOUNDATION
Forum for
Collaborative
Research's
Program on HBV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
OncologyConsults.c
06/15/2018
$89,885.00
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
om Improving
MEDICINE
Outcomes in Stage
III NSCLC The
Emerging Role of
Immunotherapy in
Curbing Disease
Progression
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Advances in Cancer
06/17/2018
$500,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
ImmunotherapyT
CANCER
2018-19
Educational
Program Series
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
Medications' Class
06/19/2018
$100,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Effects in DM and
CVD--All you need
to know- and
never asked.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live at
06/21/2018
$262,040.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
ASCP 2018:
Navigating the
Complexities of
Molecular Testing
for EGFR
Mutations to
Guide Selection
of EGFR-Targeted
Therapy for
Patients With
Lung Cancer
(150205135)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY
Lurie Cancer
06/21/2018
$10,000.00
Center
Multidisciplinary
Head and Neck
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHARLOTTE AHEC
30th Annual Fall
06/25/2018
$5,000.00
Foliage Cancer
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA ON
Integrated
06/25/2018
$6,000.00
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR
Pathways of
BIOLOGY
Disease in NASH
and NAFLD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASN Kidney Week
06/25/2018
$20,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Educational
Session Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
DNA Topoisomerases
06/25/2018
$10,000.00
CONFERENCE
in Biology and
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDUSTRY NETWORKING
BioHealth Capital
06/25/2018
$10,000.00
GROUP
Region Workforce
Community
Engagement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Unraveling the
07/01/2018
$33,782.00
OSTEOPATHIC INTERNISTS
Effects of
Antihyperglycemic
Agents on
Cardiovascular
Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live at
07/02/2018
$262,040.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
ASCP 2018:
Advances and
Challenges in
Refining the Use
of Cancer
Immunotherapies
Through Biomarker
Testing
(150205136)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE FELLOWS
Fifth Annual
07/02/2018
$250,000.00
FOUNDATION
Research Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC 2018 Workshop
07/02/2018
$100,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
on Nutrition,
CANCER
Metabolism and
the Microbiome in
Cancer Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
The Role of
07/02/2018
$167,500.00
NEPHROLOGY
Hypoxia-Inducible
Factors and
Inflammation in
the Anemia of
Kidney Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
Managing
07/04/2018
$160,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Cardiovascular
Risk Factors in
Patients with
Type 2 Diabetes:
Emerging Concepts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASH Meeting on
07/04/2018
$60,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
Hematologic
Malignancies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN HEART
Scientific
07/05/2018
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Sessions 2018
Dedicated
Programming on
Acute Coronary
Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BREATHE CALIFORNIA OF
2018 BREATHE
07/08/2018
$3,000.00
LOS ANGELES COUNTY
California of Los
Angeles County
10th Annual COPD
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR INDUSTRIAL
SIMB Annual
07/08/2018
$3,000.00
MICROBIOLOGY AND
Meeting
BIOTECHNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOSLIN DIABETES CENTER,
2018 AANHPI
07/08/2018
$5,000.00
INC.
Diabetes
Coalition
Conference The
Future of
Population
Diabetes Research
and Advocacy:
Asian American
Native Hawaiian
Pacific Islanders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACS DIVISION OF
Division of
07/09/2018
$2,500.00
MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Medicinal
Chemistry Program
256th ACS
national meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
07/10/2018
$10,000.00
CONFERENCES, INC.
Conference Tissue
Niches and
Resident Stem
Cells in Adult
Epithelia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH AMERICAN
Reducing
07/11/2018
$60,000.00
THROMBOSIS FORUM
Cardiovascular
Risk in Patients
with Diabetes: A
Comprehensive Yet
Concise Patient
Focused Action
Plan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
36th Annual Aspen
07/11/2018
$3,000.00
ALLERGY ASTHMA AND
Allergy
IMMUNOLOGY
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC 33rd Annual
07/16/2018
$400,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Meeting
CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC Cancer
07/16/2018
$67,500.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Immunotherapy
CANCER
Sparkathon 2018--
Emerging Leaders
Igniting
Innovation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Respiratory
07/16/2018
$35,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Syncytial Virus
(RSV) Education
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BINAYTARA FOUNDATION
6th International
07/16/2018
$5,000.00
Conference on
Advances in
Hematology and
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR MUCOSAL
Mucosal Immunology
07/16/2018
$10,000.00
IMMUNOLOGY
Course and
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR COLLEGE OF
Breast Cancer
07/17/2018
$3,000.00
MEDICINE
Research and
Education program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Conference on
07/17/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
The Science of
Cancer Health
Disparities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live at
07/18/2018
$164,230.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
CAP18: The
Central Role of
Biomarker Testing
in Piecing
Together the
Immuno-Oncology
Puzzle in the Era
of Precision
Medicine
(150205123)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA STATE
PeerView inClinic,
07/18/2018
$32,330.00
UNIVERSITY
Building
Innovative
Treatment Options
for Patients with
B-cell
Malignancies:
Practical
Insights on
Clinical Evidence
and Integration
Strategies
150205182
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
2018 JADPRO Live:
07/19/2018
$50,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
The Annual APSHO
EISENHOWER
Meeting--Sequenci
ng of Treatments
for Patients with
Ovarian Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASH Scholar Awards
07/20/2018
$100,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
60th ASH Annual
07/20/2018
$150,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Cancer Health
07/22/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Disparities Think
Tank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF
Association of
07/23/2018
$10,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Physician
IN ONCOLOGY
Assistants in
Oncology 21st
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
2018 JADPRO Live:
07/24/2018
$50,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
The Annual APSHO
EISENHOWER
Meeting--Manageme
nt of Side
Effects for
Patients with
Multi-Modality
Therapy in
Thoracic Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Kidney Health
07/24/2018
$30,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2018 Gordon
07/26/2018
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Research
Conference and
Seminar on Cell
Death
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
Fifth Annual
07/29/2018
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
Metastatic Breast
MEDICINE
Cancer Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Translational
07/31/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Cancer Research
for Basic
Scientists
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOARD OF REGENTS FOR
Virtual
08/01/2018
$75,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
Challenging Case
Clinic: B-Cell
Lymphomas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL
Gene Panel
08/01/2018
$100,000.00
HOSPITAL
Testing: Decision
Aid
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNG CANCER ALLIANCE
Florida and
08/01/2018
$199,200.00
Georgia Lung
Cancer Screening
Demonstration
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
YALE SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
Severe Asthma 2018
08/01/2018
$15,000.00
Advances in
Pathogenesis and
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UTAH CHAPTER OF THE
Rockies Chapter
08/02/2018
$3,000.00
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Meeting
CARDIOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Immune Escape:
08/02/2018
$25,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Current
CANCER
Understanding of
Mechanisms and
Advances in
Therapeutics
Approaches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNG CANCER ALLIANCE
Florida and
08/02/2018
$147,972.00
Georgia Lung
Cancer Screening
Demonstration
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
23rd Annual
08/02/2018
$5,000.00
Regional Allied
Health
Conference:
Current
Perspectives in
Asthma, Allergy,
and Pulmonary
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
FDA-AACR Workshop
08/02/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
on Non-clinical
Models for Safety
Assessment of
Immunooncology
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Novel Treatment
08/06/2018
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Advances and
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Approaches in the
Management of
Advanced Breast
Cancer: Expert
Strategies for
Individualized
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
New Frontiers in
08/06/2018
$45,000.00
MANAGED CARE
the Management of
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Ovarian Cancer:
Exploring the
Role of PARP
Inhibitors in the
Evolving
Treatment
Paradigm
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2018 SITC Primer
08/07/2018
$50,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
on Tumor
CANCER
Immunology and
Cancer
ImmunotherapyT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC 2018 Grant
08/07/2018
$10,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Writing Workshop:
CANCER
Grant Writing:
From Start to
Finish, and Then
Starting Again
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAS HEALTH
The Diagnosis and
08/07/2018
$85,240.00
FOUNDATION
Treatment of
Hereditary Breast
and Ovarian
Cancer Syndrome
in Brazil
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADMINISTRATORS OF THE
18th Annual SSCI
08/10/2018
$55,000.00
TULANE EDUCATION FUND
Nephrology Young
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Joint Analyses of
08/10/2018
$105,895.00
FOUNDATION
GFR slope and
Change in
Albuminuria by
AstraZeneca and
the CKDEPI
Collaboration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
JADPRO Live 2018:
08/12/2018
$25,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
New Drug Updates
EISENHOWER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA
Vascular Biology
08/12/2018
$7,500.00
Working Group
Global Chapter
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Optimizing Small
08/12/2018
$50,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Molecule
Inhibitor Therapy
for Relapsed/
Refractory B-cell
Lymphomas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Clinical
08/12/2018
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
and Economic
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Outcomes with
Emerging
Therapies in the
Management of
Chronic
Lymphocytic
Leukemia (CLL)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Optimizing
08/13/2018
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Treatment
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Strategies in the
Management of
Advanced Non-
Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC):
Individualized
Therapy for
Improved Patient
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 13th Annual
08/13/2018
$75,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Congress:
Hematologic
MalignanciesTM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN PANCREATIC
49th Annual
08/13/2018
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION, INC.
Meeting of the
American
Pancreatic
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
16th Annual
08/14/2018
$50,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Nephrology Young
CALIFORNIA
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNSYLVANIA STATE
PeerView
08/15/2018
$115,000.00
UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF
MasterClass:
MEDICINE
Innovative
Therapy in B-Cell
Malignancies: An
Expert Tumor
Board on Novel
Agent Classes in
CLL, FL, and MCL
(150205208)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION OF
Series of AUTM
08/15/2018
$25,287.50
UNIVERSITY TECHNOLOGY
2019 Annual
MANAGERS INC.
Meetings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH
TRIO-US & UCLA
08/16/2018
$5,000.00
IN ONCOLOGY-US, INC.
Annual Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DANA-FARBER CANCER
IWWM10--Internatio
08/17/2018
$100,000.00
INSTITUTE
nal Workshop on
Waldenstroms
macroglobulinemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Integrating BTK
08/20/2018
$245,090.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Inhibitors into
the Management of
B cell
Malignancies: How
is Evidence
Driving Patient
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
CRI-AACR ISS--
08/20/2018
$324,460.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Improving Patient
Outcomes With
Cancer
Immunotherapies
and Combinations
Throughout the
Continuum of Lung
Cancer
(150205201)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN NEPHROLOGY
ANNA Fall Meeting
08/20/2018
$42,500.00
NURSES ASSOCIATION
CE Symposium
(ANNA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Risk and Treatment
08/20/2018
$125,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
of Hyperkalemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
08/20/2018
$276,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Lymphoma Research
Fellowships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
2019 SITC-
08/20/2018
$120,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
AstraZeneca
CANCER
Immunotherapy in
Lung Cancer
Clinical
Fellowship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GBMC HEALTHCARE
Advances in
08/21/2018
$2,000.00
Treatment and
Management of
Ovarian Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
PARP Inhibitors in
08/21/2018
$240,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Breast Cancer:
Expert
Perspectives on
Clinical
Application and
Genetic Testing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT HEALTH SCIENCE
41st Annual San
08/21/2018
$75,000.00
CENTER AT SAN ANTONIO
Antonio Breast
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
Cancer Symposium
OFFICE OF CME
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live--The
08/22/2018
$269,660.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Evolving Role of
Immunotherapy as
a Component of
Multi-Modal
Therapy in
Earlier Stages of
Lung Cancer:
Rationale,
Current Evidence,
Key Trials, and
Implications for
Multidisciplinary
Care (150205392)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TEMPLE UNIVERSITY LUNG
Severe
08/26/2018
$65,000.00
CENTER- OF THE
Uncontrolled
COMMONWEALTH SYSTEM OF
Asthma:
HIGHER EDUCATION
Definition,
Management, and
Advance Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
OHIO CHAPTER OF THE
28th Annual
08/26/2018
$4,500.00
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Meeting of the
CARDIOLOGY
Ohio Chapter of
the American
College of
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PROSTATE CANCER
25th Annual
08/27/2018
$20,000.00
FOUNDATION
Scientific
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
Advancing the
08/27/2018
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION EDUCATION
Treatment of
AND RESEARCH, INC.
Genitourinary
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE ICAHN SCHOOL OF
The Lancet Women
08/30/2018
$50,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
and
SINAI
Cardiovascular
Disease
Commission
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Behind the
08/30/2018
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Guidelines:
Insights into the
Standard of Care
in Oncology 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Behind the
08/30/2018
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Guidelines:
Insights into the
Standard of Care
in Oncology 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE BOARD OF TRUSTREES
Stanford Review of
09/05/2018
$5,000.00
OF THE LELAND STANFORD
the 60th Annual
JUNIOR UNIVERSITY ON
American Society
BEHALF OF ITS SCHOOL
of Hematology
OF MEDICINE
Meeting 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL CYTOKINE
6th Annual Meeting
09/11/2018
$20,000.00
AND INTERFERON SOCIETY
of the
INC.
International
Cytokine and
Interferon
Society
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI
7th Annual New
09/11/2018
$10,000.00
Therapeutics in
Oncology: The
Road to
Personalized
Medicine
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MERCY HEALTH FOUNDATION
2019 Tri-State ASH
09/11/2018
$5,000.00
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
Duke Stanford CEC
09/18/2018
$20,000.00
Summit:
Scientific,
Regulatory and
Operational Best
Practices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KENTUCKY ACADEMY OF
Breast Cancer--
09/18/2018
$3,000.00
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Diagnosis and
Patient Treatment
Options
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
13th Update on the
09/20/2018
$5,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
Management of
CENTER
Genitourinary
Malignancies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2019 Congress
09/20/2018
$50,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
SeriesTM: Breast
Cancer with
Updates from the
2018 San Antonio
Breast Cancer
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Hematology 2018:
09/21/2018
$100,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
the ASH Education
Program Book
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENN STATE COLLEGE OF
Consensus or
09/23/2018
$75,000.00
MEDICINE
Controversy?
Clinical
Investigators
Provide
Perspectives on
the Current and
Future Management
of Patients with
Prostate Cancer--
An ISS Held as a
Premium Ancillary
Educational Event
During the 2019
Genitourinary
Cancers Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HARTFORD HOSPITAL
34th Annual
09/23/2018
$5,000.00
Cardiovascular
Symposium
presented by
Hartford
HealthCare
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHN HOPKINS UNIVERSITY
Novel Therapeutic
09/24/2018
$5,000.00
Approaches to
Allergic Diseases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
Advances in
09/24/2018
$2,500.00
FOR MAGNETIC RESONANCE
Multiscale Cancer
IN MEDICINE
Detection: From
Micro to Macro
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PARENTERAL DRUG
PDA Universe of
10/01/2018
$24,000.00
ASSOCIATION (PDA)
Pre-filled
Syringes and
Injection Devices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA ON
2019 Keystone
10/01/2018
$25,000.00
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR
Symposia
BIOLOGY
Directors' Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEMORIAL SLOAN
State-of-the-Art
10/01/2018
$5,000.00
KETTERING CANCER
Gynecologic
CENTER
Surgery and
Ovarian Cancer
Management
Conference 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Official Best of
10/02/2018
$60,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCE CENTER
San Antonio
AT SAN ANTONIO
Breast Cancer
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
10/03/2018
$276,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Immuno-Oncology
Research
Fellowships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDCHI, THE MARYLAND
OPTIMAL DURATION
10/8/2018
$387,213.13
STATE MEDICAL SOCIETY
OF ANTIPLATELET
THERAPY AFTER
PCI: The Case for
Longerterm Dual
Antiplatelet
Therapy in
Patients with
History of MI
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Symposium 4:
10/08/2018
$5,000.00
TOXICOLOGY
Update on RNA
Therapies:
Challenges and
Opportunities,
American College
of Toxicology
39th Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PEPTIDE THERAPEUTICS
13th Annual
10/08/2018
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION
Peptide
Therapeutics
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
7th International
10/09/2018
$5,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Conference on
Gram-Positive
Pathogens
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
2019 Atlanta
10/09/2018
$10,000.00
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
Breast Cancer
MEDICINE OFFICE OF
Symposium
CONTINUING MEDICAL
EDUCATION
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LYMPHOMA RESEARCH
LRF Postdoctoral
10/10/2018
$105,000.00
FOUNDATION
Fellowship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOG FOUNDATION INC.
11th Semi Annual
10/10/2018
$20,000.00
Meeting of NRG
Oncology
(formerly GOG,
NSABP, RTOG)
cooperative
groups
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF
Chicago Lung
10/10/2018
$10,000.00
CHICAGO
Cancer Updates
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
The Liver Meeting
10/11/2018
$15,000.00
THE STUDY OF LIVER
2018 Park Benches
DISEASES
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ANIMAL
The Continued
10/14/2018
$2,000.00
INTEREST ALLIANCE
Importance of
Animal Research
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
10/17/2018
$276,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Lung Cancer
Research
Fellowships
(Driver
Mutations)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE COOPER HEALTH
Contemporary
10/22/2018
$2,500.00
SYSTEM
Practices in
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
2019 Highlights of
10/22/2018
$100,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
ASH in North
America
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EMORY UNIVERSITY SCHOOL
3rd National
10/24/2018
$5,000.00
OF MEDICINE
Congress on the
Prevention of
Diabetes and Its
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEMORIAL SLOAN
2018 Annual Cancer
10/24/2018
$5,000.00
KETTERING CANCER
Treatment-Related
CENTER
Adverse Events
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
2018 ECOG-ACRIN
10/24/2018
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
Fall Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Special
10/28/2018
$25,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Conference on
Tumor Immunology
and Immunotherapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
Best of 19th World
10/28/2018
$20,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Conference on
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Lung Cancer
(WCLC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
45th Annual
10/29/2018
$3,000.00
Washington
University Kilo
Diabetes
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIRGINIA BIOTECHNOLOGY
Medimmune
11/01/2018
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Chariman's Circle
Membership
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
16th Annual World
11/01/2018
$100,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
congress on
Insulin
Resistance
Diabetes and
Cardiovascular
Disease (WCIRDC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live--ISS
11/01/2018
$286,060.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
at the Thoracic
Cancers
Symposium, "The
Present and
Future of
Immunotherapy as
a Key Component
of the Treatment
Arsenal for
Locally Advanced
and Earlier
Stages of Lung
Cancer: State of
the Science,
Practicalities,
and Implications
for Mult
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
CHF, the Next
11/01/2018
$150,705.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Frontier in
Diabetes: Do
SGLT2 Inhibitors
Have a Role in
Management and
Prevention?
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
ASCO and NCCN 2019
11/01/2018
$60,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
ISS CCO: PARP
Inhibitors in
Breast Cancer:
Expert
Perspectives on
Clinical
Application and
Genetic Testing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOARD OF REGENTS OF THE
Grand Rounds
11/01/2018
$250,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
series Bioascend:
2019 Ovarian
Community Grand
Rounds:
Incorporating
Recently Approved
Targeted Agents,
Emerging
Combinations, and
Genetic Testing
for the Optimal
Management of
Patients with
Ovarian Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Webinars: PARP
11/01/2018
$150,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Inhibition and
PHYSICIANS, INC.
its Evolving Use
in the Treatment
of Cancers: What
Managed Care
Needs to Know for
Improved Clinical
and Economic
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
FastForward Silver
11/05/2018
$25,000.00
UNIVERSITY
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION FOR WOMEN
Innovation and
11/05/2018
$25,000.00
IN SCIENCE
Inclusion Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR THE
2018 Biomarkers
11/05/2018
$10,000.00
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF
Consortium Cancer
HEALTH
Steering
Committee Annual
Scientific
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Oncology--
11/06/2018
$324,340.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
ISS at ASCO-SITC,
Seminars in
Immuno-Oncology,
``III, II, I:
Addressing Unmet
Needs in Earlier
Stages of NSCLC
With
Immunotherapy''
(150205292)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
ISS at 2019
11/06/2018
$286,060.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Multidisciplinary
Thoracic Cancers
Symposium-
Refining Current
Practice and
Exploring New
Frontiers in EGFR-
Mutant NSCLC
(150205322)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Comparative
11/06/2018
$2,000.00
VETERINARY
Pathologists in
PATHOLOGISTS
Translational
Medicine
reception at the
2018 ACVP/ASVCP
Concurrent Annual
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCATION OF
AAPS PharmSci 360
11/06/2018
$50,000.00
PHARMACEUTICAL
SCIENTISTS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAYO CLINIC ARIZONA
Mayo Clinic Cancer
11/07/2018
$5,000.00
Center Thoracic
Oncology Update
State of the Art
Evaluation and
Management of
Thoracic Cancers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
Case-based Forum:
11/07/2018
$20,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR
Individualizing
ANGIOGRAPHY AND
Antithrombotic
INTERVENTIONS
Therapies for PCI
FOUNDATION
Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UT HEALTH SAN ANTONIO
2019 Practical
11/07/2018
$5,000.00
Application of
New Agents in
Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
2018 Best of ASTRO
11/07/2018
$10,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
14th Annual
11/11/2018
$25,000.00
COALITION
Personalized
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACLAM FOUNDATION
2018 ACLAM Grants
11/11/2018
$4,000.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ICAHN SCHOOL OF
LIVE Conference:
11/11/2018
$5,000.00
MEDICINE AT MOUNT
3rd International
SINAI
Prostate Cancer
and Urologic
Oncology
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
2019
11/11/2018
$50,000.00
RADIATION ONCOLOGY
Multidisciplinary
Thoracic Cancers
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CENTER FOR MEDICAL
Core Outcomes in
11/11/2018
$75,000.00
TECHNOLOGY POLICY
Non-Alcoholic
Steatohepatitis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Medical Oncology
11/11/2018
$10,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
and Hematology
CENTER
2019:
Multidisciplinary
Approaches that
Improve
Coordination of
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2019 Nursing
11/11/2018
$30,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Program:
Advancing
Oncology NursingT
at the NCCN
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH AMERICAN 3R'S
Virtual Education
11/11/2018
$4,000.00
COLLABORATIVE
Community (VEC)
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLLEGIUM
32nd Biennial
11/12/2018
$40,000.00
INTERNATIONALE
Symposium of the
ALLERGOLOGICUM
Collegium
Internationale
Allergologicum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENN STATE COLLEGE OF
ISS at AACR BTK
11/12/2018
$370,330.00
MEDICINE
Inhibition as an
Anti-Cancer
Strategy:
Exploring a Model
for Modern
Targeted Therapy
in Hematologic
Malignancies and
Beyond
(150205409)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Cleveland Clinic
11/12/2018
$5,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Florida's 2nd
Annual San
Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium
SABCS Official
Review Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAYO CLINIC
Mayo Clinic
11/12/2018
$15,000.00
JACKSONVILLE
Advances in
Breast Cancer
Management 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LEUKEMIA RESEARCH
Hollis Brownstein
11/13/2018
$100,000.00
FOUNDATION INC.
Research Grants
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
ISS at ONS- Taking
11/13/2018
$317,050.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Aim at B-Cell
Malignancies with
BTK Inhibitors:
Hematology/
Oncology Nurse
Perspectives and
Insights on
Clinical Care
(150205361)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR HEALTH, INC.
Lung Cancer 2018:
11/15/2018
$5,000.00
Progress and
Future Directions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Research
11/18/2018
$28,800.00
FOUNDATION
initiative to
extend the
analytical work
related to
evaluation of
clinical
endpoints
suitable for
early phase
trials in CKD
using the CKD-
Epidemiology
Consortium (CKD-
EPI)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOARD OF REGENTS OF THE
2019 Lymphoma
11/20/2018
$7,500.00
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
Study Group
Hematology
Highlights A Post
ASH Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
39th Annual
11/20/2018
$25,000.00
Clinical
Hematology and
Oncology
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
Pharmacists' Role
11/25/2018
$49,800.00
CME, INC.
in the
Comprehensive
Care of Acute
Coronary Syndrome
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
Connecting Heart
11/26/2018
$40,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Disease and
ASSOCIATION
Diabetes-HCP Live
and On-Demand
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UHS PROFESSIONAL
Women's Health
11/26/2018
$5,000.00
EDUCATION PROGRAMS
2019
INC. (DBA VCU HEALTH
CONTINUING MEDICAL
EDUCATION)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
25th Annual
11/26/2018
$15,000.00
FOUNDATION
Interventional
Cardiology
Fellows Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEDARS-SINAI MEDICAL
13th Annual Women
11/28/2018
$5,000.00
CENTER
and Ischemic
Heart Disease
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCRIPPS HEALTH
Dr. Richard Schatz
11/28/2018
$5,000.00
Interventional
Cardiology Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA ON
2019 DNA
11/29/2018
$10,000.00
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR
Replication and
BIOLOGY
Genome
Instability: From
Mechanism to
Disease A1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
11th ANNUAL
11/29/2018
$50,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
HEMATOLOGIC
CENTER
MALIGNANCIES
DEMYSTIFIED: A
CRITICAL
APPRAISAL OF DATA
FROM 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR WASHINGTON
Cardiovascular
11/29/2018
$25,000.00
HOSPITAL CENTER
Research
Technologies,
(CRT) 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2019 Conquer
12/02/2018
$40,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Merit
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Awards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWELL HEALTH
New York City--
12/02/2018
$20,000.00
Debates in
Interventional
Cardiology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
New York
12/02/2018
$10,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
11th Biennial
12/02/2018
$25,000.00
EOSINOPHIL SOCIETY,
Symposium
INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
JOHNS HOPKINS
Grand Rounds
12/03/2018
$150,000.00
UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
series MCM:15
MEDICINE
visting faculty
series: Novel
Targeted Agents
in the Management
of Recurrent
Advanced Ovarian
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2019 Conquer
12/03/2018
$500,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Mission
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Endowment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
12/03/2018
$276,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Breast Cancer
Research
Fellowships
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR-AstraZeneca
12/03/2018
$276,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Ovarian Cancer
Research
Fellowships (DNA
Damage Response)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
ASH Bridge Grant
12/03/2018
$150,000.00
HEMATOLOGY
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Gordon Research
12/03/2018
$4,000.00
CONFERENCE
Conference:
Biotherapeutics
and Vaccines
Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDIANA UNIVERSITY
Breast Cancer Year
12/03/2018
$5,000.00
in Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
AACR Annual
12/03/2018
$225,000.00
FOR CANCER RESEARCH
Meeting 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
TEXAS HEART INSTITUTE
9th Annual Women's
12/03/2018
$3,000.00
Heart and
Vascular
Symposium: A New
Era in
Prevention,
Diagnosis and
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
2018 Managing
12/03/2018
$150,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Cardiovascular
Risk in Diabetes
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTERNATIONAL
IASLC 19th
12/03/2018
$100,000.00
ASSOCIATION FOR THE
Targeted
STUDY OF LUNG CANCER
Therapies for
Lung Cancer
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH CAROLINA THORACIC
North Carolina
12/04/2018
$14,500.00
SOCIETY
Thoracic Society
Annual Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2019 Conquer
12/05/2018
$287,500.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Young
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Investigator
Award (YIA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2019 Conquer
12/05/2018
$230,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Cancer Foundation
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
of ASCO Career
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Development Award
(CDA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FRIENDS OF CANCER
2019 Friends of
12/05/2018
$200,000.00
RESEARCH
Cancer Research
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLEGIO DE MEDICOS
Innovations in
12/06/2018
$10,000.00
CIRUJANOS DE PUERTO
Medicine 2018
RICO
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC's Cancer
12/06/2018
$150,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Immunotherapy
CANCER
Winter School
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USF HEALTH PROFESSIONS
15th Annual
12/06/2018
$7,500.00
CONFERENCING
Clinical
CORPORATION
Breakthroughs and
Challenges in
Hematologic
Malignancies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC's Cancer
12/09/2018
$100,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Immunotherapy
CANCER
Guidelines
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
Next Frontiers in
12/09/2018
$10,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Urology 2019: a
Biennial AUA/JUA
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOSPITAL QUALITY
Update on NSTEMI
12/10/2018
$185,000.00
FOUNDATION
Management for
Hospitalists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
DAPT Dilemmas: A
12/12/2018
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION
Case-Based
Roundtable
Tutorial
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. DOMINIC-JACKSON
Neuroscience
12/12/2018
$5,000.00
MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEART FAILURE SOCIETY
2019 Future
12/12/2018
$25,000.00
OF AMERICA INC.
Leaders in Heart
Failure Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2019
12/13/2018
$40,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Gastrointestinal
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
(GI) Cancers
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Symposium:
Multidisciplinary
Treatment,
Personalized
Care, Optimal
Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
ONS 2019 ISS
12/13/2018
$150,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Bioascend:
Patient and Nurse
Perspectives on
the Use of PARP
Inhibitors for
Ovarian Cancer:
Strategies for
Maximizing
Patient Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
2019 Oncologic
12/13/2018
$20,000.00
MD ANDERSON CANCER
Emergency
CENTER
Medicine
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
4th Annual Duke
12/13/2018
$3,000.00
Heart Center/DCRI
Fellows'
Presentation
Skills Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
Acute Kidney
12/16/2018
$5,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Injury: from
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
beside to bench
(and back again)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2019 ASCO-SITC
12/16/2018
$70,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Clinical Immuno-
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Oncology
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENNYSLVANIA SOCIETY
2018 Educational
12/16/2018
$2,000.00
FOR BIOMEDICAL
Programming
RESEARCH
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
Pathway to Stop
12/16/2018
$500,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
ISS at ASCO GI--
12/17/2018
$37,500.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Breaking the
Paradox:
Expanding Options
and New Questions
in HCC Management
(150205289)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C DAVIS AND S THOMPSON
Corporate
12/17/2018
$2,000.00
DVM FOUNDATION
Membership
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MIDWINTER CONFERENCE OF
58th Midwinter
12/18/2018
$5,000.00
IMMUOLOGISTS
Conference of
Immunologists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC General
12/19/2018
$3,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Society
CANCER
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF
Roundtable in
12/20/2018
$4,000.00
SCIENCES
Science and
Welfare of
Laboratory Animal
Use
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MIT
Koch Institute
12/23/2018
$5,000.00
2019 Immune
Engineering
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
The Role of the
01/03/2019
$100,000.00
FOUNDATION
Kidney and SGLT2
in Glucose
Homeostasis and
Kidney Disease: A
Scientific
Workshop
Sponsored by the
National Kidney
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
AAAAI Foundation
01/03/2019
$150,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
2019 Lectureship
IMMUNOLOGY FOUNDATION,
Series
INC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
15th Annual
01/03/2019
$299,856.00
Respiratory
Disease Young
Investigators'
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
ONS 2019 ISS
01/07/2019
$250,000.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Peerview:,
``Realizing the
Promise of PARP
Inhibitors in
Solid Tumor
Therapy Guiding
Oncology Nurses
on the Advances
and Challenges''
(150205359)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Kidney Health
01/14/2019
$30,000.00
NEPHROLOGY
Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MELANOMA RESEARCH
Melanoma Research
01/14/2019
$10,000.00
ALLIANCE
Alliance 11th
Annual Scientific
Retreat
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
3rd Annual Heart
01/15/2019
$100,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
in Diabetes (HiD)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLD SPRING HARBOR
Integrated control
01/16/2019
$10,000.00
LABORATORY
of feeding and
energy balance by
hypothalamic and
hindbrain
circuits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEW YORK UNIVERSITY
XXIV Conference on
01/16/2019
$5,000.00
the Chemistry of
the Organic Solid
State
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
41st Annual
01/22/2019
$10,000.00
National Jewish
Health Pulmonary
and Allergy
Update
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
ISS at AATS 2019
01/22/2019
$302,760.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Broadening
Horizons:The
Expanding Role of
Immunotherapy in
Locally Advanced
and Earlier
Stages of Lung
Cancer
(150205422)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
CAP Chapter
01/24/2019
$414,050.00
INSTITUTE, INC.
Meetings:
Molecular Testing
for EGFR
Mutations in the
Context of a
Changing
Treatment
Landscape,
Evolving Testing
Options, and New
Guidelines What
Do Pathologists
Need to Know and
Do? (150205307)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LUNGEVITY FOUNDATION
LUNGevity
02/03/2019
$10,000.00
Foundation
Nursing and Nurse
Navigator
Roundtable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF UC SAN DIEGO
2nd Annual Multi-
02/04/2019
$25,000.00
Disciplinary Head
and Neck Cancer
Conference-
Maximizing Speech
and Swallowing
Outcomes in
Patients
Undergoing
Radiation
Therapy: We're in
This Together
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
2018 San Antonio
02/06/2019
$5,000.00
MEDICAL CENTER
Breast Cancer
Symposium Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Individualizing
02/06/2019
$22,500.00
MANAGED CARE
Treatment in the
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Management of
Advanced Breast
Cancer: How Novel
Therapies Are
Changing the
Treatment
Paradigm
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Integrating New
02/06/2019
$22,500.00
MANAGED CARE
and Emerging
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Targeted
Therapies into
the Treatment
Paradigm in
Ovarian Cancer:
Expert Strategies
for Improved
Patient Outcomes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
Mitochondrial
02/07/2019
$10,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Biogenesis and
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
Dynamics in
Health and
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL JEWISH HEALTH
Impact of
02/07/2019
$64,925.00
Educational
Program on the
Career
Development of
Physician
Scientists;
Outcomes from 14
years of the
Annual
Respiratory
Disease Young
Investigators'
Forum--An Article
for Publication
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYU SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
Asthma Airways and
02/10/2019
$20,000.00
the Environment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR HEALTH
Mid-Atlantic
02/10/2019
$50,000.00
Nephrology Young
Investigators
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF GYNECOLOGIC
SGO 2019 Annual
02/10/2019
$62,500.00
ONCOLOGY
Meeting on
Women's Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
Heart Disease and
02/11/2019
$7,500.00
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY
Women
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN DIABETES
66th Advanced
02/11/2019
$40,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Postgraduate
Course
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Hypoxia-Inducible
02/11/2019
$100,000.00
FOUNDATION
Factor
Stabilization as
an Emerging
Therapy for CKD
Related Anemia A
Scientific
Workshop
Sponsored by the
National Kidney
Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2019-2020 Monthly
02/13/2019
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Oncology Tumor
Boards: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
2019-2020 Monthly
02/13/2019
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Oncology Tumor
Boards: A
Multidisciplinary
Approach to
Individualized
Patient Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE SOCIETY OF SURGICAL
SSO 2019 Annual
02/14/2019
$5,000.00
ONCOLOGY
Cancer Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
ONS Evidence-Based
02/17/2019
$293,500.00
SOCIETY
Practice
Improvement
Project:
Constipation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE UNIVERSITY OF
16th Annual
02/17/2019
$50,000.00
CHICAGO
International
Ultmann Chicago
Lymphoma
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOUSTON METHODIST
Heart of a Woman
02/17/2019
$3,000.00
HOSPITAL
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY
HOPA 15th Annual
02/18/2019
$35,000.00
PHARMACY ASSOCIATION
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BAYLOR SCOTT AND WHITE
8th Annual
02/18/2019
$10,000.00
HEALTH
Symposium on
Current
Strategies in the
Treatment of
Multiple Myeloma,
Leukemia,
Hodgkin's
Lymphoma and B-
cell Non-
Hodgkin's
Lymphoma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
USF HEALTH PROFESSIONS
CARDIOVASCULAR AND
02/18/2019
$247,330.00
CONFERENCING
RENAL
CORPORATION
COMPLICATIONS IN
T2DM: Roles of
Physician
Assistants and
Nurse
Practitioners in
Patient
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
New Horizons in
02/18/2019
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
the Treatment and
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Management of B-
Cell Non-Hodgkin
Lymphoma: A
Closer Look at
the Role of
Emerging Targeted
Therapies
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONCOLOGY NURSING
ONS 44th Annual
02/18/2019
$50,000.00
SOCIETY
Congress and
Regional
Workshops
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView inVision:
02/19/2019
$122,250.00
INSTITUTE INC.
``New Frontiers
in Managing Heart
Failure: Are
SGLT2 Inhibitors
the Next Leap
Forward in
Optimizing
Patient Care?''
(150205455)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2019 Annual
02/19/2019
$75,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Conference:
Improving the
Quality,
Effectiveness,
and Efficiency of
Cancer CareTM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACS DIVISION OF
257th ACS National
02/19/2019
$2,000.00
MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASSOCIATION FOR
TARC Targeting DNA
02/19/2019
$125,000.00
MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY
Repair Pathways:
Current and
Future
Implications of
PARP Inhibitors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
Pancreas Symposium
02/20/2019
$3,000.00
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY
2019: Current
Controversies in
Benign and
Malignant
Pancreatic
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONQUER CANCER
2019 ASCO Annual
02/20/2019
$30,000.00
FOUNDATION OF THE
Meeting Breast
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
Cancer Track
CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ST. JOSEPH REGIONAL
Annual
02/21/2019
$1,000.00
HEALTH NETWORK
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Master Class for
02/21/2019
$25,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Oncologists 2019--
EISENHOWER
Women's Cancer
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
Master Class for
02/21/2019
$25,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Oncologists 2019--
EISENHOWER
Hematologic
Malignancies
Track
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Achieving
02/24/2019
$1,500.00
PHYSICIANS; PUERTO
Excellence in
RICO CHAPTER
Patient Care
American College
of Physician
Annual Meeting
and Internal
Medicine Update
and Board Review
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Video in
02/25/2019
$95,975.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Exchange
Navigating
Clinical
Challenges to
Maximize the
Benefits and
Minimize the
Risks of Cancer
Immunotherapies
(150204478)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
Breast Cancer
02/26/2019
$2,000.00
DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY
Management 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOLY CROSS HOSPITAL
Updates in the
02/28/2019
$2,000.00
INC.
Treatment of
Common Cancers:
Lung,
Gastrointestinal,
GYN, and Breast
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOLY CROSS HOSPITAL
Updates in the
02/28/2019
$2,000.00
INC.
Treatment of
Common Cancers:
Lung,
Gastrointestinal,
GYN, and Breast
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Chronic
03/01/2019
$257,085.00
FOUNDATION
Hyperkalemia
Management and
Outcomes in CKD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
Crucial
03/03/2019
$99,990.00
CME, INC.
Conversations in
Nephrology: PHD
Inhibition as an
Emerging Approach
to Treating CKD
Anemia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER
20th Annual
03/03/2019
$6,500.00
Diabetes
Conference:
Current
Treatments for
Diabetes
Complications
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CLEVELAND CLINIC
Advanced
03/03/2019
$10,000.00
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Diagnostic
Bronchoscopy
Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREVENTIVE
Cardiovascular
03/03/2019
$50,000.00
CARDIOVASCULAR NURSES
Risk Reduction:
ASSOCIATION
25th
Cardiovascular
Nursing Symposium
Opening Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PENN STATE COLLEGE OF
An Update on SGLT2
03/03/2019
$142,430.00
MEDICINE
Inhibition for
the Prevention
and Treatment of
Kidney Disease in
Patients with
Type 2 Diabetes
(150205286)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
Making the
03/03/2019
$200,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Connection: A
CALIFORNIA, SAN DIEGO
Comprehensive
Strategy on the
Modern Management
of Type 1 and
Type 2 Diabetes
2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNENBERG CENTER FOR
From Inquiry to
03/03/2019
$50,000.00
HEALTH SCIENCES AT
Investigation to
EISENHOWER
Insight (I3):
Clinical Clarity
in Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer--The
2019 JADPRO Lung
Cancer Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Advances in the
03/03/2019
$30,000.00
MANAGED CARE
Management of
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Acute Coronary
Syndrome (ACS):
Updated Guideline
Recommendations
for Dual
Antiplatelet
Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
EASTERN VIRGINIA
Turning the Tide
03/03/2019
$5,000.00
MEDICAL SCHOOL
on Diabetes 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
Foundations of
03/04/2019
$200,000.00
ALLERGY ASTHMA AND
Asthma Management
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KEYSTONE SYMPOSIA ON
2019 Cancer
03/04/2019
$5,000.00
MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR
Immunotherapy:
BIOLOGY
Mechanistic
Insights to
Improve Clinical
Benefit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
METABOLIC ENDOCRINE
The Primary
03/04/2019
$154,110.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION
Prevention of CHF
and CKD in
Diabetes
Satellite
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CHEST FOUNDATION
2019 CHEST
03/04/2019
$35,000.00
Foundation
Research Award in
Severe Asthma
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
PeerView Live at
03/04/2019
$90,000.00
INSTITUTE INC.
USCAP 2019,
Clinical Advances
in Cancer
Immunotherapies,
Biomarkers, and
Testing:
Implications for
Pathologists at
the Forefront of
the Emerging
Precision
Oncology Era
(150205529)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN NEPHROLOGY
The CKD Patient
03/05/2019
$61,500.00
NURSES ASSOCIATION
with
(ANNA)
Hyperkalemia:
Nephrology Nurses
Evidence Based
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
Improving Clinical
03/05/2019
$35,000.00
MANAGED CARE
and Economic
PHYSICIANS, INC.
Outcomes with
Personalized
Treatment in the
Management of
Advanced Non-
Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DUKE UNIVERSITY
The Southeastern
03/06/2019
$2,500.00
Fellows Research
Skills and
Training Workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
NCCN 2019 Oncology
03/06/2019
$10,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Fellows Program:
New Horizons in
Quality Cancer
CareT at the NCCN
Annual Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIVERSITY OF
Allergy Fellowship
03/06/2019
$40,000.00
WASHINGTON SCHOOL OF
MEDICINE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DREXEL MEDICINE
Updates In Women's
03/06/2019
$2,000.00
Health 2109
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
Addressing Unmet
03/06/2019
$122,250.00
INSTITUTE INC.
Needs in Managing
Anemia in Chronic
Kidney Disease: A
Closer Look at
the Clinical
Potential of HIF-
PH Inhibitors
(150205556)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SIDNEY KIMMEL MEDICAL
7th Annual Lung
03/06/2019
$2,500.00
COLLEGE AT THOMAS
Cancer Symposium
JEFFERSON UNIVERSITY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDICAL LEARNING
ASCO 2019 peer
03/10/2019
$30,000.00
INSTITUTE INC.
view Stories from
the Pancreatic
Cancer CaseBook:
Taking the Road
to Improved
Outcomes with
Modern
Therapeutic
Concepts and
Innovative
Treatments
(150205416)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
GKCAS 2019 Annual
03/10/2019
$3,000.00
ALLERGY, ASTHMA AND
Meeting
IMMUNOLOGY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
REGENTS OF THE
13th International
03/10/2019
$25,000.00
UNIVERSITY OF
Congress on
CALIFORNIA
Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus
(LUPUS 2019)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Support for NCCN
03/11/2019
$60,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Distribution of
the NCCN Clinical
Practice
Guidelines in
Oncology (NCCN
Guidelinesr) for
Management of
Immunotherapy-
Related
Toxicities Pocket
Guides
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
Bladder Cancer in
03/11/2019
$15,000.00
ASSOCIATION
Women:
Identifying
Research Needs to
Improve Diagnosis
and Treatment A
Johns Hopkins
Greenberg Bladder
Cancer Institute/
American
Urological
Association
Translational
Research
Collaboration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
2019 Multidrug
03/11/2019
$2,500.00
CONFERENCES
Efflux Systems
Gordon Research
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
14th Annual Young
03/12/2019
$50,000.00
FOUNDATION
Investigator's
Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
Lung Cancer
03/12/2019
$25,000.00
CHEST PHYSICIANS
Screening
Decision
Counselor and
Navigator
Training
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY OF
SIR Annual
03/13/2019
$12,500.00
INTERVENTIONAL
Scientific
RADIOLOGY
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ECOG RESEARCH AND
ECOG-ACRIN Spring
03/13/2019
$5,000.00
EDUCATION FOUNDATION,
2019 Group
INC.
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEDSTAR HEALTH, INC.
Kidney and Bladder
03/14/2019
$10,000.00
Cancers 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
ACC Annual
03/14/2019
$50,000.00
CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION
Scientific
Session
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SAINT FRANCIS HOSPITAL
55th Annual Robert
03/14/2019
$5,000.00
AND MEDICAL CENTER
M. Jeresaty, MD
Cardiovascular
Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH
A New Beat:
03/14/2019
$25,000.00
FOUNDATION
Improving
Cardiovascular
Care in Women and
Minorities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
GORDON RESEARCH
Therapeutically
03/14/2019
$2,500.00
CONFENCE
Targeted Small
Molecules and
Enabling
Technologies in
Drug Discovery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Support for NCCN
03/14/2019
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK
Distribution of
the NCCN Clinical
Practice
Guidelines in
Oncology (NCCN
Guidelinesr) for
Breast Cancer
Pocket Guides
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHWELL HEALTH
1st Annual Heart
03/17/2019
$15,000.00
of Prevention
Symposium:
Updates on
Cardiovascular
Disease
Prevention With a
Focus on Women's
Heart Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN THORACIC
ATS 2019 Fellows
03/17/2019
$10,000.00
SOCIETY INC.
Track Symposium
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOCIETY FOR
SITC's PD-L1
03/17/2019
$35,000.00
IMMUNOTHERAPY OF
Resistance
CANCER
Definition
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CITY OF HOPE
8th Annual
03/17/2019
$10,000.00
Clinical Cancer
Genetics and
Genomics
Conference; From
Exceptionalism to
Exceptional Care:
Mainstreaming
Genomic Medicine
in Clinical
Practice
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FEDERATION OF AMERICAN
2019 FASEB SRC on
03/18/2019
$5,000.00
SOCIETIES FOR
Intracellular RNA
EXPERIMENTAL BIOLOGY
localization and
local translation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOUNDATION FOR HEART
23rd Annual Heart
03/18/2019
$10,000.00
FAILURE EDUCATION,
Failure-An Update
INC.
on Therapy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
PURDUE UNIVERSITY
Type 2 Diabetes
03/19/2019
$75,000.00
Mellitus and
Heart Failure:
Screening,
Diagnosis, and
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASTHMA AND ALLERGY
``Wheezin, Sneezin
03/19/2019
$10,000.00
FOUNDATION OF AMERICA--
and Itchin in
ALASKA CHAPTER
Alaska''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN RADIUM SOCIETY
101st Annual
03/19/2019
$25,000.00
Meeting
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL KIDNEY
Anemia in Chronic
03/19/2019
$257,085.00
FOUNDATION
Kidney Disease:
Arming Clinicians
with Meaningful
Solutions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AMERICAN UROLOGICAL
The Evolving Role
03/19/2019
$25,000.00
ASSOCIATION EDUCATION
of the Urologist
AND RESEARCH, INC.
in Advanced
Castration
Dependent
Prostate Cancer:
a Guidelines and
Case-based
Discussion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE
Emerging Issues in
03/20/2019
$25,000.00
CANCER NETWORK, INC.
Oncology--Ensurin
g Access to, and
Delivery of,
Innovative
Therapies and
Patient Centered
Care in Oncology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACS DIVISION OF
257th ACS National
03/20/2019
$5,000.00
BIOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY
Meeting and
Exposition (BIOT
Division)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Worksheet: Grants 2014 to Mar 20 2019
Appendix B
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Q114
Q214
Q314
Q414
Q115
Q215
Q315
Q415
Q116
Q216
Q316
Q416
Q117
Q217
Q317
Q417
Q118
Q218
Q318
Q418
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FARXIGA
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONGLYZA
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
KOMBIGLYZE
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SYMBICORT
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PULMICORT
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
FLEXHALER
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEXIUM OS
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEXIUM XSULE
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CRESTOR
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BYETTA
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BYDUREON
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SYMLIN
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TUDORZA
X
X
X
X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
X URA Capped at AMP
Appendix C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MPD Plan
Effective Dates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abarca
1/1/18-12/31/19
-------------------------------------------------
Envision
1/1/18-12/31/18
-------------------------------------------------
Byetta
Express Scripts
4/1/18-12/31/19
-------------------------------------------------
Health Delegates
1/1/18-12/31/18
-------------------------------------------------
MedImpact
1/1/19-12/31/19
-------------------------------------------------
SIS
1/1/18-12/31/19
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abarca
1/1/16-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Blue Shield of CA
7/1/15-12/31/16; 5/2/16-
12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Emblem Health
1/1/15-12/31/15; 1/1/16-
12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Envision
1/1/17-12/31/17
-------------------------------------------------
Express Scripts
5/2/16-12/31/19
-------------------------------------------------
Florida Health
1/1/14-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Health Alliance Medical
1/1/15-12/31/16
Plan
-------------------------------------------------
Health Partners Plans
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Healthspring
4/1/15-12/31/15
-------------------------------------------------
Highmark
7/1/14-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Humana
1/1/15-12/31/16; 5/1/16-
7/30/16; 8/1/2016-P12/
31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Crestor
IHA
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
MedImpact
1/1/15-5/1/16
-------------------------------------------------
Navitus
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
OptumRx
7/1/16-12/31/17
-------------------------------------------------
Perform Rx
10/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Pharm. Tech
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Prime Therapeutics
5/2/16-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
SelectHealth
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
SilverScript
7/1/14-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
SIS
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Ventegra
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
WellCare
1/1/15-12/31/16
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Envision
1/1/17-12/31/17; 1/1/18-
12/31/18
-------------------------------------------------
Express Scripts
1/1/16-12/31/19
-------------------------------------------------
Harvard Pilgrim
1/1/14-12/31/14
-------------------------------------------------
Health Alliance Medical
1/1/14-12/31/14
Plan
-------------------------------------------------
Healthspring
4/1/15-12/31/15
-------------------------------------------------
Highmark
7/1/14-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Nexium
Humana
1/1/14-12/31/14; 1/1/15-
12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Navitus
1/1/14-1/31/14; 1/1/15-
12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Optum Rx
1/1/14-12/31/18
-------------------------------------------------
Prime Therapeutics
1/1/14-12/31/14
-------------------------------------------------
Scott & White
1/1/14-12/31/14
-------------------------------------------------
SilverScript
7/1/14-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
WellCare
1/1/15-12/31/16
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abarca
1/1/16-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Blue Shield of CA
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Emblem Health
1/1/15-12/31/15; 1/1/16-
12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Envision
1/1/17-12/31/17; 1/1/18-
12/31/18
-------------------------------------------------
Health Partners Plans
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Healthspring
4/1/15-12/31/15
-------------------------------------------------
Seroquel
Highmark
7/1/14-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Humana
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
IHA
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Navitus
1/1/15-12/31/16; 1/1/17-
12/31/19
-------------------------------------------------
Perform Rx
10/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Pharm. Tech
1/1/15-12/31/16; 1/1/18-
12/31/18
-------------------------------------------------
SelectHealth
1/1/17-12/31/18
-------------------------------------------------
SIS
1/1/15-12/31/16
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Alliance Medical
1/1/15-12/31/16
Plan
-------------------------------------------------
Seroquel XR
SilverScript
7/1/14-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
Ventegra
1/1/15-12/31/16
-------------------------------------------------
WellCare
1/1/15-12/31/16
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP
1800 Concord Pike
P.O. Box 15437
Wilmington DE 19850-5437
Tel 302-886-3000
www.astrazeneca-us.com
March 7, 2019
The Honorable Charles E. Grassley
Chairman
Committee on Finance
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20510
The Honorable Ron Wyden
Ranking Member
Committee on Finance
U.S. Senate
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Chairman Grassley and Ranking Member Wyden:
AstraZeneca's CEO Pascal Soriot appeared before your Committee on
February 26, 2019 and answered a question from Senator Cortez Masto
regarding whether AstraZeneca offers authorized generic versions of any
of its products. At that time, Mr. Soriot indicated that AstraZeneca
does not offer any authorized generics, however, following the hearing,
Mr. Soriot was informed by AstraZeneca staff that an authorized generic
is currently available in the U.S. This letter is intended to correct
the record regarding that inadvertent oversight.
AstraZeneca does, in fact, currently have one authorized generic in
the U.S. market, and it was launched more than 3 years after the first
generic of that product was introduced. Authorized generics are not a
primary area of focus for AstraZeneca and are introduced on a selective
basis. In limited circumstances, AstraZeneca has made an authorized
generic available through a third-party distributor. Because patient
prescription access and coverage may vary with respect to branded
versus generic medicines, AstraZeneca believes it is important to keep
branded options available for patients who continue to rely on them.
We appreciate your invitation to discuss important issues of
patient access and affordability with the Committee and the opportunity
to supplement Mr. Soriot's testimony. We look forward to working with
you as a constructive partner in addressing challenges in our health-
care system.
Sincerely,
Christie Bloomquist
Vice President, Corporate Affairs, North America
______
Prepared Statement of Jennifer Taubert, Executive Vice President,
Worldwide Chairman, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Johnson & Johnson
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to be here to discuss how we
can ensure that Americans have affordable access to the best healthcare
today and to the extraordinary medical breakthroughs of tomorrow.
I am Jennifer Taubert, and I lead the Janssen Pharmaceutical
Companies of Johnson & Johnson. At Janssen, we focus on discovering and
developing transformational medicines that treat and cure some of the
world's most challenging diseases, including blood cancers like
multiple myeloma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and mantle cell
lymphoma; prostate cancer; HIV; schizophrenia and other serious mental
illnesses; cardiovascular diseases; rheumatoid arthritis; Crohn's
Disease and other destructive gastrointestinal illnesses; and pulmonary
hypertension, among others.
Like many of you, I know what it's like when a loved one faces a
serious disease. My own mother died of lung cancer in 1988, in her 40s.
At the time, there was very little that could be done for my mom. I've
committed my career to bringing families genuine, meaningful hope--hope
for years of life, hope for the chance to be there for a daughter's
wedding or the birth of a grandchild.
commitment to innovation
Last year Janssen invested $8.4 billion globally in research and
development,\1\ making Janssen one of the world's top research and
development (``R&D'') investors in any industry, anywhere in the
world.\2\ In fact, our investment in R&D last year was 86 percent more
than we spent on sales and marketing. This substantial investment has
enabled us to research and develop more than 100 medicine candidates
last year; and, over the past 5 years, we have introduced six
innovative products in the U.S.\3\ The nine Breakthrough Therapy
Designations we have received from the Food and Drug Administration
(``FDA'') reflect the significance of the advances we are pursuing in
areas of profound unmet medical need.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Johnson & Johnson, FY18-Q4 Form 10-K for the Period Ending
December 31, 2018 (filed February 20, 2019).
\2\ PricewaterHouseCoopers. ``2018 Global Innovation 1000 Study.''
https://www.strategyand.
pwc.com/innovation1000.
\3\ U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research. ``NDA and BLA Approval Reports--New Molecular Entity
(NME) Drug and New Biologic Approvals.'' https://wayback.archive-
it.org/7993/20170404174205/https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/Develop
mentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/
DrugandBiologicApprovalReports/NDAandBLAApprovalReports/ucm373420.htm.
\4\ U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research. ``CDER Breakthrough Therapy Designation Approvals.''
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/DrugandBiologicApproval
Reports/NDAandBLAApprovalReports/UCM481542.pdf.
Our investment changes lives. It has helped turn HIV from a death
sentence into a manageable disease. Today, people with HIV can have a
near-normal life expectancy.\5\ And we are working on a vaccine with
the potential to eliminate HIV altogether. Our biologic therapies have
transformed the lives of patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease by
dramatically improving their quality of life. Our therapies have
reduced major bowel surgeries for patients with Crohn's Disease by 82
percent and cut hospitalizations by 65 percent.\6\ In ulcerative
colitis patients, our therapies have reduced the need for total
colectomy by 41 percent.\7\ One of our earliest pharmaceutical
innovations enabled people with serious mental illness to be treated at
home and in their communities rather than in psychiatric institutions,
and today our innovative first and only 4-time-a-year schizophrenia
treatment is improving adherence and breaking the cycle of
hospitalization so that people with schizophrenia can live their best
lives.\8\ In the area of mental health, we are also investigating a new
medicine for people suffering from treatment-resistant depression,
which profoundly impacts these patients and their families and loved
ones as well. Our first-in-class cancer medicines have helped patients
with some of the most common and deadly types of cancer live longer, in
some cases for many additional years.\9\, \10\ In multiple
myeloma, one of our medicines has more than doubled the length of time
patients live without return of their disease.\11\ We recently launched
a new prostate cancer treatment that delays the spread of the disease
by over an additional two years versus the prior standard of
care.\12\, \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Trickey, Adam, Margaret T. May, Jorg-Janne Vehreschild, Niels
Obel, M. John Gill, Heidi M. Crane, Christoph Boesecke et al.
``Survival of HIV-positive patients starting antiretroviral therapy
between 1996 and 2013: a collaborative analysis of cohort studies.''
The Lancet HIV 4, no. 8 (2017): e349-e356. doi: 10.1016/S2352-
3018(17)30066-8.
\6\ Lichtenstein, Gary R., Songkai Yan, Mohan Bala, Marion Blank,
and Bruce E. Sands. ``Infliximab maintenance treatment reduces
hospitalizations, surgeries, and procedures in fistulizing Crohn's
disease.'' Gastroenterology 128, no. 4 (2005): 862-869. doi: 10.1053/
j.gastro.2005.01.048.
\7\ Sandborn, William J., Paul Rutgeerts, Brian G. Feagan, Walter
Reinisch, Allan Olson, Jewel Johanns, Jiandong Lu et al. ``Colectomy
rate comparison after treatment of ulcerative colitis with placebo or
infliximab.'' Gastroenterology 137, no. 4 (2009): 1250-1260.
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2009.06.061.
\8\ INVEGA TRINZA U.S. Prescribing Information, January 2019.
http://www.janssenlabels.
com/package-insert/product-monograph/prescribing-information/
INVEGA+TRINZA-pi.pdf.
\9\ IMBRUVICA U.S. Prescribing Information, January 2019. https://
www.imbruvica.com/docs/librariesprovider7/default-document-library/
prescribing-information.pdf.
\10\ ZYTIGA U.S. Prescribing Information, April 2019. http://
www.janssenlabels.com/package-insert/product-monograph/prescribing-
information/ZYTIGA-pi.pdf.
\11\ Bahlis, Nizar, Meletios A. Dimopoulos, Darrell J. White, Lotfi
Benboubker, Gordon Cook, Merav Leiba, P. Joy Ho et al. ``Three-Year
Follow-up of the Phase 3 Pollux Study of Daratumumab Plus Lenalidomide
and Dexamethasone (D-Rd) Versus Lenalidomide and Dexamethasone (Rd)
Alone in Relapsed or Refractory Multiple Myeloma (RRMM).'' (2018):
1996-1996. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-99-112697.
\12\ DARZALEX U.S. Prescribing Information, June 2018. http://
www.janssenlabels.com/package-insert/product-monograph/prescribing-
information/DARZALEX-pi.pdf.
\13\ ERLEADA U.S. Prescribing Information, February 2018. http://
www.janssenlabels.com/package-insert/product-monograph/prescribing-
information/ERLEADA-pi.pdf.
This progress against some of the world's most challenging diseases
is heartening but hard-won. Continued advancement will require
perseverance and dedication. For example, we remain very committed to
continuing research exploring new approaches and investigational
medicines to prevent Alzheimer's dementia, which starts many years
before the full onset of disease. In fact, we have invested billions of
dollars in this area, and despite some significant projects that were
halted because of lack of efficacy or a newly identified imbalance in
benefit-risk, we continue to invest with the goal of conquering this
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
major public health challenge in our lifetimes.
Defeating Alzheimer's would not only change the lives of millions
of patients and their families, it would dramatically change the
economic burden of the disease. According to one analysis, if a new
treatment that delays the onset of Alzheimer's by just five years were
approved by 2025, the U.S. would save an estimated $367 billion each
year by 2050.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Alzheimer's Association. ``Changing the Trajectory of
Alzheimer's Disease: How a Treatment by 2025 Saves Lives and Dollars.''
May 2015. https://www.alz.org/media/Documents/changing-the-trajectory-
r.pdf.
In fact, across a wide range of conditions, prescription medicines
play a key role in keeping people well and productive and preventing
the need for costly procedures and hospitalizations. For example, since
the introduction of antiretroviral therapies, we've seen up to a
$402,000 lifetime cost savings for each HIV patient diagnosed at an
early stage.\15\ Cardiovascular medicines have led to a 27 percent
reduction in costs for hospitalizations and procedures.\16\ In fact,
the U.S. health-care system could save $213 billion annually with the
correct use of prescription medications.\17\, \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Farnham, Paul G., Chaitra Gopalappa, Stephanie L. Sansom,
Angela B. Hutchinson, John T. Brooks, Paul J. Weidle, Vincent C.
Marconi, and David Rimland. ``Updates of Lifetime Costs of Care and
Quality-of-Life Estimates for HIV-Infected Persons in the United
States: Late Versus Early Diagnosis and Entry Into Care.'' Journal of
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 64, no. 2 (2013): 183-189. doi:
10.1097/QAI.0b013e3182973966.
\16\ Gotto, Antonio M., Stephen J. Boccuzzi, John R. Cook, Charles
M. Alexander, James B. Roehm, Gregg S. Meyer, Michael Clearfield,
Stephen Weis, and Edwin Whitney. ``Effect of Lovastatin on
Cardiovascular Resource Utilization and Costs in The Air Force/Texas
Coronary Atherosclerosis Prevention Study (AFCAPS/TexCAPS).'' The
American Journal of Cardiology 86, no. 11 (2000): 1176-181.
doi:10.1016/s0002-9149(00)01198-x.
\17\ IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics, ``Avoidable Costs in
U.S. Healthcare'' (June 2013). http://offers.premierinc.com/rs/381-NBB-
525/images/Avoidable_Costs_in%20_US_Healthcare-
IHII_AvoidableCosts_2013%5B1%5D.pdf.
\18\ Roebuck, M.C., J.N. Liberman, M. Gemmill-Toyama, and T.A.
Brennan. ``Medication Adherence Leads to Lower Health Care Use and
Costs Despite Increased Drug Spending.'' Health Affairs 30, no. 1
(2011): 91-99. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2009.1087.
But medicines can't make a difference if patients who need them
can't get them. We understand concerns about the cost of health care.
Although prescription medicines represent only 14 percent of overall
health-care spend--a figure that has remained relatively steady for the
past decade and is projected to remain so into the future \19\--and 90
percent of prescriptions are filled with generics,\20\ managing the
cost of medicines, particularly what patients pay at the pharmacy
counter, is important.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Altarum Institute. ``A 10-Year Projection of the Prescription
Drug Share of National Health Expenditures, Including Nonretail.''
Report. August 2015. http://altarum.org/sites/default/files/uploaded-
publication-files/Non-Retail%20Rx%20Forecast%20Data%20Brief%2010-14-14.
pdf.
\20\ IQVIA. ``2017 Medicine Use and Spending in the U.S. a Review
of 2017 and Outlook to 2022.'' April 2018. https://www.iqvia.com/-/
media/iqvia/pdfs/institute-reports/medicine-use-and-spending-in-the-us-
a-review-of-2017-and-outlook-to-2022.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
our approach to pricing
At Janssen, we take a responsible approach to pricing that
recognizes our dual responsibility to patients today and patients
tomorrow. Patients today need access to our medicines. Patients
tomorrow count on us to deliver cures and treatments for the most
challenging, intractable diseases. When we set an initial price for our
medicines, we balance:

Value to patients, the health-care system, and society. We
consider how the medicine will improve patient health and
assess its potential to reduce other costs--surgeries, hospital
stays, or long-term care, for example--and the improvement the
medicine represents over the existing standard of care.

Affordable access to medicines for people who need them. We
want to ensure appropriate insurance coverage so that patients
who are prescribed our medicines can get them.

Ability to develop future groundbreaking cures and
treatments. We have an obligation to ensure we have the
resources necessary to invest in future R&D to address serious
unmet medical needs.
The list price of a medicine is a starting point that is ultimately
reduced by the substantial discounts, rebates, and fees we provide to
insurance companies, pharmacy benefit managers (``PBMs''), government
programs, and others. We pay required discounts to government programs,
and we negotiate with private payers so that they will cover our
medicines and make them available to patients with lower out-of-pocket
cost. In 2018, we provided approximately $21 billion in discounts and
rebates on our medicines--an overall reduction from list price of 47
percent. For some of our medicines, and for some of our customers, we
pay discounts, rebates, and fees totaling well over 50 percent of our
list price--so middlemen in the supply chain in those cases realize a
majority of the revenue.
All told, while our 2018 aggregate list price increase was 6.3
percent,\21\ for the second year in a row discounts and rebates
outweighed that increase, and aggregate net price--in other words, the
real price--decreased by 6.8 percent.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Represents the year-over-year change in the average list
price, or wholesale acquisition cost (``WAC'').
\22\ Represents the year-over-year change in the average net price,
which is WAC less rebates, discounts, and returns.
trends in pharmaceutical spending
The fact is that across the industry net prices for branded
medicines have increased well below the rate of medical inflation in
recent years.\23\, \24\, \25\, \26\ In
2017, the total expenditure on pharmaceuticals in the U.S. grew by only
0.4 percent, compared to a 3.9 percent increase in overall health
spending and a 4.6 percent increase in hospital spending.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ IQVIA INSTITUTE for Human Data Science. ``The Global Use of
Medicine in 2019 and Outlook to 2023.'' Report. January 2019. https://
www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/pdfs/institute-reports/the-global-use-of-
medicine-in-2019-and-outlook-to-2023.pdf.
\24\ U.S. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
``Consumer Price Index--December 2016.'' News release, January 18,
2017. https://www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/cpi_01182017.pdf.
\25\ U.S. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
``Consumer Price Index--December 2017.'' News release, January 12,
2018. https://www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/cpi_01122018.pdf.
\26\ U.S. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
``Consumer Price Index--December 2018.'' News release, January 11,
2019. https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/cpi.pdf.
\27\ U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. ``NHE Fact
Sheet.'' December 6, 2017. https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-
data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-reports/national
healthexpenddata/nhe-fact-sheet.html.
Unfortunately, these trends are not reflected in many patients'
experiences at the doctor's office or pharmacy counter. In fact, total
patient out-of-pocket spending on medicines grew by 54 percent from
2006 to 2016.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Claxton, Gary, Larry Levitt, Matthew Rae, and Bradley Sawyer.
``Increases in Cost-sharing Payments Continue to Outpace Wage Growth.''
Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker. June 15, 2018. https://
www.healthsystemtracker.org/brief/increases-in-cost-sharing-payments-
have-far-outpaced-wage-growth/.
One reason patient out-of-pocket spending has grown is due to
changes in how health insurance is designed and, specifically, how
pharmaceutical benefits are managed. As one recent analysis shows,
patients are required to pay 13 percent of overall pharmaceutical costs
versus only 3 percent of hospital costs--even though medicine can help
keep patients out of the hospital.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ PhRMA. ``PhRMA Chart Packs: Biopharmaceuticals in
Perspective.'' Report. 2018. https://www.phrma.org/report/chart-pack-
biopharmaceuticals-in-perspective-summer-2018.
The reality is that our health coverage system simply wasn't built
in anticipation of medicines that treat diseases previously only
treated with surgeries, hospitalizations and other complex
interventions. Medicines today can extend and transform life for people
facing very challenging, often relatively rare, diseases. It's critical
that we work together to ensure that today's medicines are more
accessible and affordable for patients while at the same time
preserving the incredible ecosystem of medical innovation that has
delivered so much and promises so much more.
solutions to address the challenges we face
Above all, we need an American solution to this American challenge.
We must maintain the hallmarks that make American health care
remarkable: access to innovative therapies, personal choice, and
doctors and patients making decisions based on what is right for each
individual.
At Janssen, we are committed to being part of the solution.
We believe open dialogue and partnership is essential to addressing
the challenges in our health-care system. That's why in 2016 we began
issuing an annual Janssen U.S. Transparency Report, sharing information
about how we invest our resources, price our medicines, and help people
who need Janssen medicines get access to them. Just recently, we
expanded our commitment to transparency, announcing plans to
voluntarily include list price and potential patient out-of-pocket
costs in our pharmaceutical direct-to-consumer TV advertising, starting
with our most frequently prescribed medicine.
These more recent steps build on a legacy of commitment to
transparency at Janssen. For example, we believe that making clinical
trial data available promotes the understanding of disease, expands the
knowledge needed to develop new treatments, and generates new insights
and more complete evidence that lead to better health-care decisions
for patients. In a first-of-its-kind agreement with the Yale University
School of Medicine, we share clinical trial data through the Yale Open
Data Access (YODA) Project. Since 2014, YODA Project has served as an
independent review panel, evaluating researchers' requests for access
to participant-level trial data and research reports, which provide
extensive details about the methods and results of a clinical trial.
Researchers can use these clinical trial data in their own research to
increase medical knowledge and improve public health.
In the same spirit of open dialogue and partnership, we have
consistently brought forward ideas and perspectives to both Congress
and the administration, with the goal of building on what is working in
our healthcare system while fixing what is not:
part d out-of-pocket cap
While Medicare Part D is working for many seniors and has been
effective in containing costs, we believe an out-of-pocket cap in
Medicare Part D is a needed protection. Without a cap, Medicare
beneficiaries face unlimited out-of-pocket expenses, and, as research
shows, high out-of-pocket costs reduce patient adherence to prescribed
treatments and make them more likely to abandon their prescriptions.
Poor patient outcomes related to lack of adherence or abandonment of
prescribed treatments can lead to an increase in overall health-care
costs.
Individual and group health insurance policies are already required
to have out-of-pocket caps. We believe that Medicare, which serves some
of the sickest and most vulnerable patients and is essential to the
health of American seniors, should also have that protection. We have
been working on policy approaches that would make it possible to
implement an out-of-pocket cap in a fiscally responsible way without
creating new costs or access barriers for patients. As Congress
considers any changes to Part D, we look forward to discussing these
ideas in more depth.
medicare part b reform
We believe policy solutions in Medicare Part B should meet three
objectives: (1) reduce cost and spending; (2) increase competition; and
(3) remove incentives to prescribe higher cost therapies without
causing significant disruption to physicians or patient care.
As changes to Part B are contemplated, it is important to remember
that Medicare currently benefits from aggressive negotiations in the
commercial market through the Average Sales Price (ASP) mechanism. Any
reform should therefore leverage the benefits of the existing system.
In our response to the Health and Human Services advance notice of
proposed rulemaking regarding Part B, we proposed an option that would
allow Medicare to continue to achieve the negotiated cost savings of
the free market, reduce Part B acquisition cost under the ASP-based
model, and reimburse all stakeholders on a fee-based mechanism aligned
with the services that they provide. Our proposal aims to eliminate
incentives for selecting higher list price drugs while maintaining
current Part B patient access to appropriate clinical care.
rebate reform
We support reforms to the rebate system that restructure incentives
to ensure patients benefit from a competitive marketplace and see lower
out-of-pocket costs. In 2017, the pharmaceutical industry paid $150
billion in negotiated rebates and discounts.\30\ As we have noted, too
often these rebates and discounts are not shared with patients, leaving
the sickest patients paying higher out-of-pocket costs. We anticipate
eliminating rebates could result in lower list prices, provided these
rebates and discounts are not replaced with equally high fees or other
payments demanded by middlemen. We also strongly advocate that
beneficiary copays be based on net price.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Adam J. Fein. ``The Gross-to-Net Bubble Topped $150 Billion in
2017.'' Drug Channels (April 24, 2018) (citing IQVIA Institute for
Human Data Science. ``Medicines Use and Spending in the U.S.: A Review
of 2017 and Outlook to 2022.'' Report. April 2018. https://
www.iqvia.com/institute/reports/medicine-use-and-spending-in-the-us-
review-of-2017-outlook-to-2022.
Altering the current rebate structure would be a major change to
the entire pharmaceutical supply chain. It would need to be done
thoughtfully and carefully to avoid disruption for patients. We look
forward to commenting on the administration's proposed rule in this
area.
value-based care
Our current system rewards the quantity or volume of care
delivered, regardless of the results of that care. Consequently,
sometimes we spend money on treatments, diagnostic procedures, and
surgeries that provide limited value or may not even be needed, driving
up health-care costs without actually improving patient health.
At Janssen, we're working with partners throughout the health-care
system to encourage more results-based health-care approaches. While we
have negotiated several value-based contracts, current policy often
limits our ability to implement creative solutions. To address policy
barriers, we support the following measures:

Establish safe harbors in the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute
that better enable manufacturers to partner with payors and
share risk; and,

Clarify Medicaid pricing treatment, including existing
Medicaid best price requirements that inhibit companies from
offering arrangements that may yield lower price in some
circumstances.
promoting competition on a level playing field
Biosimilars--near copies of biologic medicines--have the potential
to increase competition and bring down costs, which is why Janssen has
long supported a
patient-focused, science-based regulatory framework for biosimilars.
Some stakeholders have called for government to drive uptake by
creating further incentives for biosimilars. But policies designed to
increase share for biosimilar manufacturers would distort the
competitive environment and risk limiting the savings biosimilars
deliver to patients and taxpayers. We saw this risk realized most
recently in the 340B Drug Discount Program, where policy designed to
encourage the use of biosimilars had the unfortunate effect of
increasing cost to patients, including low-income patients who can
least afford it, and to taxpayers.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Center for Biosimilars. ``340B Changes: What Biosimilar
Manufacturers Need to Know.'' Feb. 19, 2018. https://
www.centerforbiosimilars.com/contributor/amanda-forys/2018/02/340b-
changes-what-biosimilar-manufacturers-need-to-know.
When it comes to making more biosimilars available for patients and
their physicians, competition, not government intervention, is the best
approach. And that approach is working. Not only is competition driving
prices down for both innovator biologics and biosimilars, the
biosimilars pipeline is strong. Competition on a level playing field
will keep it that way.
340b policy
At Janssen, we recognize that the 340B Drug Discount Program plays
an important role in the healthcare system, helping to ensure that low-
income, needy patients have appropriate access to medicine. However,
congressional oversight, proper implementation, and equitable
application of the program are essential to ensuring the 340B program
is helping those it was designed to help.
Under the 340B Drug Discount Program, we are required to provide
significant discounts on certain medicines purchased by 340B covered
entities (comprised of specific categories of hospitals, clinics, and
health centers that meet Federal eligibility requirements). Growth in
the 340B program has been well documented, and Janssen has experienced
significant growth in this highly discounted channel as well. Although
the program was intended to benefit needy patients, the facilities
themselves receive the discounts. There is no requirement that 340B
covered hospitals pass along those discounts to patients. 340B covered
hospitals can therefore access 340B pricing on outpatient drugs for all
of their patients, including wealthy and well-insured patients.
A more direct and accountable link between the provision of the
discount and patient access is needed. We believe the benefits of the
program should flow more directly and transparently to needy patients.
We support efforts to strengthen the 340B program through greater
transparency and increased clarity and accountability for all
stakeholders. These goals can be achieved through the establishment of
clear, reasonable and auditable rules including a clear definition of
``patient'' as well as hospital eligibility criteria.
conclusion
We are here today at a moment of incredible hope, on the verge of
extraordinary progress that could change our lives and the lives of our
children and grandchildren. We have the opportunity to get this right
for Americans today and for future generations. At Janssen, we are
committed to bringing that promise to life with transformational
medical innovation.
______
Questions Submitted for the Record to Jennifer Taubert
Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
spending on advertising/marketing vs. research and development
Question. The Department of Health and Human Services' proposed
rule, ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates
Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees,'' envisions that drug manufacturers will offer up-front
discounts rather than the back-end rebates that are now commonly
provided. Some observers argue that a 1996 court case called into
question whether manufacturers could offer up-front discounts,
resulting in today's rebate-based system. I've heard differing opinions
as to whether the issues related to the initial court case are still
relevant. If the HHS proposed rule is finalized, can you assure the
committee that your company will offer up-front discounts? If not, why?
Please describe how you expect your company to respond to the HHS
proposed rule to eliminate safe harbor protection for back-end rebates
in Medicare Part D that is referenced above if it is finalized.
Assuming you are confident that antitrust laws do not prevent your
company from offering up-front discounts, specifically, do you envision
that your company lowers the list price of a drug to the current after-
rebate net price, offer discounts equal to the current rebate amount,
or a combination of both?
Answer. The 1996 antitrust law case cited, in our assessment,
should not limit the ability to move from rebates to other types of
discounts. Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the
entire market or only to those related to Federal health plans and
assuming rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that
offset the amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer
discounts for pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we
would need to renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-of-sale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
Question. To what extent are the back-end rebates your company
currently offers contingent on the amount of market share realized for
your drugs as a result of Part D plan formulary placement and other
techniques?
Answer. Janssen does not currently offer rebates contingent on the
amount of market share for our drugs as a result of Medicare Part D
formulary placement. In other words, Janssen's current Medicare Part D
rebate agreements do not contain any market share performance
requirement.
Question. Please provide a breakdown of percentage of sales that go
to each payer (including Medicare, Medicaid, private pay, other) and a
similar percentage by volume of the total number of each drug compared
to total volume. Please provide this data for the most recent year
available.
Answer. Potentially responsive information may not be maintained by
the company in the ordinary course of business. As such, an answer to
this question is not readily available.
Question. Do your companies hire consultants or lobbyists to
promote products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics
Committees? To whom do you disclose advocacy activities surrounding
State Medicaid programs, if at all?
Answer. Janssen does not hire external lobbyists or consultants for
the purpose of promoting products at State Medicaid Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committees. We have internal employees who register as
lobbyists and provide information about Janssen products to State
Medicaid Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee personnel. We comply with
varied State laws regarding advocacy, including disclosure
requirements.
Question. Please describe how the costs of patient assistance
programs are accounted for within your company's financial statements.
Please also describe the types of market information, such as
prescribing and use patterns, that your company collects from different
types of patient assistance programs and patient hub services.
Answer. Our patient assistance programs include both commercial
copay support programs and charitable donations, which include both
financial contributions and pharmaceutical products.
With respect to Janssen's copay card programs, the value of patient
copayment support is recorded as a reduction in sales revenue. The
administrative costs associated with implementing the copayment
programs are captured in selling, marketing and administrative expenses
on Johnson & Johnson's SEC Form 10K.
With respect to the company's charitable free product programs,
Janssen donates prescription products to the Johnson & Johnson Patient
Assistance Foundation, Inc. (``JJPAF''), a 501(c)(3) organization with
an independent board and decision-making. Janssen also makes financial
contributions to JJPAF and other independent 501(c)(3) organizations.
These product and financial donations are recorded as charitable
deductions.
With respect to our commercial patient assistance programs, we
collect information that is needed to support administering the
program, helping patients get access to the medically appropriate
treatment they have selected, and identifying and addressing barriers
to patient access.
Question. Please provide a list of all contributions since January
1, 2014, that your company has made to any tax-exempt organizations
working on issues related to drugs within your product lines, including
but not limited to patient groups, disease awareness groups, medical or
professional societies, universities or hospitals, industry
associations or leagues. For each contribution, please provide the name
of the organization that received the donation, the date the donation
was made, the amount of the donation, and a description of the purpose
of the contribution (i.e., was the contribution for the general fund, a
specific purpose to a specific program, or continuing medical
education). Please also note whether the contribution was unrestricted
or restricted; if it was restricted, please explain all restrictions.
Finally, if your company maintains a foundation or other separate
charitable arm, please provide the name of all such entities, and list
all donations made from that entity or entities.
Answer. Through our Janssen charitable giving, we're proud to make
a difference for patients and for the communities where we live and
work. Janssen provides charitable donations through an established
application review and approval process designed to ensure that the
recipient of any contribution (i) is a valid 501(c)(3) charitable
organization; (ii) has an established, good reputation; and (iii) is
not on a Federal exclusion list (if the non-profit is a provider or
government contractor). In addition, the charitable contributions
review process is designed to review requests for donations to make
sure that they are not made for the purpose of inducing the use or
recommending the use of any J&J product.
Janssen releases a contributions transparency report
(``Contributions Report'') that details all of the charitable donations
from the company for the prior year. Please see the attached link for
the most recently posted Contributions Report, https://www.janssen.com/
us/transparency/educational-charitable-contribution-disclosures.
With respect to the Contributions Report, please note:

In keeping with our donor agreements and applicable
regulatory guidance, financial donations made to independent
charitable foundations that assist patients who are
underinsured and in need of financial assistance with
treatment-related expenses are disclosed in aggregate on the
Janssen Contributions Report.

Charitable contributions made by recently acquired company
Actelion are not included in our report. In future years, these
donations will be included in the Contributions Report.

Donations in the amount of $270,000 have been made annually
to support the mission of PhRMA Foundation. These donations
were made on April 29, 2014; January 21, 2015; December 21,
2015; September 11, 2017; June 1, 2018; and January 15, 2019.
Contribution Reports for years 2014 through 2017 are attached.
Most donation requests seek support for a specific program or
initiative. If approved, the use of the contributed funds will be
restricted to the purpose set forth in the application request. The
Contribution Report details this purpose in the project title section.
In addition, the company's standard donation agreement used for
most contributions stipulates that funds should not be used to (i)
educate, train or support meals, salary, travel, consulting fees or any
other reimbursement to U.S.-licensed physicians; or (ii) fund services
for which the organization receives government reimbursement under a
fee-for-service model.
Janssen makes financial contributions and prescription product
donations to the Johnson & Johnson Patient Assistance Foundation, Inc.
(``JJPAF''), a 501(c)(3) organization with an independent board and
decision-making. The JJPAF provides free products directly to patients
who meet certain income requirements and who do not have insurance
coverage. In limited circumstances, JJPAF may work with other non-
profit entities to distribute products to patients in need. JJPAF does
not advise Janssen of the specific recipients of its donations.
In 2018, Janssen donated approximately $1 billion in free product
and financial support to the JJPAF, enabling it to provide medicines at
no cost to approximately 76,000 patients.
The Johnson & Johnson Foundation (``JJF'') is a private non-profit
501(c)(3) organization, founded in 1953. Solely funded by the Johnson &
Johnson Family of Companies, the Foundation is responsible for managing
the Corporation's Global Community Impact (``GCI'') programs and
activities across the globe. Donations made by this foundation are
available publicly through the IRS Form 990 it submits each year.
Question. Pay-for-delay agreements cost consumers and taxpayers
billions in higher drug costs every year. The FTC has gone after drug
companies that enter into these settlements where the brand pays the
generic company to keep its lower cost alternative off the market. I'm
the lead Republican sponsor of S. 64, the Preserve Access to Affordable
Generics and Biosimilars Act, which would help put an end to these
deals.
Do you agree that these pay-off agreements keep drug costs high for
patients because they delay competition?
Has your company ever entered into these kinds of settlements with
a generic company?
Do you support the pay for delay bill?
Answer. J&J has not entered into patent settlement agreements that
require payment of money to a generic manufacturer. Since J&J has not
entered into agreements of this type, we do not have direct experience
with their competitive impacts. The current legal framework--FTC
oversight and judicial review on a case-by-case basis--is intended to
identify any patent settlement that is anti-competitive. It is
important to note that not all settlement agreements would result in a
delay in competition; for example, some agreements of this type might
facilitate generic entry prior to patent expiry.
Although we believe that the current legal framework is sufficient
to ensure that patent settlements are not anti-competitive, we would
not oppose pay-for-delay legislation, provided that such legislation
clearly, and in a manner consistent with current case law, defines the
specific features of settlement agreements within its scope, does not
hinder the ability of parties to utilize settlement agreements to
efficiently settle patent disputes, and allows for an assessment of the
competitive impacts of individual settlement agreements on a case-by-
case basis.
rebate traps/walls
Question. I'm increasingly concerned about the effect of so-called
``rebate traps'' or ``rebate walls'' on patients' access to quality,
lower cost medicine. I understand there is ongoing litigation
challenging these practices as anti-competitive.
Does your company engage in the bundling of rebates over multiple
products? If so, why? And what benefit does the consumer gain from
that?
Answer. Like other companies with broad portfolios of medicines
that are highly valued by payers, health-care providers, and patients,
Janssen offers incremental value when customers make a broader range of
our medicines available to patients. Similar programs are common in the
pharmaceutical and other industries. These programs provide an
incentive for the customer to utilize our products and can lower costs.
Those savings may be passed through to patients.
Question. Does your company view these practices as anticompetitive
or harmful to patients' access to quality, lower cost medicine?
Answer. Janssen's contract offerings encourage price competition
among drug manufacturers and ultimately enhance patients' access to
quality medicines at lower prices.
Question. If a policy were adopted to eliminate rebates, or to
require that rebate savings be passed on to the consumer, would that in
and of itself solve the issue of rebate ``traps'' and ``walls''? And
would consumers benefit from such a policy?
Answer. We support reforms to the rebate system that restructure
incentives to ensure patients benefit from a competitive marketplace
and see lower out-of-pocket costs.
It is important to note that in today's health-care marketplace,
payers use their ability to influence utilization to extract rebates,
thereby enhancing competition and lowering overall system costs.
Unfortunately, these savings are not usually shared with patients.
Similarly, if rebates are eliminated, we anticipate that payers
will use their ability to influence utilization to extract discounts
and fees from manufacturers.
drug pricing
Question. When setting the list price of a drug, does your company
consider regulatory costs or compliance? If so, how specifically do
those factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least
one specific example, if applicable, from your current product
portfolio.
When setting the list price of a drug, does your company consider
the risk of liability or litigation? If so, how specifically do those
factors affect the list price of a drug? Please provide at least one
specific example, if applicable, from your current product portfolio.
Answer. At Janssen, we take a responsible approach to pricing that
recognizes our dual responsibility to patients today and patients
tomorrow. Patients today need access to our medicines. Patients
tomorrow count on us to deliver cures and treatments for the most
challenging, intractable diseases. When we set an initial list price
for our medicines, we balance:

Value to patients, the health-care system, and society.
We consider how the medicine will improve
patient health. We also assess the medicine's potential to
reduce other costs--surgeries, hospital stays, or long-term
care, for example--and the improvement the medicine represents
over the existing standard of care.

The importance of maintaining affordable access to medicines
for people who need them.
We work with insurers, pharmacy benefits
managers, governments, hospitals, physicians, and other
providers of care so that patients who are prescribed our
medicines can get access to them.

The importance of preserving our ability to develop future
groundbreaking cures and treatments.
We have an obligation to ensure that the sale
of our medicines provides us with the resources to invest in
R&D to address serious, unmet medical needs.
In addition, the sale of our medicines must enable us to cover the
costs of compliance with all laws and regulations.
Regarding the requests for specific examples from our current
product portfolio, the information requested is confidential and
competitively sensitive. As such, potentially responsive information is
not available for public disclosure.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Pat Roberts
Question. What role do you see value-based arrangements (VBAs)
playing in the effort to reduce prescription drug costs? What potential
do these arrangements have to find the ``sweet spot'' between
controlling costs to patients and encouraging innovation of new drugs?
Answer. We believe a value-based health-care system has tremendous
potential to improve patient health, increase access to care, and curb
the growth in health-care spending. Our current health-care system
rewards the quantity or volume of care delivered, regardless of the
results of that care. Consequently, sometimes money is spent on
treatments, diagnostic procedures, and interventions that provide
limited value or may not even be needed, driving up healthcare costs
without actually improving patient health.
Shifting to a value-based system requires innovation in the way
contracts between payers and manufacturers are structured. By creating
common incentives to deliver value for patients, value-based
agreements, including innovative approaches to contracting models, can
provide better outcomes at lower costs. We have established several
innovative, value-based contracts and continue to explore new
opportunities. For example, we have contracts tied to measurable
medical outcomes and contracts tied to offsets of other expenditures.
Fundamentally we believe a value-based health system will drive
down the amount of waste in our current health-care system, so the
money spent actually makes a measurable difference in individual health
and the health of our society overall. Efforts to achieve a more value-
based system have encouraged all stakeholders to more clearly define
and measure the value of health-care services offered, including
medicines. In a health-care system that rewards value over volume, we
believe incentives will be greater to bring to market new drugs that
can reduce the need for other costly health-care intervention and
ultimately produce better health outcomes and lower cost.
Question. How can VBAs help lower what patients pay out-of-pocket?
Answer. Innovative contracting models can align the incentives of
all stakeholders, including pharmaceutical companies, health-care
providers, and payers, to achieve better outcomes for patients at a
lower overall cost of care to the health-care system, including Federal
programs. In most cases, because the pharmaceutical company agrees to
share some of the risk around the economics of the arrangement for a
particular medicine, the health plan or PBM will provide better access
to that medicine, which may entail placing the medicine on a lower
formulary tier. Lower formulary tier placement results in lower out-of-
pocket costs for patients. We know that rising patient copayments are a
barrier to adherence and therefore to optimal outcomes. We believe that
keeping out-of-pocket costs reasonable for patients is an important
element of getting to better outcomes, and innovative contracts can
support this goal.
According to an analysis by PhRMA and Avalere Health, commercially
insured patients in health plans with outcome-based contracts for
diabetes, high cholesterol and HIV medicines between 2015 and 2017 had
copays that were, on average, 28 percent lower for those medicines
compared to patients in other plans.
Question. Can Congress do more to allow for and encourage the use
of VBAs?
Answer. We are enthusiastic about the potential for expanding the
use of innovative value-based agreements. Nevertheless, a number of
technological and policy barriers can make these agreements challenging
to implement. To address technological barriers, we advocate for
modernizing our healthcare data system to make it easier to track
patient outcomes. To address policy barriers, we support the following
approaches: establishing safe harbors to better enable manufacturers to
partner with payers and share risk; clarifying the treatment of value-
based contracts in government price calculations, including in the
complex Medicaid Best Price determination; and making comparative
formulary and cost-sharing information readily available so patients
have the information they need to make better decisions.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
Question. We continue to hear that rebates negotiated off of the
list price of a drug are both good and bad.
Pharmacy benefit managers and plans have argued that rebates are
used to lower premiums across the board and that it is the best way to
seek a price concession on otherwise expensive drugs.
Your industry argues that these payers are insisting on higher
rebates that can only be achieved by raising list prices. But patients
often lose under this system, with out of pocket costs being tied to
list price. Insulin patients appear to be routinely impacted by this
perversity in the system.
Please explain to the committee how your company would reduce list
prices if rebates were no longer a part of the equation?
What assurance can you provide that you would in fact lower your
prices?
What actions should be taken to ensure that patients are actually
seeing the benefits of lower out of pocket costs?
Answer. Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the
entire market or only to those related to Federal health plans and
assuming rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that
offset the amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer
discounts for pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we
would need to renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-of-sale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
We support reforms to the rebate system that restructure incentives
to ensure patients benefit from rebates and discounts that are
provided.
Question. If rebates are driving high list prices for drugs as drug
manufacturers' claim, why do you think that Part B drugs, which have no
PBM rebates, are also seeing significant price increases? Whose fault
is that?
Answer. Part B benefits from competitive commercial rebates and
discounts, while maintaining access to medicines for our nation's
seniors, through the Average Selling Price (``ASP''). ASP, which is the
basis for Part B drug reimbursement, reflects all commercial discounts
and rebates. Since both provider reimbursement and patient out-of-
pocket costs for Part B drugs are based on ASP, changes in a product's
ASP is a more relevant indicator of true cost to the Medicare system
and beneficiaries.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Michael B. Enzi
Question. The Food and Drug Administration's drug review process is
known to many as the ``gold standard'' for evaluating medical products.
I've long thought that it is critical that we maintain public
confidence in their ability to ensure that drugs are safe and
effective. There is a perception among some, however, that biosimilars
might not be as safe as their reference products. That perception can
undermine patient and provider confidence. Do you believe that when FDA
approves a biosimilar, providers can be confident that it is safe and
effective?
Answer. Biosimilars granted licensure by the FDA are by definition
safe and effective and are highly similar to the reference biologic. We
support the FDA's application of rigorous scientific standards and
appropriate data requirements for the licensure of both biosimilars and
interchangeable biosimilars, and we believe evidence and experience
will drive patient and provider confidence in these products.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
re-evaluating business strategies in foreign countries
Question. Since taking office, President Trump has made reducing
drug prices one of his highest priorities--and has repeatedly spoken
about his frustration with the U.S. subsidizing the costs of
pharmaceuticals for the rest of the world. He has gone so far as to
issue proposals, like the International Pricing Index (IPI) Model, in
an attempt to bring down prescription drug prices.
With the increased scrutiny of the industry and of the drug supply
chain as a whole in the United States, have any of your companies re-
evaluated your business strategy in foreign countries?
If not, then why?
If a proposal, like IPI, were implemented, would it force your
companies to potentially ``walk away from the negotiating table when
other countries demand low prices subsidized by America's seniors,'' as
HHS Senior Advisor for Drug Pricing Reform John O'Brien has said?
What are some of your ideas on how we can ensure Americans aren't
shouldering the full cost of pharmaceuticals?
Answer. We continuously evaluate our global business strategy and
country-
specific market access approaches in light of current conditions,
including changing policies and circumstances.
We support the use of trade tools to improve the policy environment
for U.S. companies operating overseas and to enhance incentives for
innovation. The U.S. government has already taken steps to advance this
goal with some of our key trading partners. The U.S. Mexico Canada
Agreement (``USMCA'') includes important provisions committing Canada
and Mexico to recognize the value of pharmaceuticals either through the
operation of competitive markets or through procedures that
appropriately value pharmaceuticals. The agreement also contains
procedural safeguards for U.S. companies. These include a requirement
that Canada and Mexico provide opportunities for stakeholder comment on
measures before they are finalized and also offer U.S. companies an
opportunity to appeal administrative actions. These are critical tools
that will help American companies obtain fair value for innovation
outside the U.S.
The U.S. government has announced its intention to negotiate trade
agreements with Japan, the European Union, and the United Kingdom.
These negotiations could address inadequacies in the systems of some
our largest trading partners.
The U.S. government can also effectively leverage existing trade
agreements and tools like Organisation for Economic Cooperation
accession negotiations to induce foreign governments to provide
appropriate value for innovation and offer greater incentives for new
treatments and cures.
foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
Question. President Trump and Secretary Azar have both repeatedly
described their frustrations with ``foreign freeloading'' of U.S. drugs
in the last year.
``When foreign governments extort unreasonably low prices from U.S.
drug makers, Americans have to pay more to subsidize the enormous cost
of research and development. . . . It's unfair and it's ridiculous, and
it's not going to happen any longer.''
Do you agree that because of foreign countries' pricing and
reimbursement systems, U.S. patients and innovators are shouldering the
burden for financing medical advances?
Answer. According to a report by the U.S. Department of Commerce,
international reference pricing and controls suppress worldwide private
research and development by up to 16 percent annually, leading to fewer
new medicines launched each year. Conversely, recent estimates
demonstrate that removing price controls in other wealthy countries
would increase the number of available new treatments by 9 percent by
2030, equivalent to a range of 8 to 13 new therapeutics that year.
Question. How do foreign countries' pricing and reimbursement
systems affect our prescription drug costs?
Answer. While there is no direct relationship between U.S. drug
prices and foreign prices, according to a report by the U.S. Department
of Commerce, existing foreign price controls suppress worldwide private
research and development and decrease the number of new treatments and
cures, to the detriment of U.S. patients.
It is important to note that most cross-country pricing comparisons
focus solely on the list prices of medicines and do not account for the
significant discounts required for participation in U.S. public
programs, such as Medicaid, the 340B Drug Discount Program, and the
Federal Supply Schedule (for U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and
the Department of Defense), as well as the discounts and rebates
negotiated by private payers. For this reason, most international
comparisons are not ``apples to apples.'' In addition, in other
countries, medicine prices are achieved through national regulation,
which often restricts or delays access to innovative medicines and
limits patient and physician choice.
Question. Are foreign governments taking note of the concerns being
raised by the Trump administration and have they responded in any way?
Answer. We understand that some foreign government officials have
noted the concerns raised by the Trump administration and appear to be
seeking a better understanding of the proposed policy changes in the
United States and the potential future impacts on their countries.
Question. Has there been any noticeable change in any of our trade
agreements since these concerns have been raised by the Trump
administration?
Answer. The U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (``USMCA'') contains
important provisions on intellectual property that establish a higher
global IP standard than in previous agreements, particularly with
respect to data protection for biologics. The agreement also contains
important provisions committing Canada and Mexico to recognize the
value of pharmaceuticals either through the operation of competitive
markets or through procedures that appropriately value pharmaceuticals.
The agreement includes procedural safeguards for U.S. companies. These
include a requirement that Canada and Mexico provide opportunities for
stakeholder comment on measures before they are finalized and also
offer U.S. companies an opportunity to appeal administrative actions.
These are critical tools that will help American companies obtain fair
value for innovation. The U.S. government has announced its intention
to negotiate trade agreements with Japan, the European Union, and the
United Kingdom. These negotiations could address inadequacies in the
systems of some our largest trading partners. The U.S. government can
also effectively leverage existing trade agreements and tools like
Organisation for Economic Co-operation accession negotiations to induce
foreign governments to provide appropriate value for innovation and
offer greater incentives for new treatments and cures.
medicaid closed formulary proposals
Question. In an attempt to bring down drug costs, various states
have been exploring whether to exclude certain drugs from its Medicaid
program. For example, the state of Massachusetts' recently asked CMS
for permission to create a closed formulary where the state Medicaid
program would pick at least one drug per therapeutic class. CMS denied
their waiver request citing violation of federal law, but this proposal
does bring up important questions on how to contain drug prices in
state Medicaid programs.
If the principles of the Medicare Part D program--including the
necessary patient protections--were applied to State Medicaid programs,
do you think it would lower drug costs while ensuring access to
patients?
Answer. By legislative design, the Medicaid Program already
receives the ``best'' price, in addition to substantial rebates
associated with an inflation penalty and negotiated supplemental
rebates. The rebate is never less than 23.1 percent, the required
statutory minimum, and often requires manufacturers to sell their
products (both older and newer) for as low as 1 cent per pill or unit.
The Medicaid drug rebate statute represents a carefully crafted
legislative approach developed by Congress and designed as a package to
offer Medicaid beneficiaries comprehensive coverage and access to
outpatient drugs at the lowest cost in the marketplace. We support the
significant access protections required under the current Medicaid Drug
Rebate Program that serve a uniquely vulnerable population. We also
question whether reducing access to medically necessary medication for
vulnerable Medicaid beneficiaries will yield true program savings. Any
further restrictions in medication access is likely to increase the
risk of higher costs elsewhere in the health-care continuum. Moreover,
vulnerable Medicaid beneficiaries may be particularly challenged to
navigate the administrative, technical, logistical and other challenges
that inevitably arise when additional restrictions are placed on their
access to care.
medicaid ``best price''
Question. In the Trump administration's Blueprint, they suggested
that because drug manufactures have to give Medicaid the ``best price''
on drugs, there is no incentive to offer deeper discounts to other
payers--both government and commercial--than what is already offered
under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Does the Medicaid ``best price'' requirement encourage
manufacturers to increase initial prices?
Answer. We take into account the Medicaid ``best price''
requirement at all stages of the drug lifecycle, including launch. We
consider best price when offering large discounts to commercial
customers after a drug is launched and when designing value-based
agreements.
Question. What, if any, changes would you suggest we make to the
program?
Answer. We are supportive of ongoing efforts to promote a value-
driven health-care system, including in Medicaid, and applaud recent
efforts by both the administration and Congress that seek to address
regulatory and legal uncertainty around value-based payment
arrangements. We also support CMS's recent approvals of State proposals
to advance specific Medicaid value-based arrangements with drug makers.
outcomes-based contracts
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you highlight your
support of outcomes-based contracts and how we need to be shifting our
system toward that approach.
How will these contracts lower drug costs for patients in both the
near term and long-term?
How will they lower overall health-care costs for our Federal
programs?
What have the preliminary results looked like so far?
Answer. Innovative contracting models can align the incentives of
all stakeholders, including pharmaceutical companies, health-care
providers, and payers, to achieve better outcomes for patients at a
lower overall cost of care to the health-care system, including Federal
programs.
In most cases, because the pharmaceutical company agrees to share
some of the risk around the economics of the arrangement for a
particular medicine, the health plan or PBM will provide better access
to that medicine, which often entails placing the medicine on a more
preferable formulary tier. More preferable formulary tier placement
results in lower out-of-pocket costs for patients. We know that rising
patient copayments are a barrier to adherence and therefore to optimal
outcomes. We believe that keeping out-of-pocket costs reasonable for
patients is an important element of getting to better outcomes, and
innovative contracts can support this goal.
According to an analysis by PhRMA and Avalere Health, commercially
insured patients in health plans with outcome-based contracts for
diabetes, high cholesterol and HIV medicines between 2015 and 2017 had
copays that were, on average, 28 percent lower for those medicines
compared to patients in other plans.
Innovative contracting models are still relatively new, and we look
forward to the point at which we will have the long-term data necessary
to evaluate the success of these programs with respect to health-care
cost reduction. We are enthusiastic about the potential of innovative
value-based contracting models to enable us to take full advantage of
medicines' benefits, including their potential to reduce other health-
care costs.
transparency/point of sale
Question. In almost all of your testimonies, you express your
support for the Trump administration's proposal to allow manufacturers
to provide PBMs up-front discounts that are passed onto patients at the
point of sale.
Do you feel like this proposal will make the transactions within
the drug supply chain more transparent?
If so, would this transparency bring down drug costs--overall and
for specialty drugs?
Answer. We do believe that a point-of-sale discount model, wherein
manufacturer discounts could be passed through to a patient at the
point-of-sale, will make price reductions offered by the manufacturer
more transparent because these discounts would be more directly
reflected in patient out-of-pocket cost at the pharmacy. However, we do
not believe that the proposal will improve transparency with respect to
fees or mark-ups to the price of drugs added elsewhere in the supply
chain.
Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the entire
market or only with respect to Federal health plans and assuming
rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that offset the
amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer discounts for
pass-through at the point of sale.
the relationship between wholesalers and manufacturers
Question. When talking about the pharmaceutical supply chain, a lot
of focus has been placed on the pharmacy benefit manager. But there's
another side of the equation that I'd like to ask about: how do
wholesalers negotiate pricing with manufacturers?
Answer. Janssen sells to wholesalers and specialty distributors at
list price, with discounts customarily offered for prompt payment.
Janssen occasionally offers discounts to wholesalers for discrete
periods of time on certain products. These are generally offered to
contracted, authorized wholesalers market-wide. In addition, Janssen
negotiates service agreements with wholesalers and specialty
distributors for bona fide services relating to distribution of Janssen
products.
Question. What impact does this have on drug costs?
Answer. We do not know the details of the wholesalers' arrangements
with downstream stakeholders such as pharmacies, hospitals, providers,
and other sites of care.
Question. What incentives or disincentives do they have to contain
price increases?
Answer. We are not in a position to comment on wholesaler
incentives or disincentives to contain price increases.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
proposed rebate rule
Question. As has been done in many other settings, drug
manufacturers said during the hearing that one reason list prices for
drugs are high is that pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) demand
larger and larger rebates in order for the drug to receive favorable
placement on a formulary. You and your colleagues who testified during
the hearing stated if the administration's proposal on changes to the
anti-kickback safe harbor for pharmaceutical rebates took effect, your
company would likely lower list price.
Like many Oregonians, I am skeptical drug manufacturers would
voluntarily lower their prices. Therefore, would you support
legislation that would (1) make similar changes the administration has
put forward related to Part D and Medicaid managed care, (2) change the
rebate system in a similar way to the proposal for the commercial
market, and (3) require drug makers to lower the list price of their
drugs equal to the amount of rebates provided today?
Answer. We support reforms to the rebate system that restructure
incentives to ensure patients benefit from a competitive marketplace
and see lower out-of-pocket costs.
Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the entire
market or only to those related to Federal health plans and assuming
rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that offset the
amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer discounts for
pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we would need to
renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-of-sale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
medicaid drug rebate program
Question. The Medicaid Drug Rebate Program (MDRP) requires
manufacturers to provide a basic rebate and an additional inflationary
rebate for both brand and generic drugs. The inflationary rebate is an
increasingly substantial part of total rebates due in large part to
large increases in drug prices that exceed inflation. Under current
law, this inflationary rebate is capped at 100 percent of Average
Manufacturer Price (AMP). This is the case even when manufacturers
continue to raise their prices well above inflation.
Please provide a list of all of your pharmaceutical products that
have reached the Medicaid AMP rebate cap in any of the 20 quarters from
January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2018.
For each drug listed in response to question 1, please also provide
a list of which quarters and years each drug hit the cap.
Answer. Janssen has numerous current products, and products that
have since been sold to third parties, that have reached the Medicaid
AMP rebate cap in at least one of the 20 quarters from 1Q 2014 through
4Q 2018. The fact that these products reaching the 100 percent AMP cap
is based on confidential metrics reported under the Medicaid Drug
Rebate Program. The Medicaid AMP rebate cap is reached when AMP is less
than or equal to the Unit Rebate Amount (URA). URA is calculated based
on AMP and Best Price--which are confidential under the Medicaid Drug
Rebate statute at 42 U.S.C. ' 1396r8(b)(3)(D). There are exceptions in
the statute that permit the Secretary and State Medicaid agencies to
disclose the information only in certain situations, including
disclosure to CBO. Thus, if there was legislation proposing to amend
the 100 percent AMP cap, CBO would be able to access the drugs and
underlying data to estimate the cost/savings to the government of such
a legislative change.
The product-specific information requested is confidential and
competitively sensitive. As such, potentially responsive information is
not available for public disclosure.
medicaid drug rebate program compliance
Question. I am concerned about recent reports and legal settlements
surrounding drug manufacturers' failure to comply fully with the
requirements of the MDRP. For example, an analysis by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General
found that between 2012 and 2016 taxpayers may have overpaid by as much
as $1.3 billion for 10 potentially misclassified drugs. That is why I
introduced the Right Rebate Act with Chairman Grassley to prevent drug
manufacturers from manipulating Medicaid to increase their profits.
However, I continued to be concerned about oversight and manufacturer
compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
Accordingly, please describe the following:
Your company's current compliance plan and procedures used to
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program including internal audits or other checks you use to identify
compliance vulnerabilities.
Any past or ongoing issues of non-compliance.
Any corrective actions taken to address identified problems or
issues of non-
compliance with the MDRP and how such steps were communicated to the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Any steps taken to improve compliance and ensure that all Medicaid
drug rebates owed to the Federal Government and the States are paid in
full.
Answer. We comply with the obligations we undertake when
participating in U.S. Federal, State, or local government contracts and
government pricing programs such as the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program.
We have an established compliance framework along with organizational
structure and accountabilities designed to assure compliance. Our
framework includes testing and monitoring and an obligation to correct
any identified discrepancies. As such, any discrepancies have been
timely addressed and corrected.
The other information requested is confidential. As such,
potentially responsive information is not available for public
disclosure.
bonus payments tied to specific drugs
Question. I am concerned by the potential for employee financial
incentives to encourage high launch prices and price increases for
prescription drugs.
Is your salary, bonus or other compensation tied to sales or
revenue targets of a single product your company sells? Has it ever
been? If yes, please state the product or products to which your
salary, bonus or other compensation was tied.
Answer. At no time during her employment with the Johnson & Johnson
Family of Companies has Ms. Taubert's salary, bonus, or other
compensation been tied to sales or revenue targets of a single product.
Question. Is your salary, bonus, or other compensation tied to
either revenue or net income of the company as a whole? Has it ever
been? If yes, please explain what assumptions about price increases are
used when the compensation committee sets revenue or net income goals.
Does the compensation committee provide any guidance to executives in
regards to the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth?
Answer. We structure performance-based compensation to reward an
appropriate balance of short-term and long-term financial and strategic
business results, with an emphasis on managing the business for long-
term results. Our compensation program's emphasis on long-term value
reduces the possibility that our executives make excessively risky
business decisions that could maximize short-term results at the
expense of long-term value.
Ms. Taubert's base salary is tied to performance, market data,
responsibilities, time in position, internal equity, and experience.
Ms. Taubert's bonus and long-term incentive compensation has been and
is awarded based on her individual performance and the company's
performance.
The compensation committee does not provide guidance to executives
regarding the amount of revenue that the company will generate from
price increases versus volume growth.
provision of rebates in exchange for formulary placement
Question. In today's system, drug makers receive a limited time
window to sell their drug without competition. After that period has
expired, low-cost generics should become available. However, drug
makers often prevent access to these cheaper generic drugs in Medicare.
Researchers have found that 72 percent of Medicare Part D plans charged
lower cost-sharing for a brand name drug compared to its generic
equivalent. This means seniors were charged less out of pocket for
brand name drugs compared to generics that are on average four times
cheaper than the brand-named drug. This happens because drug makers pay
a rebate to the Part D plans in order to give the more expensive drug
better treatment than a generic. As a result, Medicare spending
increases due to the current structure of the Part D benefit.
Has your company ever paid a rebate to a Part D plan so that a
brand name drug would get preferential treatment (i.e., lower cost-
sharing or less utilization management) compared to a cheaper generic?
If so, please provide: a list of the drugs for which your company
has done this since January 1, 2014; and the number of Part D plans in
which this type of rebate was given for each drug in each year.
Answer. In negotiations with PBMs and payers, Janssen may offer
multiple different rebate options. The PBM or payer has sole discretion
over how formularies are structured. In some cases, a PBM or payer may
establish a formulary that puts a branded drug in a preferential
position.
The information requested is confidential and competitively
sensitive. As such, potentially responsive information is not available
for public disclosure.
net prices
Question. Your testimony stated that ``while our 2018 aggregate
list price increase was 6.3 percent, for the second year in a row
discounts and rebates outweighed that increase, and aggregate net
price--in other words, the real price--decreased by 6.8 percent.''
According to your testimony, the net price ``represents the year-over-
year change in the average net price, which is WAC less rebates,
discounts, and returns.'' Please describe how the company's year-over-
year aggregate net price is calculated. Please also specifically
address the following questions:
Answer. Average net price change represents the year-over-year
change in the average net price, which is Wholesale Acquisition Cost
less rebates, discounts, and returns.
Question. How many products are included in the calculation of the
average net price change? What was the median net price change?
Answer. We believe weighted average net price change is the
appropriate metric for evaluating list price changes across the
portfolio. There are 99 products (brands) included in the average net
price change calculation. The 2017-2018 weighted average net price
change is -6.8 percent. The non-weighted average 2017-2018 net price
change is -3.7 percent. The 2017-2018 median net price change is -1.9
percent. It is important to note that non-weighted average or median
net price change treats all medicines--whether used by many patients or
by very few--equally, so those figures are not useful or valuable in
understanding the actual change experienced.
Question. Is net price weighted? If so, how? For example, in
determining the aggregate net price does the company assign different
weights to different products based on volume or other factors? Are
``on patent'' and ``off patent'' drugs weighted identically? Are other
statistical weights used or are all products treated equally?
Answer. Annual net price change versus prior year is calculated at
the product level and weighted across the company's U.S. product
portfolio using net trade sales. All products, both ``on patent'' and
``off patent,'' are included.
Question. Does the figure that you provided during your testimony
account for U.S. prices, international prices, or both? Generally
speaking, when your company reports net price changes, does it
differentiate between U.S. and international prices?
Answer. The figure provided, -6.8 percent, accounts for 2018 net
price change for our U.S. pharmaceutical business only. We disclose
this figure in our annual Janssen U.S. Transparency Report.
Question. Please list the five drugs your company sold in the U.S.
that had the greatest year-over-year net price increase in 2018, noting
the increase for each drug by dollar figure and percentage. Please list
the five drugs your company sold in the U.S. that had the lowest year-
over-year net price increase (and/or the greatest decrease) in 2018,
noting the increase (or decrease) for each drug by dollar figure and
percentage.
Answer. The information requested is confidential and competitively
sensitive. As such, potentially responsive information is not available
for public disclosure.
Question. For 2018, what was the average net price change in the
U.S. market for (1) drugs with no competition, (2) drugs with only
branded competition, and (3) drugs with generic competition?
Answer. The information requested is confidential and competitively
sensitive. As such, potentially responsive information is not available
for public disclosure.
Question. Your company noted in its annual financial filing with
the Securities and Exchange Commission that ``Immunology was negatively
impacted by lower sales of REMICADE' (infliximab) due to
increased discounts/rebates and biosimilar competition,'' and ``Strong
sales of long-acting injectables INVEGA TRINZA'/
TREVICTA' (paliperidone palmitate) and INVEGA
SUSTENNA'/XEPLION' were partially offset by
cannibalization of RISPERDAL CONSTA' (risperidone) and
generic competition for CONCERTA'/methylphenidate,'' and
``Lower sales of INVOKANA'/INVOKAMET'
(canagliflozin) in the U.S. was primarily due to an increase in price
discounts, higher rebates and market share decline driven by
competitive pressure. Lower sales of XARELTO' (rivaroxaban)
were driven by an increase in discounts and rebates, partially offset
by an increase in market share.'' What were the year-over-year net
price changes for each of these drugs?
Answer. The information requested is confidential and competitively
sensitive. As such, potentially responsive information is not available
for public disclosure.
Question. Please define the following terms that were used on page
20 of your company's annual report for the year ending December 31,
2018 regarding sales of various pharmaceutical products: strong uptake,
market growth, and share gain. Please also define ``reduction in
sales,'' as used in the sentence ``Biosimilar versions of
REMICADE' have been introduced in certain markets outside
the U.S., resulting in a reduction in sales of REMICADE' in
those markets.''
Answer. ``Strong uptake'' means that we are seeing significant
utilization of a medicine that was recently introduced into the market
or approved for a new indication.
``Market growth'' refers to increase in utilization of medicines
overall for a particular disease state or in a particular class of
medicines.
``Share gain'' means that within a class of medicines or
therapeutic area, a particular medicine is being selected and utilized
more than it had been previously and now represents a greater
percentage of utilization within that class relative to competitor
medicines.
``Reduction in sales'' in the sentence you reference means that
revenues for REMICADE' are lower than they have been in
previous years. Please note that our 2018 Annual Report goes on to
state, ``In the U.S., a biosimilar version of REMICADE' was
introduced in 2016, and additional competitors continue to enter the
market. Continued infliximab biosimilar competition in the U.S. market
will result in a further reduction in U.S. sales of
REMICADE'.''
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
Question. During the hearing, when I asked whether your company
engaged in tactics to delay generic production of your products, you
answered ``no.'' However, your Johnson & Johnson's Actelion appears on
the FDA's list of companies who have access complaints against them.
Can you explain the discrepancy between your answer and the FDA list?
The FDA list can be found here: https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/
ApprovalApplications/AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/
ucm607738.htm.
Answer. Johnson & Johnson acquired Actelion in June 2017. We share
FDA's commitment to policies that promote access to generics when
balanced with the protection of innovation and the safeguarding of
patient safety. It is important to note that the FDA's website on
Reference Listed Drug (``RLD'') Access Inquiries does not differentiate
between inquiries and complaints, and does not clarify whether the RLD
Sponsor made samples available after the FDA issued a Safety
Determination Letter. Following the receipt of a Safety Determination
Letter from the FDA, Actelion has actively entered into a supply
agreement with every generic manufacturer who has requested testing
samples of our products. This is true for each instance cited in the
FDA's RLD Access Inquiry list. Actelion is also actively engaging with
generic manufacturers to develop shared REMS programs that protect
patient safety while enabling patient access to our medicines.
Question. When new products enter the market, do drug companies set
high initial rebates and then provide deep rebates in order to gain
access to insurance plan's formularies?
Answer. At Janssen, we take a responsible approach to pricing that
recognizes our dual responsibility to patients today and patients
tomorrow. Patients today need access to our medicines. Patients
tomorrow count on us to deliver cures and treatments for the most
challenging, intractable diseases. When we set an initial list price
for our medicines, we balance:

Value to patients, the health-care system, and society.
We consider how the medicine will improve
patient health. We also assess the medicine's potential to
reduce other costs--surgeries, hospital stays, or long-term
care, for example--and the improvement the medicine represents
over the existing standard of care.

The importance of maintaining affordable access to medicines
for people who need them.
We work with insurers, pharmacy benefits
managers, governments, hospitals, physicians, and other
providers of care so that patients who are prescribed our
medicines can get access to them.

The importance of preserving our ability to develop future
groundbreaking cures and treatments.
We have an obligation to ensure that the sale
of our medicines provides us with the resources to invest in
R&D to address serious, unmet medical needs.
We go through a lengthy process to gather the information necessary
to assess the medicine according to these factors. We use this
information to determine the value of our medicine compared to what is,
or will be, available to treat the same condition--be it other
medicines, surgery, or other forms of health care.
Question. If CMS finalizes the rebate rule, do you anticipate
future products entering the market with significantly lower initial
list prices?
Answer. Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the
entire market or only to those related to Federal health plans and
assuming rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that
offset the amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer
discounts for pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we
would need to renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-of-sale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
Question. What are your recommendations for lowering prices for the
40 percent of drugs that do not offer rebates in Medicare Part D? In
the health insurance plans that you offer your employees, do you ask
your insurers to pass through the full manufacturer rebates to the
beneficiaries?
Answer. Drugs that offer lower rebates tend to be drugs that face
less competition in the marketplace. Increased competition can lead to
lower prices of branded and generic drugs. FDA Commissioner Scott
Gottlieb prioritized faster approval of generic drugs. In 2018, FDA set
a record by approving an estimated 971 generic drugs.
Within today's health-care system, we do recover manufacturer
rebates from our PBM. Any savings we receive are used to offset out-of-
pocket costs for employees and total plan costs. In order to help
ensure affordability for our employees, we limit out-of-pocket pharmacy
costs through a monthly per prescription cap.
Question. The systems for pricing and distributing drugs are opaque
and difficult to understand. What are your recommendations for
increasing transparency in how your companies set the list prices for
drugs, and for improving transparency in the supply chain for
prescription drugs? Would you support federal standards for
transparency in setting the list prices for drugs?
Answer. At Janssen, we issue an annual U.S. Transparency Report
that explains what we take into account in setting list prices for our
medicines. When we set an initial list price for our medicines, we
balance:

Value to patients, the health-care system, and society.
We consider how the medicine will improve
patient health. We also assess the medicine's potential to
reduce other costs-- surgeries, hospital stays, or long-term
care, for example--and the improvement the medicine represents
over the existing standard of care.

The importance of maintaining affordable access to medicines
for people who need them.
We work with insurers, pharmacy benefits
managers, governments, hospitals, physicians, and other
providers of care so that patients who are prescribed our
medicines can get access to them.

The importance of preserving our ability to develop future
groundbreaking cures and treatments.
We have an obligation to ensure that the sale
of our medicines provides us with the resources to invest in
R&D to address serious, unmet medical needs.
The list price we set is a publicly available figure that can be--
and is-- compared to other options available. We believe that a point-
of-sale discount model will make price reductions offered by the
manufacturer more transparent because these discounts will be directly
reflected in patient out-ofpocket cost at the pharmacy. However, we do
not believe that the proposal will improve transparency with respect to
fees or mark-ups to the price of drugs added elsewhere in the supply
chain.
Transparency that is meaningful and valuable to patients can help
achieve what we all want: better health care, at more manageable cost,
and, most importantly, longer, healthier lives for all.
We believe an environment that encourages medical innovation and
robust competition to deliver the best health outcomes is essential to
achieving these goals. Our support for legislation that establishes a
federal standard for transparency in setting the list price for drugs
would depend on the extent to which the proposed standards maintained
such an environment.
Question. In nearly every sector of the health-care industry,
Medicare, Medicaid, employers, and insurers are moving away from fee-
for-service payments to reimbursements based on value and performance.
Prescription drugs and medical devices were the glaring exceptions to
this trend until recently. How many of your drugs are included in
value-based contracts and how many patients are benefiting from them?
How do these value-based contracts work to lower drug prices for both
patients and taxpayers?
Answer. We have established several innovative, value-based
contracts with insurers and continue to explore new opportunities. For
example, in immunology, we partnered with payers to create an agreement
in which the price of a medicine for chronic immune conditions varies
based on how well it works for patients. In oncology, we partnered with
public and private payers on novel contracts for patients with prostate
cancer and agreed in one contract to provide additional rebates to the
insurer for plan members who meet eligibility criteria and whose
treatment duration is shorter than a predetermined period of time. We
also partnered with a leading payer on a contract under which we are
paid more if data show our medicine that treats adults with type 2
diabetes contributed to lowering other identified health-care costs,
such as the use of additional medicines.
Question. Last year, Senator Portman and I did an investigation on
the pricing of an opioid overdose reversal drug called EVZIO,
manufactured by Kaleo. Kaleo increased the price of EVZIO from $575 in
2014 to $4,100 in 2017. We found that the best price Medicare was able
to get for EVZIO, about $4,000, was much higher than the price other
Federal programs and private insurers were able to get. It seemed that
Kaleo was able to get this higher price of $4,000 from Medicare by
helping doctors fill out paperwork showing that the drug was medically
necessary, even though there are cheaper alternatives on the market. As
a result of the investigation, Kaleo announced it will bring a generic
version of the drug to market at only $168 per pack. Are any of your
companies providing medical necessity paperwork to doctors in order to
get your drugs covered by Medicare?
Answer. Like other pharmaceutical companies, we offer a sample
letter of medical necessity that offices can complete using their own
clinical judgment regarding the medical and clinical rationale for
submission to the insurance company or PBM. We also research and
provide payer-specific forms required to provide medical necessity
information such as payer-specific prior authorization forms.
Question. In 2017, the Rand Corporation estimated that biosimilar
drugs, which are competitors to complex, biologic drugs, could save the
United States more than $50 billion over the next decade. Some of you
have also argued that increasing the use of biosimilar drugs would help
lower drugs costs for consumers and taxpayers. What is delaying the
uptake of biosimilar drugs in the United States? What policies do you
recommend to increase the development of biosimilar drugs?
Answer. The goal of biosimilar policy should be to lower costs for
the health-care system and patients, and not simply to encourage
biosimilar uptake without regard to price. The current open and
competitive environment supports price competition and biosimilar
uptake as appropriate. For example, the net price of infliximab
products, including the innovator product REMICADE', is
falling. Furthermore, the uptake of infliximab biosimilars in the U.S.
is consistent with branded biologic launches of immunology products,
including those that provide a clinical benefit over the standard of
care.
Biologics are used in patients with serious, chronic conditions,
many of whom have taken years to become stable on a branded product.
Health-care providers and patients may naturally be hesitant to switch
medicines in these circumstances. The approval of an interchangeable
biosimilar may address some of the physician and patient reservations
about switching a stable patient to a non-interchangeable biosimilar.
The biosimilars pipeline is strong and a diverse group of
companies--traditional pharmaceutical manufacturers as well as
manufacturers focused on biosimilars--is investing in the space. For
example, in the immunology therapeutic area alone, at least 18
biosimilars are currently in clinical development or undergoing FDA
review.
We fully support a regulatory framework for FDA review and approval
of biosimilars and interchangeable biosimilars with standards and
policies that are science-based and rooted in patient safety.
Ultimately, the uptake of biosimilars will be reliant on competitive
pricing and on patient and prescriber confidence. Provider and patient
confidence can be strengthened by the application of rigorous review
standards, including the robust approach to interchangeability that FDA
is pursuing and appropriate standards regarding biosimilar to
biosimilar switching.
Biosimilar manufacturers need access to samples of reference
products to perform comparative testing required to demonstrate
biosimilarity or interchangeability. We cooperate with manufacturers of
generic drugs and biosimilars so they have access to samples of our
medicines at reasonable, market-based prices. To facilitate access to
product samples while fostering efficiencies in the delivery and
oversight of healthcare, we believe that manufacturers should identify
for FDA a point of contact to facilitate access to samples for each
approved reference product. When a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation
Strategy (REMS) is in place, the REMS should facilitate the safe use of
medicine and ensure access for appropriate patients; it should not be
used to hinder provision of product samples for use in developing a
generic or biosimilar. We believe FDA should finalize draft guidance,
issued December 2018, describing a process for FDA determination that
protocols pertaining to biosimilarity and interchangeability testing
contain safety protections comparable to an applicable REMS with
limited distribution elements. A letter from FDA stating comparable
protections exist and indicating FDA would not consider it to be a
violation of the REMS to provide samples to the biosimilar manufacturer
provides needed assurances for reference product manufacturers about
both the safe use of our products and regulatory compliance.
The Purple Book is an essential resource for many stakeholders and
should be enhanced to provide timely information to stakeholders, to
clarify practices regarding substitution, and to provide information to
assure the appropriate use of biosimilars and interchangeable products.
In addition, the Purple Book should include detailed information about
approved biosimilars and interchangeable biosimilars, including, for
example, a description or listing of pivotal clinical trials considered
in FDA's approval of the biosimilar.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Benjamin L. Cardin
Question. The United States is one of the only countries in the
world to allow prescription drug manufacturers to advertise directly to
consumers through magazines, billboards, radio, and television
commercials. While I will not argue that it is beneficial to educate
consumers about an unfamiliar disease and encourage them to seek
medical help, most commercials from all of your companies recommend
asking about a specific brand name drug, not a medical condition.
Furthermore, even if your advertisements follow all FDA rules and list
medication side effects, they also almost always list these while a
smiling, apparently healthy person is walking on a beach.
Researchers say that this type of imagery, combined with viewing
hours of drug commercials each month, leads consumers to underestimate
the risks associated with medications. For the past decade, studies
have shown that aggressive direct-to-consumer advertising is associated
with rising drug prices and an increase in inappropriate drug
prescriptions.
Since researchers have concluded that consumers are
misunderstanding the benefits and risks described in your ads, what
further policies could help you and your colleagues ensure that you are
educating patients in a clear manner?
Answer. At Janssen, we believe patients can get and stay healthier
when they are well informed about their conditions and treatment
options. We provide accurate, up-to-date educational materials in
language that is clear and understandable for consumers to help
patients facing diseases our medicines treat and to help patients who
take our medicines understand how to use them properly. Our product-
specific communications, including our DTC advertising, are designed to
encourage appropriate dialogue between patients and healthcare
providers about the risks and benefits of treatment.
We believe acting ethically and responsibly is not only the right
thing to do but also the right way to do business. We follow all
relevant laws and regulations regarding the promotion of prescription
drug products and submit promotional materials to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration at the time of initial publication or
dissemination.
We are always open to ways to improve our communication, including
DTC, to ensure patients better understand the benefits and risks of our
medicines.
pharmaceutical companies continue to raise prices
Question. As you are well aware, high prescription drug prices are
the number one concern for Americans and their families. According to
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the average
American spends around $1,208 annually on prescription drugs. There
have been several instances where brand name or even generic drugs that
have been on the market for years continue to increase in price.
One of the most well-known examples is Mylan's increase of the
price of EpiPen from less than $100 in 2007 to more than $600 in 2016.
Another example, is the ever-increasing price of insulin. Sanofi
increased the price of a vial of Lantus from $88.20 in 2007 to $307.20
in 2017. And those are just a small sample of price increases.
Why don't we see price decreases for drugs that have been on the
market for years without new formulations or added benefit?
Answer. In fact, net price does often decrease, sometimes quite
significantly, for medicines that have been on the market for years
because of competition from other, newer medicines for the same
condition. Competition brings down price for payers such as PBMs and
insurers, although unfortunately patients often do not benefit from the
lower net price.
It is also important to note that biopharmaceutical innovation
paves the way for the introduction of generic medicines, which enables
medicine costs to be reduced over time. In the U.S., medicines lose
patent protection, on average, about 12 years after they are
introduced. When that happens, prices generally drop significantly,
giving patients ongoing access to effective therapies at a lower cost.
pay for delay
Question. Pay for delay is a tactic that more and more branded drug
manufacturers have been using to stifle competition from lower-cost
generic manufacturers. This allows you to sidestep competition by
offering patent settlements that pay generic companies not to bring
lower-cost alternatives to market.
These pay-for-delay patent settlements benefit both brand-name
pharmaceutical companies by helping them avoid costly patent litigation
and general manufacturers by rewarding them a hefty sum to delay
entering the market with a cheaper drug alternative. However, these
deals do not benefit consumers. According to an FTC study, these
anticompetitive deals cost consumers and taxpayers $3.5 billion in
higher drug costs every year.
Does your company partake in pay-for-delay settlements?
Answer. We have not entered into patent settlement agreements that
require payment of money to a generic manufacturer.
Question. Why would a pharmaceutical company enter into a pay-for
delay agreement?
Answer. We have not entered into patent settlement agreements that
require payment of money to a generic manufacturer and, therefore, we
cannot speculate as to why other companies might enter into such
agreements in specific cases.
Question. Do you think these agreements stifle competition and
prevent generic alternatives to your branded medications?
Answer. We have not entered into patent settlement agreements that
require payment of money to a generic manufacturer, so we do not have
direct experience with their competitive impacts. However, we believe
that the competitive impact of any individual settlement agreement must
be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The current legal framework--FTC
oversight and judicial review on a case-by-case basis--is intended to
identify any patent settlement that is anti-competitive.
drug rebate rule
Question. In January, the Department of Health and Human Services'
(HHS) Office of Inspector General (OIG) promulgated a new regulation to
remove regulatory safe harbor protections under the Anti-Kickback
Statute (AKS) for rebates on prescription drugs rebates paid by
manufactures to PBMs under Medicare Part D and for Medicaid managed
care organizations (MCOs). The OIG proposal attempts to ban most
rebates by eliminating their regulatory protections.
The rule is predicted to increase net drug costs in its early
years. The CMS actuaries estimate it would cost $196 billion over 10
years. Despite this high price tag, the beneficiary benefits are
limited. The proposed rule notes that under the CMS Actuary's analysis,
the majority of beneficiaries would see an increase in their total out-
of-pocket payments and premium costs; reductions in total cost sharing
will exceed total premium increases.
I wanted to ask a question about the administration's rebate rule,
which I understand that many of the drug manufacturers, and your main
trade association, strongly support. According to an analysis of the
rule by the Office of Actuaries at CMS, drug manufacturers are likely
to initially retain 15 percent of the current rebates as higher net
drug prices.
Given that estimate, can you provide the committee with any
assurances that prices will not increase under this proposed rule?
Answer. Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the
entire market or only to those related to Federal health plans and
assuming rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that
offset the amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer
discounts for pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we
would need to renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-of-sale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sherrod Brown
Question. As I understand it, 2 years ago PhRMA updated its
membership standards to require member companies to meet two new
criteria: (1) each company must meet a 3-year average global research
and development to sales ratio of 10 percent or greater, and (2) each
company must spend at least $200 million on R&D per year over a 3-year
average. As a result of these changes, several companies who continue
to operate under business models that prioritize price gouging over
innovation, left PhRMA.
Given your company's role in setting a higher standard for R&D,
would you support a more even playing field by raising the minimum bar
for R&D across the entire pharmaceutical sector, in particular for
companies that participate in government programs such as Medicare and
Medicaid?
Answer. We are proud to set a high standard for R&D investment. In
2018 Janssen invested $8.4 billion globally in research and
development. This investment in R&D was 86 percent more than we spent
on sales and marketing. However, we would not support a policy that
requires a certain amount of R&D spending for a manufacturer's products
to be covered by Medicare and Medicaid because we would not want to
deny patients access to needed medication based on the investment
decisions of these drug companies.
Question. According to an article recently published in the Journal
of the American Medical Association, medical marketers spend nearly $30
billion dollars in 2016, up from $17 billion in 1997. Direct-to-
Consumer (DTC) advertising had the biggest percentage increase: from
$2.1 billion, or 11.9% of all medical marketing, in 1997 to $9.6
billion, or 32% of total spending, in 2016.
Can you please provide what your ratio of spending on sales and
marketing to research and development is today?
Answer. In 2018, the pharmaceutical segment of Johnson & Johnson
invested 86 percent more in R&D globally ($8.4B) than we spent on
global sales and marketing ($4.5B).
price-gouging
Question. Sanofi, as I understand it, has made a pledge to the
public to limit its price increases to the national health expenditures
growth projection.
Would your company commit to a cap on annual price increases as
part of your PhRMA membership criteria?
Answer. In 1993, the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association (PMA,
now the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America or PhRMA)
asked the Department of Justice (``DOJ'') Antitrust Division to review
a proposal for a PMA effort to ask member companies to commit
voluntarily to limiting price increases on their entire line of
prescription medicines in any calendar year to an amount not to exceed
the increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). In its response, the
DOJ Antitrust Division stated that, ``[T]he Department believes that
the proposed program would violate the antitrust laws. . . . The
Supreme Court has. . . made clear that agreements that set maximum
prices are as equally illegal as agreements that set minimum prices.''
The DOJ noted that it ``intends to bring suit to challenge the program
if PMA and its members go forward with this proposal.'' Therefore, we
are unable to commit to such a cap as part of PhRMA membership
requirements due to likely enforcement action by the DOJ.
Question. What policies would you propose to help ensure lower
launch prices for new drugs?
Answer. We support rebate reforms that ensure patients benefit from
negotiated rebates and discounts--$150 billion in 2017 alone--and, as a
result, have patients see lower out-of-pocket costs at the pharmacy.
Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the entire
market or only to those related to Federal health plans and assuming
rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that offset the
amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer discounts for
pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we would need to
renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-of-sale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
transparency
Question. In many of your testimonies, you mentioned that the
current system of pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) back-end rebates do
not rarely results in a scenario where the PBM passes on savings to
consumers at the point of sale (POS). The administration recently
proposed a rule to eliminate the anti-kickback statute safe harbor
protections for these drug rebates.
Do you agree that greater transparency should be required to
understand how manufacturers and PBMs are negotiating prices and
rebates to ensure that savings are passed down to beneficiaries?
Answer. We believe that a point-of-sale discount model will make
price reductions offered by the manufacturer more transparent because
these discounts will be directly reflected in patient out-of-pocket
cost at the pharmacy. However, we do not believe that the proposal will
improve transparency with respect to fees or mark-ups to the price of
drugs added elsewhere in the supply chain.
Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the entire
market or only to those related to Federal health plans and assuming
rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that offset the
amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer discounts for
pass-through at the point of sale.
pbms
Question. An Axios article from March 7, 2019 highlights the fact
that, while ``pharmaceutical companies put a lot of the blame for high
drug prices on pharmacy benefit managers,'' many large pharmaceutical
companies ``rely on PBMs to manage their own health-care benefits.''
In your role as an employer, does your company contract with a
pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM) to administer the prescription
drug benefits for your employees and negotiate lower drug costs on your
behalf?
Answer. As an employer, we design our own pharmacy benefit program
and contract with a PBM for administration and to negotiate on our
behalf.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, how do you utilize the
rebates your PBM negotiates to lower health-care costs or drug costs
for your employee plans and what does your company do with that
savings? Specifically, do the savings go toward lowing premiums?
Answer. We use any savings to offset total plan costs, enhance
benefits, and lower premium and out-of-pocket costs for our employees.
In order to ensure our employees have affordable access to medicine, we
have a monthly per prescription out-of-pocket cap.
Question. For those of you who do use a PBM to help manage the
prescription drug benefit for your employees, does your PBM offer
point-of-sale rebates to your employees?
Answer. We are exploring the possibility of offering point-of-sale
rebates with our PBM.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
Question. Please describe any policy changes you support that would
result in your company lowering the list prices of its drugs.
Answer. We support rebate reforms that ensure patients benefit from
negotiated rebates and discounts-- $150 billion in 2017 alone--and, as
a result, have patients see lower out-of-pocket costs at the pharmacy.
Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the entire
market or only to those related to Federal health plans and assuming
rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that offset the
amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer discounts for
pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we would need to
renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-of-sale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
Question. How much does your company's research and development
portfolio rely on taxpayer-funded research conducted by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH)? How many of your company's products are
based, at least in part, on NIH research, and how many are the result
of research funded solely by your company?
Answer. The NIH plays an important role in medical research,
primarily funding basic research on medical problems. The
pharmaceutical industry is responsible for developing the solutions--
undertaking the long, financially risky, and costly process to discover
a compound and develop new medicines that meet the stringent safety and
efficacy requirements of the FDA. In those instances where NIH
contributes to a product that is brought to market, NIH would receive
any contracted license fees or royalties.
Question. In each of the last 5 years, how much has your company
spent on research and development versus the advertising and marketing
of your products?
Answer. Below is a chart including global Janssen R&D and Sales and
Marketing expenditures over the last 5 years. Sales and marketing
includes expenses related to: (1) selling, (2) marketing management,
(3) market and consumer research, and (4) advertising and promotion.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen R&D
$6.2B
$6.8B
$7B
$7.9B
$8.4B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen Sales and Marketing
$4.5B
$4.6B
$4.5B
$4.2B
$4.5B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question. During the hearing, you mentioned that your company would
be likely to lower the list prices of its drugs if the recent proposal
by the Trump administration to change the current system of rebates was
extended to the private market.
If the policy was extended to the private market, how large would
the list price reductions be relative to the size of the rebates your
company is currently providing?
How will this proposal affect how your company sets the list prices
for new drug products?
Answer. Depending on whether elimination of rebates applies to the
entire market or only to those related to Federal health plans and
assuming rebates are not replaced by high fees or other costs that
offset the amount saved, we expect to lower list prices or offer
discounts for pass-through at the point of sale. In either case, we
would need to renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to list price
reductions or point-ofsale discounts will depend upon the details of
the final regulation and the reactions of other stakeholders in the
supply chain. We are concerned that PBMs may seek to replace rebate
revenue with new and increasing fees or may seek to shift costs among
supply chain participants through service fees.
Question. If the proposal is finalized and not extended to the
private market, will your company make any list price reductions? If
so, how large would the reductions be relative to the size of the
rebates your company is currently providing?
Answer. If elimination of rebates applies only to Medicare and
Medicaid Managed Care and assuming rebates are not replaced by high
fees or other costs that offset the amount saved, we expect to offer
discounts for pass-through at the point of sale. To do so, we would
need to renegotiate our agreements with customers.
The degree to which we can convert current rebates to point-of-sale
discounts will depend upon the details of the final regulation and the
reactions of other stakeholders in the supply chain. We are concerned
that PBMs may replace rebate revenue with new and increasing fees or
may shift costs among supply chain participants through service fees.
______
Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan
Question. In June of 2018, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission (MACPAC) unanimously recommended under Recommendation 1.1 in
their annual report to Congress that Congress remove the statutory
requirement that manufacturers blend the average manufacturer price
(AMP) of a brand drug and its authorized generic.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ MACPAC, ``Improving Operations of the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program,'' https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Improving-
Operations-of-the-Medicaid-Drug-Rebate-Program.pdf.
This requirement created an unintended loophole. Rather than use
the price of the authorized generic, drug companies can sell its
authorized generic to a corporate subsidiary at an artificially lower
price, and use that lower price to bring down the AMP, which in turn
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lowers the rebate obligation.
Does your company engage in this practice? Has your company ever
engaged in this practice in the past?
Answer. We do not include authorized generic internal transfer
prices to an affiliate when calculating Average Manufacturer Price for
the branded product. Under previous versions of the statute and CMS
guidance, we have at times in the past included in Average Manufacturer
Price the transfer prices of our authorized generic sold to an
affiliate.
______
Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
Question. As a portion of your revenue, for what percentage of the
drugs in your portfolio do you offer no rebates? Based on the drugs in
your pipeline, do you foresee that portion growing? For those drugs is
your list price equal to your net price?
Answer. The information requested is confidential and competitively
sensitive. As such, potentially responsive information is not available
for public disclosure.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you generate in US sales
revenue? Please include specific figures.
Answer. Janssen is one of the world's top R&D investors in any
industry, anywhere in the world. In 2018 we invested $8.4 billion in
pharmaceutical R&D globally. Our pharmaceutical revenue in the U.S. was
$23.3 billion. We invested 86 percent more in pharmaceutical R&D ($8.4
billion) than we spent on pharmaceutical global sales and marketing
($4.5 billion).
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
administration? What company functions do you consider to be included
in administration? Please include specific figures.
Answer. Johnson & Johnson is comprised of three business segments:
pharmaceuticals (Janssen), medical devices, and consumer products. In
its financial statements, Johnson & Johnson reports a global total
figure across all segments for Sales, Marketing and Administration
(``SM&A''). This figure combines marketing, sales, and administrative
expenses such as insurance, legal, finance, and product distribution.
In 2018, that global, cross-sector SM&A expenditure was $22.54 billion.
The total global, cross-sector R&D investment by J&J in 2018 was $10.78
billion.
Johnson & Johnson does not report SM&A by business segment.
Janssen, the pharmaceutical segment of J&J, invested $8.4 billion in
R&D globally in 2018 and spent $4.5 billion on marketing and sales
globally.
Question. Do you invest more in R&D than you spend on marketing and
sales? What company functions do you consider to be included in sales?
Please include specific figures.
Answer. In 2018, we invested 86 percent more in pharmaceutical R&D
($8.4 billion) than we spent on pharmaceutical global sales and
marketing ($4.5 billion). Sales and marketing includes: (1) our
expenses related to selling, (2) marketing management, (3) market and
consumer research, and (4) advertising and promotion.
Question. Why do you advertise for the drugs you manufacture? What
factors do you consider in choosing which drugs you advertise?
Answer. We believe direct-to-consumer communication, including
advertising, can empower patients with information to help them have
appropriate discussions with their healthcare providers, including
dialogue about the risks and benefits of treatment. We provide
accurate, up-to-date educational materials to help patients facing
diseases our medicines treat and to help patients who take our
medicines understand how to use them properly.
We believe acting ethically and responsibly is not only the right
thing to do but also the right way to do business. We follow all
relevant laws and regulations regarding the promotion of prescription
drug products and submit promotional materials to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration at the time of initial publication or
dissemination.
We work to communicate in ways that will be most valuable in
empowering patients to have appropriate dialogue with their healthcare
providers.
We consider the availability of information and awareness of
treatment options. We build a communication plan that can include a
variety of channels, with direct-to-consumer advertising being one
channel among many we may use.
______
Janssen Biotech, Inc. Monetary and Product Contributions to U.S.-based
Charitable Organizations Full Year 2014
(Payments made from January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014)--Amended March
19, 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Payment
Donation
Payee
Payee
Amount
Payment
Project Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
100
4631
$1,000
8/29/2014
100 Black Men
Black
Delmar
of Metro St.
Men (of
Boulevard
Louis, St.
Metro
, St.
Louis, MO
St.
Louis, MO
Louis)
63108
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Abington
515
$300
8/29/2014
Abington Art
Art
Meetingho
Center,
Center
use Road
Jenkintown,
Jenkintow
PA (2014
n, PA
Janssen
19046
Cares
Volunteer
Days)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aldie
11 Welden
$300
9/10/2014
Aldie
Foundat
Drive
Foundation,
ion
Doylestow
Doylestown,
Inc.
n, PA
PA Janssen
18901
Cares
Volunteer
Days
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
American
2600 US
$1,000
4/21/2014
Run for Dad
Cancer
Highway 1
Prostate
Society
North
Cancer event
North
in Hamilton,
Brunswick
NJ
, NJ
08902
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
115 NE
$5,000
8/29/2014
Arthritis
s
100th
Foundation,
Foundat
Suite
Seattle, WA--
ion
#350
Great West
Seattle,
Region JBRs
WA 98125
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
1876
$6,000
11/10/2014
Jingle Bell
s
Minnehaha
Run/Walks
Foundat
Avenue
Upper
ion
West St.
Midwest
Paul, MN
55104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
35 East
$10,000
8/29/2014
AF, Chicago,
s
Wacker
IL 2014
Foundat
Drive
Heartland
ion
Suite
Region
2260
Jingle Bell
Chicago,
Runs and
IL 60601
Walks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
4300
$7,000
12/22/2014
Arthritis
s
McArthur
Foundation,
Foundat
Suite 245
Dallas, TX--
ion
Dallas,
JBRs South
TX 75209
Central
Region
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
4530 Park
$5,000
8/29/2014
Arthritis
s
Road
Foundation,
Foundat
Charlotte
Charlotte,
ion
, NC
NC--2014
29209
JBRs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
4630
$7,500
10/3/2014
Arthritis
s
Richmond
Foundation,
Foundat
Road
Cleveland,
ion
Suite 240
OH JBRs
Cleveland
, OH
44128
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
800 West
$12,500
11/13/2014
Jingle Bell
s
Sixth
Run/Walks,
Foundat
Street
Los Angeles
ion
Suite
CA
1250 Los
Angeles,
CA 90017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
8383 North
$1,000
11/13/2014
Arthritis
s
Davis
Foundation,
Foundat
Highway
Pensacola,
ion
Pensacola
FL--Jacksonv
, FL
ille JBR
32514
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
8383 North
$1,000
11/13/2014
Arthritis
s
Davis
Foundation,
Foundat
Highway
Pensacola,
ion
Pensacola
FL for
, FL
Pensacola
32514
JBR/W
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
8383 North
$1,500
11/13/2014
Arthritis
s
Davis
Foundation,
Foundat
Highway
Pensacola,
ion
Pensacola
FL--Orlando
, FL
Jingle Bell
32514
Run & Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
111 South
$2,500
4/18/2014
Walk to Cure
s
Independe
Arthritis,
Foundat
nce Mall
Philadelphia
ion,
E Suite
, PA, May
Inc.
500
17, 2014
Philadelp
hia, PA
19106
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
115 NE
$5,000
6/9/2014
Eight Walks
s
100th
to Cure
Foundat
Suite
Arthritis in
ion,
#350
the Great
Inc.
Seattle,
West Region
WA 98125
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
122 East
$50,000
4/4/2014
NE Region
s
42nd
Jingle Bell
Foundat
Street
Runs 2014
ion,
18th
Inc.
Floor New
York, NY
10168
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
1876
$3,500
4/4/2014
Arthritis
s
Minnehaha
Foundation's
Foundat
Avenue
2014 Walks
ion,
West St.
in MN, WI
Inc.
Paul, MN
and ND
55104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
209 10th
$2,000
4/21/2014
Arthritis
s
Avenue
Foundation
Foundat
South
Walks to
ion,
Suite 228
Cure
Inc.
Nashville
Arthritis in
, TN
TN and AL
37203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
29 Crafts
$3,500
4/21/2014
Walks to Cure
s
Street
Arthritis in
Foundat
Suite 450
CT, RI, NH,
ion,
Newton,
and MA
Inc.
MA 02458
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
35 East
$12,000
4/21/2014
Walks to Cure
s
Wacker
Arthritis in
Foundat
Drive
IL, IN, IA,
ion,
Suite
KS, MO, NE
Inc.
2260
Chicago,
IL 60601
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
400
$500
6/9/2014
2014 Walk to
s
Hibiscus
Cure
Foundat
Street
Arthritis,
ion,
West Palm
Lake Worth,
Inc.
Beach, FL
FL
33401
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
408 12th
$500
4/18/2014
Walk to Cure
s
Street
Arthrits,
Foundat
West
Sarasota,
ion,
Bradenton
FL, May 17,
Inc.
, FL
2014
34205
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
4300
$4,000
4/21/2014
South Central
s
McArthur
Region Walks
Foundat
Suite 245
to Cure
ion,
Dallas,
Arthritis
Inc.
TX 75209
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
4720
$10,000
4/18/2014
Arthritis
s
Montgomer
Walks--Mid
Foundat
y Lane
Atlantic
ion,
Suite 300
Region--DE,
Inc.
Bethesda,
MD, DC, VA,
MD 20814
NC, and SC.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
800 West
$10,000
6/25/2014
Walks to Cure
s
6th
Arthritis in
Foundat
Street
CA, AZ, and
ion,
Suite
HI
Inc.
1250 Los
Angeles,
CA 90017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthriti
8383 North
$500
3/17/2014
2014 Walk to
s
Davis
Cure
Foundat
Highway
Arthritis
ion,
Pensacola
Pensacola FL
Inc.
, FL
32514
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
2875 York
$300
6/24/2014
Janssen Cares
Brother
Road
Volunteers
s Big
Jamison,
Days--Commun
Sisters
PA 18929
ity Service
at Big
Brothers Big
Sisters,
Jamison, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bowmans
1635 River
$300
8/29/2014
Bowman's Hill
Hill
Road New
Wild Flower
Wildflo
Hope, PA
Preserve,
wer
18938
New Hope, PA
Preserv
(2014 JCVD)
e
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bringing
940 West
$2,500
10/28/2014
Bringing Hope
Hope
Valley
Home Inc.,
Home
Road
Wayne, PA
Inc.
Wayne, PA
19087
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
121 Avenue
$2,000
4/21/2014
Cancer Care's
Care,
of the
6th Annual
Inc.
Americas
Healing
6th Floor
Hearts
New York,
Family
NY 10013
Bereavement
Camp,
Milford, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
121 Avenue
$10,000
4/21/2014
2014-2015
Care,
of the
Edition of
Inc.
Americas
``A Helping
6th Floor
Hand: The
New York,
Resource
NY 10013
Guide for
People with
Cancer.''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$600
6/25/2014
Janssen Cares
Support
Road
Volunteer
Communi
Warminste
Days--commun
ty
r, PA
ity service
Gilda's
18974
at Gilda's
Club
Club June 24
Warmins
and June 26,
ter, PA
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
4100
$2,500
10/3/2014
Cancer
Support
Chamounix
Support
Communi
Drive
Community of
ty of
Philadelp
Philadelphia
Philade
hia, PA
,
lphia
19131
Warminister,
PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Children
34th and
$5,000
10/3/2014
CHOP
s
Civic
Philadelphia
Hospita
Center
, PA Child
l of
Blvd.
Life Program
Philade
Philadelp
lphia
hia, PA
Foundat
19104-
ion
4399
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Chrohn's
386 Park
$15,000
8/29/2014
Crohn's and
and
Avenue
Colitis
Colitis
South
Foundation,
Foundat
17th
New York,
ion
Floor New
NY--Camp
York, NY
Oasis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communit
300B
$20,000
10/15/2014
Community
y
Lawrence
Volunteers
Volunte
Drive
in Medicine,
ers in
West
West
Medicin
Chester,
Chester, PA
e Inc.
PA 19380
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohns
116 Wilson
$5,000
11/13/2014
Buds N Suds
and
Pike
Benefit
Colitis
Circle
Concert
Foundat
Brentwood
Nashville,
ion of
, TN
TN
America
37027
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohns
116 Wilson
$5,000
11/13/2014
Donate A
and
Pike
Photo
Colitis
Circle
Awareness
Foundat
Brentwood
Campaign at
ion of
, TN
ACG Fall
America
37027
2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohns
386 Park
$135,000
4/22/2014
Take Steps
and
Avenue
Walks
Colitis
South
Nationwide
Foundat
17th
ion of
Floor New
America
York, NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohns
9 Lake
$3,000
4/18/2014
CCFA 's Camp
and
Bellevue
Oasis for
Colitis
Drive
IBD
Foundat
Suite 203
Pediatric
ion of
Bellevue,
Patients,
America
WA 98005
Longbranch,
WA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohn's
386 Park
$5,000
8/29/2014
CCFA, NY, NY
and
Avenue
(DDW
Colitis
South
Awareness)
Foundat
17th
ion of
Floor New
America
York, NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delaware
215 South
$3,000
9/10/2014
Delaware
Valley
16th
Valley
Science
Street,
Science
Council
Philadelp
Council,
hia PA
STEM
19102
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delaware
215 South
$21,300
4/4/2014
Delaware
Valley
16th
Valley
Science
Street,
Science
Fairs,
Philadelp
Fairs Tri-
Inc.
hia PA
State
19102
Competition,
Oaks, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Educatio
454 Maple
$5,000
10/3/2014
Education-
n-Plus
Terrace
Plus Inc.,
Inc.
Ardmore,
Philadelphia
PA
, PA Read
Now Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Franklin
222 North
$10,000
10/3/2014
Franklin
Institu
20th
Institute,
te
Street
Philadelphia
Philadelp
, PA
hia, PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
330 Manor
$4,000
10/3/2014
Girl Scouts
Scouts
Road
of Eastern
of
Miquon,
PA, Miquon,
Eastern
PA 19444
PA
Pennsyl
vania
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Green
1368
$15,000
10/3/2014
Green
Valleys
Prizer
Valleys,
Assocat
Road
Pottstown,
ion of
Pottstown
PA (EITC
Southea
, PA
participant)
stern
19465
Pennsyl
vania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hatboro
440 South
$300
9/4/2014
Hatboro Area
Area
York Road
YMCA,
YMCA
Hatboro,
Hatboro, PA
PA 19040
(2014 Jansen
Cares V.D.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hatboro
229
$300
8/29/2014
Hatboro-
Horsham
Meetingho
Horsham
Educati
use Road
Educational
onal
Hatboro-
Foundation,
Foundat
Horsham,
Horsham, PA
ion
PA 19044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hatboro
229
$25,000
8/29/2014
Hatboro-
Horsham
Meetingho
Horsham Ed.
Educati
use Road
Foundation
onal
Hatboro-
(EITC),
Foundat
Horsham,
Horsham, PA
ion
PA 19044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Impact
2979
$300
8/29/2014
JBI Impact
Thrift
Bethlehem
Thrift
Sortes
Pike
Sortes,
Inc.
Montgomer
Inc.,
yville,
Montgomeryvi
PA
lle, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Integrat
532
$1,000
4/4/2014
2014 Belmont
ed
Broadholl
Stakes Blue
Medical
ow Road
Ribbon Run
Foundat
Suite
for Prostate
ion,
142A
Cancer,
Inc.
Melville,
Melville, NY
NY 11747
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Internat
6144 Clark
$10,000
12/24/2014
International
ional
Center
Waldenstroms
Waldens
Avenue
Macroglobuli
troms
Sarasota,
nemia
Macrogl
FL 34238
Foundation,
obuline
Sarasota, FL
mia
Foundat
ion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Junior
522 South
$5,000
10/3/2014
Junior
Achieve
Walnut
Achievement,
ment of
Street
Wayne, PA
Delawar
Wilmingto
(Horsham
e
n, DE
Scools)
Valley
19801
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Leukemia
555 North
$175,000
6/16/2014
LLS
and
Lane
Nationwide
Lympho
Suite
Light the
Society
5010
Night Walks
, Inc.
Conshohoc
ken, PA
19428
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Metropol
2323
$15,000
10/3/2014
MANNA,
itan
Ranstead
Philadelphia
Area
Street
, PA
Neighbo
Philadelp
rhood
hia, PA
Nurtrit
19103
ion
Allianc
e
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
National
PO Box 303
$2,500
8/29/2014
National
Ovarian
Holicong,
Ovarian
Cancer
PA 18928
Cancer
Coaliti
Coalition
on Inc.
Inc.,
Holicong, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
National
6600 SW
$50,000
11/13/2014
National
Psorias
2nd
Psoriasis
is
Avenue
Foundation,
Foundat
Suite 300
Portland OR--
ion
Portland,
Compliments
OR 97223
are
Contagious
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Open
350 Main
$300
8/29/2014
Royersford
Door
Street
Outreach
Royersfor
Open Door
d, PA
(Janssen
19468
Cares V.D.),
Royersford,
PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Perkiome
1 West
$300
8/29/2014
Perkioment
n
Skippack
Watershed
Watersh
Pike
Conservancy,
ed
Schwenksv
Schwenksvill
Conserv
ille, PA
e, PA
ancy
19473
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Philadel
325
$10,000
10/3/2014
Philadelphia
phia
Chestnut
Reads, Inc.,
Reads,
Street
Philadelphia
Inc.
Philadelp
, PA (EITC)
hia, PA
19106
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Premier
PO Box 93
$5,000
10/3/2014
Premier Cares
Cares
Pleasant
Foundation,
Foundat
Valley,
Inc.
ion
NY 12569
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Prostate
7009 S.
$1,000
8/29/2014
Prostate
Cancer
Potomac
Cancer
Educati
Street
Education
on
Centennia
Council,
Council
l, CO
Centennial,
80112
CO
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Prostate
500
$10,000
4/21/2014
Prostate
Health
Victory
Health
Educati
Road
Education
on
Quincy,
Network
Network
MA 02170
(PHEN) Sixth
, Inc.
Annual
Father's Day
Rally
Nationwide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rebuidli
PO Box
$5,000
6/13/2014
Mantua Block
ng
42752
Build,
Togethe
Philadelp
Philadelphia
r
hia, PA
, PA
Philade
19101-
lphia
2752
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
925
$7,000
10/15/2014
RSVP, Blue
Senior
Harvest
Bell, PA
Volunte
Drive
er
Suite 100
Program
Blue
of
Bell, PA
Montgom
19422
ery
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverben
1950
$5,000
6/9/2014
Outreach to
d
Spring
Children/
Environ
Mill Road
Access to
mental
Gladwyne,
Nature
Educati
PA 19035
Education
on
for local
Center
elementary
school in
Norristown,
PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
2800
$4,000
12/31/2014
Special
Equestr
Street
Equestrians,
ians
Road
Warrington,
Warringto
PA
n, PA
18976
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
34th
$2,000
4/18/2014
5th Annual
Childre
Street
Walk for
ns
Civic
Hope,
Hospita
Center
Veteran's
l of
Boulevard
Park,
Philade
Philadelp
Hamilton,
lphia
hia, PA
NJ,
Foundat
19104
benefitting
ion
IBD Research
at CHOP
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
4275
$3,000
6/9/2014
Hands-On
Giving
County
Helping by
Tree
Line Road
Children
Suite 138
Chalfont,
PA 18914
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2600
$10,000
4/21/2014
Hubert J. P.
Melmark
Wayland
Schoemaker
Charita
Road
Classic,
ble
Berwyn,
October 6,
Foundat
PA 19312
2014,
ion
Berwyn, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trustees
University
$7,000
10/15/2014
WXPN (Trutees
of the
of
of the U of
Univers
Pennsylva
PA),
ity of
nia
Philadelphia
Pennsyl
Philadelp
, PA
vania
hia, PA
19104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
1709
$223,382
12/22/2014
United Way
Way of
Benjamin
Campaign
Greater
Franklin
Match
Philade
Parkway
lphia
Philadelp
and
hia, PA
Souther
19103
n New
Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Us Too
5003
$1,000
9/10/2014
Us Too
Interna
Fairview
Internationa
tional
Ave.
, Des
Downers
Plaines, IL
Grove, IL
60515
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Wissahic
12 Morris
$2,603
6/25/2014
New
kon
Road
wildflower
Valley
Ambler,
meadow
Watersh
PA 19002
development
ed
via Janssen
Associa
Cares
tion
Volunteer
Days.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Wissahic
12 Morris
$1,400
4/21/2014
Community
kon
Road
Service
Valley
Ambler,
Project for
Watersh
PA 19002
JBI's Bridge
ed
to
Associa
Employment
tion,
program;
Inc.
mentors and
students
planting
trees and
shrubs for
water
conservation
at
Wissahickon
Valley
Watershed
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen has also made financial donations to independent charitable
foundations that assist patients who are underinsured and in financial
need with treatment-related expenses. In keeping with our donor
agreements and applicable regulatory guidance, we will only disclose
aggregate data on our charitable giving and do not publicize
information on donations to specific foundations and disease states.
In 2014, we contributed approximately $40 million in donations to
independent charitable foundations, enabling them to provide
assistance with medication-related copays to patients with cancer
diseases.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$84,591,419
3/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$86,924,535
6/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$78,551,321
9/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$86,312,829
12/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updatd February 24, 2017
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Monetary and Product Contributions to U.S.-
based Charitable Organizations Full Year 2014
(Payments made from January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
180
1
$1,000
9/22/2014
Youth
Turnin
Bethany
Helpline
g
Road,
Hunterdon,
Lives
Buildin
Mercer, and
Around
g 3
Somerset
, Inc.
Suite
Operations
42
Hazlet,
NJ
07730
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
A
P.O. Box
$2,500
12/4/2014
A Woman's
Woman'
299
Place
s
Doylest
Prevention
Place
own, PA
Project
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Adult
872 E
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
Day
Main
associated
Center
Street
with 2014
of
Bridgew
Janssen
Somers
ater,
Cares
et
NJ
volunteer
County
08807
activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Allies,
1262
$7,500
11/17/2014
Greensleeves
Inc.
Whiteho
Flemington
rse-
Expansion
Hamilto
Environment
n
al
Square
Stewardship
Road
Program
Buildin
g A,
Suite
101
Hamilto
n, NJ
08690
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
100 West
$5,000
5/27/2014
2014 EXPO
n
Station
Pittsburgh
Diabet
Square
es
Drive
Associ
Suite
ation
1900
Pittsbu
rgh, PA
15219
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1160
$30,000
12/10/2014
Diabetes
n
Route
Interventio
Diabet
22 East
n Project
es
Suite
($20,000),
Associ
103
and
ation
Bridege
Community
water,
Outreach
NJ
Education
08807
($10,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1701
$125,000
12/10/2014
American
n
North
Diabetes
Diabet
Beaureg
Association
es
ard
's Outcomes-
Associ
Street
based
ation
Alexand
Community
ria, VA
Programs
22311
Targeted to
High Risk
Populations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1 Union
$5,000
10/16/2014
Fundraising
n
Street
event
Heart
Suite
support to
Associ
301
benefit
ation
Robbins
general
ville,
mission of
NJ
organizatio
08691
n.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$20,000
12/10/2014
Partnership
n
Wilson
for
Psychi
Bouleva
Workplace
atric
rd
Mental
Founda
Suite
Health ICU:
tion
1825
Improving
Arlingt
Emotional
on, VA
Health
22208
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$100,000
12/10/2014
Typical or
n
Wilson
Troubled?
Psychi
Bouleva
Student
atric
rd
Mental
Founda
Suite
Health
tion
1825
Education
Arlingt
Program
on, VA
22208
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$225,000
12/10/2014
Campaign by
n
Wilson
Psychiatris
Psychi
Bouleva
ts and
atric
rd
Judges to
Founda
Suite
Reduce the
tion
1825
Overreprese
Arlingt
ntation of
on, VA
Incarserate
22208
d
Individuals
with SMI
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
707
$15,000
10/20/2014
Support for
n Red
Alexand
the
Cross
er Road
American
Princet
Red Cross
on, NJ
Disaster
08550
Cycle
Services
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
Central
$20,000
3/14/2014
Support to
n Red
New
American
Cross
Jersey
Red Cross
707
Disaster
Alexand
Relief
er Road
Services
Suite
101
Princet
on, NJ
08540-
6331
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anchor
482
$418
1/9/2014
General
House,
Centre
Operating
Inc.
Street
Support
Trenton
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anderso
PO Box
$17,500
10/22/2014
Integrated
n
134 532
Care
House
County
Management
Rd. 523
Whiteho
use, NJ
08889
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Ann
595 West
$9,500
12/4/2014
Ann
Silver
State
Silverman
man
Street
Community
Commun
Doylest
Health
ity
own, PA
Clinic for
Health
18901
Bucks
Clinic
County
residents
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arc of
141
$5,000
9/22/2014
Fundraising
Somers
South
event
et
Main
support to
County
Street
benefit
Manvill
general
e, NJ
mission of
08835
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arc of
141
$4,000
10/1/2014
Respite
Somers
South
Services
et
Main
for
County
Street
Families
Manvill
with
e, NJ
Children
08835
with
Disabilitie
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
500 E.
$1,500
7/1/2014
The
is
Morehea
Community
Servic
d
Arthritis/
es
Street
Diabetes
Suite
Project--ta
320
rgeting
Charlot
women with
te, NC
Type II
28202
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Asian
180 W
$2,000
8/28/2014
Cardiovascul
Health
Washing
ar Health
Coalit
ton
Screenings
ion
Street
for Low-
Suite
Income,
1000
Limited-
Chicago
English
, IL
Speaking At-
60602
Risk
Diabetic
Asian
Immigrants
and
Refugees in
Chicago
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Associa
819
$9,000
8/15/2014
Parital Care
tion
Alexand
Rehabilitat
for
er Road
ion and
Advanc
Princet
Support
ement
on, NJ
Services
of
08540
Mental
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Associa
2400 N
$20,000
11/17/2014
Spirit of
tion
Street
the Heart:
of
NW
Community
Black
Sutie
Inverventio
Cardio
249
n to
logist
Washing
Improve
s
ton, DC
Cardiovascu
20037
lar Health
of
Underserved
Patients
with AFIB
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Athens
7 N.
$2,500
6/6/2014
The
Mental
Congres
Gathering
Health
s St
Place case
, Inc.
Athens,
management
OH
services
45701
program for
community
drop-in
center for
adults with
mental
illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Autism
1060
$1,000
8/28/2014
Community
Speaks
State
Partner
Road
15th Annual
2nd
Central New
Floor
Jersey Walk
Princet
Now for
on, NJ
Autism
08540
Speaks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
B More
5 East
$5,000
8/15/2014
Support of
Clubho
Frankli
B'More
use,
n
Clubhouse
Inc.
Street
which
Baltimo
offers
re, MD
members
21202
meaningful
work,
friendship,
and links
to stable
housing,
education
and other
resources
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bay
66 Canal
$5,000
6/12/2014
Bay Cove
Cove
Street
Wellness
Human
Boston,
Center to
Servic
MA
assist
es,
02114
diverse low-
Inc.
income
clients who
are working
towards
recovery
from severe
mental
illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bear
1162
$500
10/15/2014
Bear Tavern
Tavern
Bear
Elementary
Parent
Tavern
School
s
Road
Science
Associ
Titusvi
Fair
ation
lle, NJ
08560
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
2875
$6,500
10/14/2014
School-Based
Brothe
York
Mentoring
rs Big
Road
Program
Sister
Jamison
s of
, PA
Bucks
18929
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
2 West
$7,500
10/1/2014
Big Brothers
Brothe
Washing
Big Sisters
rs Big
ton
Youth
Sister
Avenue
Mentoring
s Of
Suite
Program-
Hunter
210 PO
Somerset
don
Box 123
County
Somers
Washing
et and
ton, NJ
Warren
07882
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
535 East
$8,000
8/26/2014
Big Brothers
Brothe
Frankli
Big Sisters
rs Big
n
of Mercer
Sister
Street
County
s of
Trenton
Youth
Mercer
, NJ
Mentoring
County
08610
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Boys
212
$22,500
10/14/2014
Career
and
Centre
Launch
Girls
Street
(Career
Club
Trenton
Exploration
of
, NJ
, Work
Trento
08611
Readiness,
n and
HS
Mercer
Graduation,
County
and Career
Pathway
Program)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bridgeh
950 S.
$4,000
6/12/2014
Recovery
aven,
First
Connection
Inc.
Street
program
Louisvi
lle, KY
40203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bridgew
615 N.
$5,000
12/4/2014
Self-
ay
Broad
Sufficiency
Rehabi
Street
Fund for
litati
Elizabe
Somerset,
on
th, NJ
Mercer and
Servic
07208
Hunterdon
es
residents
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bristol
120
$7,500
12/10/2014
ArtRageous
Rivers
Radclif
Summer Camp
ide
fe
Theate
Street
r Co,
P O Box
Inc.
1250
Bristol
, PA
19007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Broward
305
$10,000
5/27/2014
Affordable
County
Southea
Rental
Commun
st 18th
Housing
ity
Court
program
Develo
Fort
pment
Lauderd
Corpor
ale, FL
ation
33316
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bucks
1069
$5,000
11/17/2014
Bucks County
County
Jackson
Housing
Housin
ville
Group's
g
Road
Veterans
Group
Ivyland
Housing
, PA
Assistance
18974
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
Diocese
$5,000
7/1/2014
On My Own--
c
of
Supportive
Charit
Trenton
Housing
ies
Delawar
Program
e House
Services
Mental
program
Health
Service
s 25
Ikea
Drive
Westham
pton,
NJ
08060
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
Diocese
$17,500
7/7/2014
Partners In
c
of
Recovery
Charit
Trenton
program
ies
Delawar
e House
Mental
Health
Service
s 25
Ikea
Drive
Westham
pton,
NJ
08060
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
212
$75
1/28/2014
Employee
c
Ninth
directed
Charit
Street
donation in
ies
Pittsbu
lieu of
Dioces
rgh,
company
e of
Pennsyl
holiday
Pittsb
vania
gift
urgh
15222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
212
$75
12/3/2014
Employee
c
Ninth
directed
Charit
Street
donation in
ies
Pittsbu
lieu of
Dioces
rgh,
company
e of
Pennsyl
holiday
Pittsb
vania
gift
urgh
15222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
920
$4,000
10/16/2014
CYO's Broad
c
South
St. Trenton
Youth
Broad
Center
Organi
Street
After
zation
Trenton
School
of
, NJ
Program's
Mercer
08611
(ASP)
County
Tutoring
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
11
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
for
Minneak
associated
Educat
oning
with 2014
ional
Road
Janssen
Advanc
Fleming
Cares
ement
ton, NJ
volunteer
08822
activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
11
$15,000
10/20/2014
Employment
for
Minneak
Training
Educat
oning
program
ional
Road
enhancement
Advanc
Fleming
s
ement
ton, NJ
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
Harzfeld
$10,000
9/16/2014
PAINS:
for
Buildin
National
Practi
g 1111
Pain
cal
Main
Strategy
Bioeth
Street,
Roll-Out
ics
Suite
Meeting
500
Kansas
City,
MO
64105-2
116
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Chabad
PO Box
$1,000
5/9/2014
``We Care''
Lubavi
29
Educational
tch of
Princet
Series
Mercer
on, NJ
County
08542
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Child
204 N.
$2,000
10/1/2014
Adolescent
Home
West
Prenatal
and
Street
and
Commun
#101
Parenting
ity
Doylest
Continuum
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
635
$10,000
10/20/2014
CUNA and
n's
South
Body and
Home
Clinton
Soul
Societ
Avenue
Prenatal
y of
Trenton
Health
New
, NJ
Education
Jersey
08611
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
Roebling
$5,000
5/7/2014
Fundraising
n's
Market
event
Home
Complex
support to
Societ
635
benefit
y of
South
general
New
Clinton
mission of
Jersey
Avenue
organizatio
Trenton
n
, NJ
08611-
1831
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Christi
PO Box
$2,500
12/3/2014
Pajama Bags
nes
190
for Kids in
Hope
Hopewel
Need in
for
l, NJ
Mercer
Kids
08525
County
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
2000
$22,500
10/14/2014
Nursing
of New
Penning
Merit
Jersey
ton
Scholarship
Road
s ($10,000)
P.O.
and
Box
Educational
7718
Opportunity
Ewing,
Fund
NJ
Promise
08628
Awards
($12,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Colorad
PO Box
$2,500
8/1/2014
Peer
o
6336
Workforce
Mental
Denver,
Initiative
Wellne
CO
ss
80206
Networ
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$5,000
11/17/2014
Rise Summer
ty
88 116
Healthy
Action
North
Food
Servic
Main
Initiative
e
Street
for low
Center
Hightst
income
, Inc.
own, NJ
youth
08520
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
4059
$5,000
10/23/2014
Arts for
ty
Skyron
Seniors
Conser
Drive
($3,000)
vatory
Doylest
and Music
of
own, PA
Therapy
Music
18902
($2,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$150,000
12/12/2014
Johnson &
ty
338
Johnson
Founda
Morrist
Somerset
tion
own, NJ
County
of New
07963
Contributio
Jersey
ns Fund to
support
healthcare
and basic
needs of
residents
in Somerset
and
Hunterdon
Counties
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
P.O. Box
$11,500
10/13/2014
Each One,
ty
15176
Teach One:
Health
407
An Evidence
Coalit
Crutchf
Based
ion,
ield
Diabetes
Inc.
Street
Self-
Durham,
Management
NC
Workshop
27704
and
Community
Leaders
Training
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
199
$12,000
5/27/2014
Pathway to
ty
Pomeroy
Recovery
Hope,
Road
residential
Inc.
Parsipp
programs
any, NJ
($10,000)
07054
and The
Mental
Health
Educational
Forum and
Wellness
Fair
($2,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
199
$13,000
11/5/2014
Hope for
ty
Pomeroy
Veterans
Hope,
Road
and Valley
Inc.
Parsipp
Brook
any, NJ
Village for
07054
Veterans
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
310 W.
$7,500
10/20/2014
Social
ty
State
Security
Justic
Street
Services
e
3rd
and
Center
Floor
Veterans
, Inc.
Trenton
Assistance
, NJ
Project
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
507 E.
$4,000
7/1/2014
Compeer
ty
College
Program of
Mental
Street
Johnson
Health
Iowa
County
Center
City,
For
IA
Mid-
52240
Easter
n Iowa
dba
Compee
r
Progra
m,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Compeer
259
$2,500
7/29/2014
Compeer
Roches
Monroe
Rochester
ter,
Avenue
Youth and
Inc.
Rochest
Family
er, NY
Mentoring
14607
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Compeer
259
$3,000
7/1/2014
Compeer
, Inc.
Monroe
Senior
Avenue
Partners
Suite
program
340
Rochest
er, NY
14607
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Contact
60 S.
$8,500
12/4/2014
CRISIS
of
Main
HOTLINES
Mercer
Street
and Online
County
Penning
Emotional
New
ton, NJ
Support:
Jersey
08534
CRISIS CHAT
, Inc.
and
TxtToday
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Contact
60 South
$1,000
3/17/2014
Annual
of
Main
Senior
Mercer
Street
Volunteer
County
Penning
Recognition
New
ton, NJ
Brunch,
Jersey
08534
``Volunteer
, Inc.
s Are
Heroes!''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Court
1450
$12,500
10/14/2014
CASA of
Appoin
Parksid
Mercer
ted
e
Child
Specia
Avenue
Advocacy
l
Suite
Program for
Advoca
22
Abused and
tes
Ewing,
Neglected
NJ
Children
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
D&R
P.O. Box
$250
2/3/2014
23rd Annual
Canal
2 Rocky
D&R Canal
Watch
Hill,
Watch 5K
NJ
Fun Run
08553
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Deborah
212
$1,000
8/28/2014
2015 Women's
Hospit
Trenton
Heart
al
Road
Health
Founda
Browns
Symposium
tion
Mills,
NJ
08015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
14
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
e
Michael
associated
River
McCorri
with 2014
Steamb
stin
Janssen
oat
Road
Cares
Floati
Hamilto
volunteer
ng
n, NJ
activity
Classr
08690
oom,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
14
$4,000
11/3/2014
Environmenta
e
Michael
l education
River
McCorri
for
Steamb
stin
underfunded
oat
Road
and
Floati
Hamilto
underserved
ng
n, NJ
schools and
Classr
08690
youth
oom,
groups
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Depress
5
$1,000
3/17/2014
DBSA NJ
ion
Village
Mutual Aid
and
Court
Support
Bipola
Lawrenc
Group
r
eville,
Facilitator
Suppor
NJ
Training
t
08648
Allian
ce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Detroit
10
$5,000
8/25/2014
Managing
Centra
Peterbo
SPMI and
l City
ro
Chronic
Commun
Profess
Disease
ity
ional
Mental
Buildin
Health
g
, Inc.
Detroit
, MI
48201
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Didi
4760
$3,500
5/7/2014
Healthy
Hirsch
South
Inglewood
Mental
Sepulve
Project
Health
da
Servic
Bouleva
es
rd
Culver
City,
CA
90230
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Dress
3131
$9,000
10/13/2014
Dress for
for
Princet
Success
Succes
on
Mercer
s
Pike,
County--Job
Buildin
Readiness
g 4,
Program
Suite
Expansion
209
Project--To
Lawrenc
ols to
eville,
Succeed
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Eden
2
$5,000
10/14/2014
2015 Eden
Autism
Merwick
Autism
Servic
Road
Services
es
Princet
Princeton
Founda
on, NJ
Lecture
tion
08540
Series on
Autism
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Elijah'
211
$850
5/7/2014
General
s
Livings
Operating
Promis
ton
Support
e
Ave.
New
Brunswi
ck, NJ
08901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Emma
670
$3,500
7/1/2014
Mental
Norton
North
Health
Servic
Robert
Recovery
es
Street
Skills
St.
Training
Paul,
and
MN
Medication
55101-
Support at
2523
Emma Norton
Residence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Enable,
13
$6,000
11/5/2014
Connect with
Inc.
Roszel
Enable
Road,
program
Suite
B110
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Every
Fred
$8,500
11/17/2014
Every Child
Child
Vereen,
Valued
Valued
Jr.
After
A NJ
Communi
School
Nonpro
ty
Program
fit
Center
Corpor
175
ation
Johnson
Avenue
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Everybo
PO Box
$2,000
11/17/2014
Coming Up
dy
3127
for AIRTM
Loves
Princet
Kenny
on, NJ
Projec
08543
t,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Faith
39
$1,000
9/22/2014
Responsible
Christ
Somerse
Fatherhood
ian
t Drive
Empowerment
Counse
Willing
Workshop
ling
boro,
Center
NJ
08046
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$8,000
5/27/2014
Behavioral
Guidan
Notting
Healthcare
ce
ham Way
Services
Center
Hamilto
for the
Corpor
n, NJ
Chronically
ation
08619
Mentally
Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1 AAA
$15,000
11/17/2014
Get FIT
Resour
Dr.
Youth
ce
Suite
program
Networ
203
k
Trenton
, NJ
08691
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1 AAA
$1,000
5/9/2014
Fundraising
Resour
Drive
event
ce
Suite
support to
Networ
203
benefit
k
Trenton
general
, NJ
mission of
08691
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
4
$7,500
6/6/2014
Emergency
Servic
Corners
Homeless
e
tone
Shelter
Associ
Drive
Community
ation
Langhor
Nurse
of
ne, PA
Educator
Bucks
19047
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
790 Park
$4,000
5/27/2014
STEPS to
Servic
Avenue
Wellness
e
Hunting
Program
League
ton, NY
, Inc.
11743
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Federat
Administ
$1,000
5/9/2014
The Big Nosh
ion of
rative
Vocational
Organi
Offices
Services
zation
One
Program
s
Farming
dale
Road
Route
109
West
Babylon
, NY
11704
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Forsyth
61
$75
12/3/2014
Employee
Humane
Miller
directed
Societ
Street
donation in
y
Winston-
lieu of
Salem,
company
NC
holiday
21704
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$7,000
11/17/2014
The ``I'm
ion of
Lawrenc
still
Morris
eville
here''
Hall/
Road
approach to
St.
Lawrenc
managing
Lawren
eville,
challenging
ce
NJ
behaviors
08648
in Grace
Garden.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$2,500
11/17/2014
Fundraising
ion of
Lawrenc
event
Morris
eville
support to
Hall/
Road
benefit
St.
Lawrenc
general
Lawren
eville,
mission of
ce
NJ
organizatio
08648
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gateway
11901
$9,500
7/1/2014
Support for
Homes,
Reedy
a Nurse
Inc.
Branch
Practitione
Road
r to
Chester
provide
field,
comprehensi
VA
ve
23838
personalize
d health
education
and
counseling
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
246
$1,500
6/18/2014
Consumer
Mental
Sycamor
scholarship
Health
e
s to attend
Consum
STreet
the 23rd
er
Suite
Annual
Networ
160
Statewide
k
Decatur
Consumer
, GA
Conference,
30030
``Year of
the Peer''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
201
$2,000
12/3/2014
Robotics
Scouts
Grove
Program
Heart
Street
of New
Westfie
Jersey
ld, NJ
, Inc.
07090
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Good
38 Elm
$1,000
12/19/2014
Peer Support
Grief,
Street
Program--Pr
Inc.
Morrist
inceton
own, NJ
07960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Grand
700 Lawn
$100
2/11/2014
Memorial
View
Avenue
donation
Health
Sellers
Founda
ville,
tion
PA
18960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gulf
13228 N.
$100
5/27/2014
Memorial
Ridge
Central
donation
Counci
Avenue
l Boy
Tampa,
Scouts
FL
of
33612-
Americ
3462
a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
31 Oak
$4,000
11/17/2014
Women Build
for
Avenue,
A Brush
Humani
Suite
with
ty of
100
Kindness
Greate
Chalfon
r
t, PA
Bucks
18914
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
6860
$800
8/15/2014
Costs
for
Cortona
associated
Humani
Drive,
with 2014
ty of
Suite A
Janssen
Southe
Goleta,
Cares
rn
CA
Volunteer
Santa
93117
Activity
Barbar
a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hamilto
1315
$9,500
12/12/2014
A.C.T.
n Area
Whiteho
(Actively
YMCA
rse-
Changing
Mercerv
Together)
ille
Program
Road
Hamilto
n, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heart
78
$2,000
12/19/2014
HealthCare
to
Ditmars
Portfolio
Hearts
Avenue
Program
, Inc.
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heartla
4750 N.
$7,500
8/15/2014
Pathways
nd
Sherida
Home,
Health
n Road
supportive
Outrea
Chicago
housing
ch
, IL
program for
60640
those
living with
mental
health
issues
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HiTops,
21
$7,000
11/17/2014
HiTOPS'
Inc.
Wiggins
Dating
Street
Violence
Princet
Risk-
on, NJ
Reduction
08540
and
Prevention
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$20,000
10/20/2014
24-Hour and
nt
Princet
Emergency
on
Childcare
Avenue
Center:
Lawrenc
Providing
eville,
Care
NJ
``Around
08648
the Time
Clock''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$10,000
10/27/2014
Huchet House
nt
Princet
on
Avenue
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
35
$1,000
9/16/2014
Hopewell
l
Princet
Elementary
Elemen
on Ave
Science
tary
Hopewel
Fair 2015
School
l, NJ
Parent
08525
Teache
r
Organi
zation
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
PO Box
$3,500
6/12/2014
Scholarship
l
553
for a
Valley
Penning
Hopewell
Educat
ton, NJ
Valley
ion
08534
Regional
Founda
School
tion
District
graduating
student
($1,000), I
Dream a
World: 15
Day Artist
Residency
($2500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Horizon
120 S.
$1,000
5/7/2014
Philly Has
House,
30th
Talent
Inc.
St.
outreach
Philade
and
lphia,
awareness
PA
event
19104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
1410
$2,500
9/22/2014
Fundraising
on
Route
event
County
22 West
support to
YMCA
Annanda
benefit
le, NJ
general
08801
mission of
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Institu
PO Box
$3,500
10/14/2014
IWWWE
te of
7869
Nursing
Wonder
West
Experiences
ful
Trenton
hip Program
Women
, NJ
Workin
08628
g for
Empowe
rment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Interfa
3635
$5,000
8/28/2014
Fundraising
ith
Quakerb
event
Caregi
ridge
support to
vers
Road
benefit
Trento
Suite
general
n,
16
mission of
Inc.
Hamilto
organizatio
n, NJ
n
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Interfa
3635
$15,000
10/14/2014
Neighbors
ith
Quakerb
Helping
Caregi
ridge
Neighbors
vers
Road
program to
Trento
Suite
support
n,
16
elderly and
Inc.
Hamilto
disabled in
n, NJ
Mercer
08619
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Isles,
10 Wood
$9,000
11/17/2014
Trenton
Inc.
Street
ReHEET
Trenton
(Residentia
, NJ
l, Health,
08618
Energy, and
Environment
al
Treatment)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$7,500
12/4/2014
Mercer
Family
Alexand
County
and
er Road
Caregiver
Childr
Suite
Help Line
en's
102
and
Servic
Princet
Caregiver
e of
on, NJ
Services
Greate
08540
r
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Junior
4365
$7,800
12/10/2014
2015 J&J
Achiev
Route 1
Pharma Day
ement
South
Program
of New
2nd
Jersey
Floor
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Karis
1361
$3,500
6/6/2014
Direct
Commun
Detroit
support of
ity
St.
the Karis
Denver,
Community
CO
Continuum
80206
of Care
Programs in
lieu of
event
sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kidsbri
4556
$4,500
9/22/2014
Kidsbridge
dge,
South
Anti-
Inc.
Broad
Bullying
Street
Life Skills
2nd
Program for
Floor
At-Risk
Trenton
Children in
, NJ
Trenton at
08620
the
Elementary
School
Level
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Laguna
362
$12,000
5/27/2014
Diabetes
Beach
Third
Program for
Commun
Street
Disadvantag
ity
Laguna
ed
Clinic
Beach,
Individuals
CA
92651
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Latin
669
$3,500
12/10/2014
Door to
Americ
Chamber
Health/
an
s
Puerta de
Legal
Street
Salud
Defens
Suite B
program
e And
Trenton
Educat
, NJ
ional
08611
Fund,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Lawrenc
PO Box
$2,710
10/1/2014
Engaging
e
6531 17
Budding
Townsh
Philips
Engineers
ip
Ave.
at
Educat
Lawrenc
Lawrencevil
ion
eville,
le
Founda
NJ
Elementary
tion,
08648
School:
Inc.
enhancing
the third
grade STEM
curriculum.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Leyden
10001
$5,000
7/18/2014
Health Home
Family
Grand
and
Servic
Avenue
Integrated
e and
Frankli
Care =
Mental
n Park,
Innovation
Health
IL
program
Center
60131
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Liberta
5245
$6,500
12/4/2014
Psychiatric
e,
Bensale
Services
Inc.
m
for Women
Bouleva
Recovering
rd
from
Bensale
Substance
m, PA
Use
19020
Disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
LifeTie
LifeTies
$5,150
11/17/2014
The
s,
, Inc.
Transgender
Inc.
2205
Youth
Penning
Health
ton
Services
Road
Project:
Ewing,
Staff
NJ
Training
08638
and Mentor
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
55
$2,500
12/18/2014
Early
y and
Primros
Childhood:
Life,
e
Building
Inc.
Circle
Blocks for
Princet
the Future
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
121
$5,000
12/3/2014
Adult
y New
Chestnu
Literacy
Jersey
t
Program in
, Inc.
Street
Mercer
Suite
County
203
Roselle
, NJ
07203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
120
$4,000
11/17/2014
Literate
y
Findern
Moms,
Volunt
e Ave--
Stable
eers
Box 7
Futures
of
Bridgew
program
Somers
ater,
et
NJ
County
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Main
8
$2,500
7/1/2014
Accessible
Street
Marcell
Care for
Counse
a
Schizoaffec
ling
Avenue
tive
Center
West
Disorder
Orange,
NJ
07052
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mary's
15
$75
3/17/2014
Employee
Place
Broadwa
directed
By The
y Ocean
donation in
Sea
Grove,
lieu of
NJ
company
07756
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Massach
130
$2,500
6/6/2014
Peer Support
usetts
Bowdoin
Whole
Associ
Street
Health
ation
Boston,
Resiliency
for
MA
Program
Mental
02108
Health
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
McCarte
91
$9,500
11/17/2014
OnStage
r
Univers
Seniors: A
Theatr
ity
Community
e
Place
Project of
Center
Princet
McCarter
on, NJ
Theatre
08450
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
5 Walter
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
On
Foran
associated
Wheels
Bouleva
with 2014
in
rd
Janssen
Hunter
Suite
Cares
don,
2006
volunteer
Inc.
Fleming
activity
ton, NJ
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
180
$15,000
10/22/2014
Meals-on-
on
Ewingvi
Wheels
Wheels
lle
Program
of
Road
Trento
Ewing,
n
NJ
Ewing
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1431
$1,000
6/6/2014
2014 Mental
Health
North
Health
Americ
Delawar
Symposium
a
e
and Annual
Street
Meeting
Indiana
polis,
IN
46202
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2000
$90,000
12/10/2014
Building
Health
North
Skills of
Americ
Beaureg
Caregivers
a
ard
to Assist
Street
People
6th
Living with
Floor
Schizophren
Alexand
ia through
ria, VA
Social Self-
22311
Directed
Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
70 E.
$1,500
8/28/2014
Mental
Health
Lake
Health and
Americ
Street
Wellness
a
Suite
Fair/
900
Chicago
Chicago
Area
, IL
Resource
60601
Guide
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2211
$15,000
8/1/2014
School
Health
Norfolk
Behavioral
Americ
Suite
Health
a of
810
Initiative
Greate
Houston
r
, TX
Housto
77098
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1385 S.
$2,500
7/1/2014
Pro Bono
Health
Colorad
Counseling
Americ
o
and
a of
Bouleva
Referral
Colora
rd
Program
do
Suite
610
Denver,
CO
80222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2323 W.
$10,000
7/11/2014
Get
Health
Fifth
Connected
Americ
Avenue
Wellness
a of
Suite
program
Frankl
160
in
Columbu
County
s, OH
43204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100
$5,000
7/1/2014
What is
Health
Edgewoo
Schizophren
Americ
d
ia?
a of
Avenue
Educational
Georgi
Suite
Forum
a
502
Atlanta
, GA
30303
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1210 San
$2,500
7/1/2014
Mental
Health
Antonio
Health
Americ
Street
Education
a of
Suite
and
Texas
200
Advocacy
Austin,
Campaign
TX
78757
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
475
$2,500
5/27/2014
Mental
Health
Clevela
Health
Associ
nd
Education
ation
Avenue
for Support
N Suite
Systems
222
Saint
Paul,
MN
55104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
870
$7,500
8/1/2014
Reducing the
Health
Market
Stigma and
Associ
Street
Discriminat
ation
Suite
ion of
928 San
Mental
Francis
Illness
co, CA
within
94102
Multi-
cultural
Communities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 West
$1,500
7/1/2014
13th Annual
Health
10th
Community
Associ
Street
Mental
ation
Suite
Health
in
600
Conference-
Delawa
Wilming
-Back to
re
ton, DE
Basics:
19801
Mind, Body
and Spirit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 West
$1,000
8/15/2014
Bronze
Health
10th
sponsor
Associ
Street
2014 E-
ation
Suite
Racing the
in
600
Blues 5K
Delawa
Wilming
Run/Walk
re
ton, DE
10K Run
19801
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
330 S.
$5,000
8/1/2014
Schizophreni
Health
Greene
a and
Associ
St,
Schizo-
ation
Suite B-
Affective
In
12
Supportive
Greens
Greensb
Services
boro,
oro, NC
Inc.
27401
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
88
$1,000
8/28/2014
Silver
Health
Pompton
Sponsor 7th
Associ
Ave.
Annual Walk
ation
Verona,
for
in New
NJ
Wellness
Jersey
07044
and
Recovery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
617
$2,500
6/5/2014
Support
Health
Garden
Mental
Associ
Street
Wellness
ation
Santa
Center
in
Barbara
Santa
, CA
Barbar
93101
a
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3701
$8,000
8/1/2014
Mental
Health
Latrobe
Health
Associ
Drive,
First Aid
ation
Suite
Training
of
140
for
Centra
Charlot
Mecklenburg
l
te, NC
County
Caroli
28211
Sheriff's
nas
Office
Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1301
$10,000
9/17/2014
Health Care
Health
York
Reform
Associ
Road
Parity
ation
Suite
Initiative
of
505
Maryla
Lutherv
nd,
ille,
Inc.
MD
21093
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2335
$1,000
7/1/2014
Open Doors
Health
Tamiami
Open Minds--
Associ
Trail
Cultural
ation
North
Competency
of
(Ninth
Educational
Southw
Street)
Program
estern
Suite
Promoting
Florid
404
Wellness
a
Naples,
and
FL
Recovery
34103
Through
Inclusion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
580
$1,000
2/13/2014
Supporting
Health
White
sponsor
Associ
Plains
2014 MHA on
ation
Road
the Move:
of
Tarryto
Run/Walk
Westch
wn, NY
ester
10591
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1870
$1,000
7/24/2014
Copper
Health
South
sponsor for
Associ
Boulder
the 20th
ation
Avenue
Annual
Oklaho
Tulsa,
Zarrow
ma
OK
Mental
74119-
Health
5234
Symposium,
``All
Things
Prevention'
'
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
555N.
$4,000
8/15/2014
MHA Housing
Health
Woodlaw
Initiative:
Associ
n,
Ensuring
ation
Suite
Housing for
Reside
3105
Our Most
ntial
Wichita
Vulnerable
Care
, KS
Populations
Inc.
67208
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
4141 E.
$7,500
7/1/2014
Enhancement
Health
Dickens
of The
Center
on
Downstairs
of
Place
program
Denver
Denver,
CO
80222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3809
$10,000
6/24/2014
Outreach and
Illnes
Rosewoo
Behavioral
s
d Dr.
Healthcare
Recove
P.O.
for
ry
Box
Homeless
Center
4246
Individuals
, Inc.
Columbi
with Mental
a, SC
Illness
29240
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
3150
$7,500
12/4/2014
Integrating
Allian
Brunswi
healthcare
ce to
ck Pike
access into
End
Lawrenc
operation
Homele
eville,
of the
ssness
NJ
Mercer
08648-
County
2420
Service
Access
Center for
Homeless
Individuals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
PO Box
$3,950
11/17/2014
Z.O.M.B.I.E.
County
17202
: Zooming
Commun
Trenton
in On
ity
, NJ
Making
Colleg
08690
Biology
e
Interactive
Founda
and
tion
Engaging--(
Peer Tutor
support)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
Growth
$7,500
8/11/2014
Data Through
Region
Partner
Action:
al
ship of
Education
Econom
Central
and Tourism
ic
Jersey,
Initiatives
Develo
Inc. 1A
Throughout
pment
Quakerb
Central New
Founda
ridge
Jersey
tion,
Plaza
Inc.
Drive,
Suite 2
Mercerv
ile, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$20,000
9/22/2014
Food Bank--
Street
Mercer
Healthy
Friend
Street
Choices
s
Trenton
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Merrima
60
$800
8/26/2014
Costs
ck
Island
associated
Valley
Street
with 2014
Habita
2nd
Janssen
t for
Floor
Cares
Humani
East
volunteer
ty
Lawrenc
activity
e, MA
01840
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Metropo
1 North
$1,500
8/4/2014
Adult Mental
litan
Dearbor
Health
Family
n
Wellness
Servic
Chicago
Initiative
es
, IL
60602
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Michael
1115
$100
12/19/2014
Memorial
Stern
Broadwa
Donation
Parkin
y,
son's
Suite
Resear
1200
ch
New
Founda
York,
tion
NY
10010
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Middle
P.O. Box
$15,000
10/14/2014
Outreach
Earth
8045
Program and
520
Community
North
Youth
Bridge
Centers
Street
Bridgew
ater,
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Midland
60
$7,500
9/22/2014
Midland
Adult
Industr
Helping
Servic
ial
Hands
es,
Parkway
Employment
Inc.
PO Box
Training
5026
Program
North
Branch,
NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101
$15,000
11/5/2014
Trenton
l
Oakland
PEERS--Teen
Child
Street
Education
and
Trenton
and
Family
, NJ
Empowerment
08618
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101-A
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
l
Oakland
associated
Founda
Street
with 2014
tion,
Trenton
Janssen
Inc.
, NJ
Cares
08618
volunteer
activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minding
2083
$5,000
3/17/2014
2014 Minding
our
Lawrenc
Our
Busine
eville
Business
ss,
Rd
Summer
Inc.
Lawrenc
Program:
eville,
Bridge to
NJ
the Future
08648
for Mercer
County
Youth
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Morven
55
$5,000
10/14/2014
Morven
Museum
Stockto
Museum and
and
n
Garden
Garden
Street
Summer
Princet
Internship
on, NJ
Program for
08540
Isles of
Trenton
Youths
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mount
73 North
$12,500
9/22/2014
Mount Carmel
Carmel
Clinton
Guild Home
Guild
Avenue
Health
Trenton
Nursing
, NJ
Program
08609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI--C
1904
$1,000
5/27/2014
Consumer,
VA
Byrd
Public, and
Centra
Ave
Provider
l
Richmon
Education:
Virgin
d, VA
Peer to
ias
23230
Peer and In
Voice
Our Own
On
Voice
Mental
Programs
Illnes
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1012
$1,000
2/13/2014
Bronze
Arkans
Autumn
sponsor
as
Rd
2014
Suite 1
Arkansas
Little
NAMIWalk
Rock,
AR
72211
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
2400
$1,000
5/9/2014
Bronze
Delawa
West
sponsor
re
4th St.
12th Annual
Wilming
NAMI
ton, DE
Delaware
19805
Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
P.O. Box
$1,000
7/18/2014
Purchase of
Lansin
26101
books for
g,
Lansing
family
Inc.
, MI
education,
48909
communicati
on
enhancement
and support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
3371
$2,500
1/14/2014
Silver
Mercer
Brunswi
sponsor
NJ
ck Pike
NAMI Mercer
Suite
Walk 2014
124
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
3371
$9,500
6/6/2014
Education
Mercer
Brunswi
and Support
NJ
ck Pike
Programs
Suite
124
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
3371
$2,500
12/10/2014
Silver
Mercer
Brunswi
sponsor
NJ
ck Pike
2015 NAMI
Suite
Mercer Walk
124
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
2100
$5,000
7/1/2014
Educational
DuPage
Manches
and
County
ter
supportive
Illino
Road
services
is
Buildin
programs to
g B
include
Suite
community
925
outreach,
Wheaton
school
, IL
connections
60187
, hospital
education,
educational
courses,
NAMI
Connection,
MICAP,
Family
Support
Group and
other
resources
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
One
$500
8/15/2014
Bronze
Lake
Victori
sponsor
County
a Sq.,
2014 NAMI
Ste.
Lake
260
County's
Painesv
Strides for
ille,
Awareness
OH
Walk
44077
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
100 West
$1,000
3/17/2014
Bronze
PA
Main
sponsor
Montgo
Street
2014
mery
Suite
Greater
County
204
Philadelphi
Lansdal
a NAMIWalk
e, PA
19446
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1750
$1,000
5/9/2014
Bronze
St.
South
sponsor
Louis
Brentwo
2014
od
NAMIWalks
Blvd.,
Suite
511 St.
Louis,
MO
63144
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
PO Box
$1,000
3/6/2014
Bronze
Summit
462
sponsor
County
Cuyahog
NAMIWalks
a
2014
Falls,
OH
44321
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
5251
$1,000
2/13/2014
Bronze
Ventur
Verdugo
sponsor
a
Road,
NAMIWalk
County
Suite K
Ventura
PO Box
County 2014
1613
Camaril
lo, CA
93011
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
217
$1,000
5/27/2014
Bronze
Waukes
Wiscons
sponsor
ha
in Ave
2014
Suite
NAMIWalks
300
in Waukesha
Waukesh
a, WI
53186
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
90 Park
$2,500
10/23/2014
26th Annual
l
Avenue
New York
Allian
16
Mental
ce for
Floor
Health
Resear
New
Research
ch on
York,
Symposium
Schizo
NY
phreni
10016
a and
Depres
sion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1 Bangor
$1,000
5/16/2014
Supporter
l
Street
sponsor
Allian
Augusta
2014 NAMI
ce for
, ME
Maine Walk
the
04330
for Mental
Mental
Health
ly Ill
Awareness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
10630
$1,000
9/16/2014
Silver
l
Little
sponsor
Allian
Patuxen
NAMI
ce for
t
Maryland
the
Parkway
2014 Annual
Mental
Columbi
Education
ly Ill
a, MD
Conference
21044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1225
$10,000
5/9/2014
NAMI Ohio's
l
Dublin
Medication
Allian
Road;
Access
ce for
Ste.
Initiative
the
125
Mental
Columbu
ly Ill
s, OH
43215
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1536
$7,500
7/1/2014
``Ending the
l
West
Silence''
Allian
Chicago
training
ce for
Avenue
for
the
Chicago
students
Mental
, IL
regarding
ly Ill
60622
mental
illness and
brain
disorders
($6000) and
Special and
Restorative
Programming
for
individuals
living with
Mental
Illness
($1500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1562
$1,000
3/17/2014
Bronze
l
Route
sponsor
Allian
130
2014
ce for
North
NAMIWalks
the
Brunswi
New Jersey:
Mental
ck, NJ
Step
ly Ill
08902
Forward for
Our Heroes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1562
$2,500
7/1/2014
2014
l
Route
Conference:
Allian
130
Expanding
ce for
North
Horizons
the
Brunswi
Mental
ck, NJ
ly Ill
08902
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
237
$1,000
12/3/2014
Bronze
l
Fernwoo
sponsor
Allian
d Blvd
2015
ce for
Suite
NAMIWALKS,
the
101
Changing
Mental
Fern
minds one
ly Ill
Park,
step at a
FL
time.
32730
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
309 West
$1,000
3/17/2014
Bronze
l
Millbro
sponsor
Allian
ok Road
2014
ce for
Suite
NAMIWalks
the
121
Mental
Raleigh
ly Ill
, NC
27609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3250
$1,000
3/6/2014
Bronze
l
Wilshir
sponsor
Allian
e Blvd
2014
ce for
Ste
NAMIWalks
the
1501
Los Angeles
Mental
Los
County
ly Ill
Angeles
, CA
90010
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3440
$1,000
7/1/2014
Bronze
l
Viking
sponsor
Allian
Drive,
Northern
ce for
Suite
California
the
104A
NAMI Walk
Mental
Sacrame
2015
ly Ill
nto, CA
95827
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$50,000
12/10/2014
Crisis
l
Fairfax
Interventio
Allian
Drive
n Team
ce for
Suite
Technical
the
100
Assistance
Mental
Arlingt
and
ly Ill
on, VA
Statewide
22203
Expansion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$35,000
12/10/2014
Multicultura
l
Fairfax
l Action
Allian
Drive
Center
ce for
Suite
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$40,000
12/10/2014
NAMI Basics
l
Fairfax
Education
Allian
Drive
Program
ce for
Suite
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
498
$9,500
8/14/2014
NAMI
l
Georget
Lexington
Allian
own
Advocacy,
ce for
Street
Education,
the
Suite
Outreach
Mental
201
and Support
ly Ill
Lexingt
($8,500),
on, KY
bronze
40508
sponsor
2014 Walk
($1,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
576
$1,000
1/15/2014
Bronze
l
Farming
sponsor
Allian
ton
2014
ce for
Avenue
NAMIWalks
the
Hartfor
Mental
d, CT
ly Ill
06105
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
800
$1,000
5/7/2014
Bronze
l
Transfe
sponsor
Allian
r Road
NAMIWalks
ce for
Suite
2014
the
31
Mental
Saint
ly Ill
Paul,
MN
55114
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
800
$1,000
7/1/2014
NAMI
l
Transfe
Connections
Allian
r Road
Training
ce for
Suite
the
31
Mental
Saint
ly Ill
Paul,
MN
55114
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
99 Pine
$3,000
8/28/2014
2014 NAMI-
l
St.
NYS
Allian
Suite
Education
ce for
302
Conference-
the
Albany,
United We
Mental
NY
Stand:
ly Ill
12207
Shaping our
Future.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
Kentucky
$1,000
7/1/2014
Community
l
Affilia
Sponsor
Allian
te c/o
2014 Annual
ce for
Somerse
Conference,
the
t
``Advocatin
Mental
Communi
g for
ly Ill
ty
Change
College
Together''
808
Montice
llo
Street
Somerse
t, KY
42501
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
7/24/2014
Family-to-
l
22697
Family and
Allian
2601
Peer-to-
ce for
Cold
Peer
the
Spring
Education
Mental
Road
programs
ly Ill
Indiana
polis,
IN
46222-
0697
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
10/23/2014
Bronze
l
66270
sponsor
Allian
Houston
2015
ce for
, TX
NAMIWalks
the
77274
Greater
Mental
Houston
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
7/1/2014
Bronze
l
8260
sponsor
Allian
Richmon
2014
ce for
d, VA
NAMIWalks
the
23218
Virginia
Mental
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
Scott
$1,000
5/16/2014
Bronze
l
County
sponsor
Allian
1706
2014
ce for
Brady
NAMIWalk
the
Street
Greater
Mental
Suite
Mississippi
ly Ill
200
Valley
Davenpo
rt, IA
52803
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
The
$1,000
3/17/2014
Bronze
l
Schraff
sponsor
Allian
t's
2014
ce for
Center
NAMIWalks
the
529
Massachuset
Mental
Main
ts
ly Ill
Street
Suite
1M17
Boston,
MA
02129
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$1,000
7/1/2014
Mental
l
West
Illness
Allian
25th
Peer
ce for
Street
Support and
the
6th
Education
Mental
Floor
programs
ly
Clevela
Ill--G
nd, OH
reater
44113
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$1,000
8/12/2014
Bronze
l
West
sponsor
Allian
25th
2014
ce for
Street
NAMIWalks
the
6th
for the
Mental
Floor
Mind of
ly
Clevela
America
Ill--G
nd, OH
Greater
reater
44113
Cleveland
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
5911
$1,000
8/12/2014
Bronze
l
Meredit
sponsor
Allian
h Drive
2014 NAMI
ce for
Suite E
IOWA
the
Des
NAMIWalk
Mental
Moines,
ly
IA
Ill--I
50322-
owa
1903
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2753
$1,000
1/15/2014
Bronze
l
West
sponsor
Allian
Central
2014
ce for
Avenue
NAMIWalk
the
Toledo,
Mental
OH
ly Ill
43606
of
Greate
r
Toledo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
505
$1,000
2/13/2014
Bronze
l
Eighth
sponsor
Allian
Avenue
NAMIWalks
ce for
Suite
NYC 2014
the
1103
Walk/Run
Mental
New
ly Ill
York,
of New
NY
York
10018
City
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1981
$1,000
11/5/2014
Bronze
l
Marcus
sponsor
Allian
Ave,
2015 Long
ce for
C117
Island/
the
Lake
Queens
Mental
Success
NAMIWalk
ly Ill
, NY
for Mental
Queens/
11042
Health
Nassau
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
of
$1,000
8/12/2014
Bronze
l
Butler
sponsor
Allian
County
2014
ce on
5963
National
Mental
Boymel
Alliance on
Illnes
Drive
Mental
s
Fairfie
Illness of
ld, OH
Butler
45014
County
NAMIWalks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1150
$3,500
5/15/2014
Peer PALS
l
South
program
Allian
Bascom
ce on
Ave.,
Mental
Ste 24,
Illnes
San
s
Jose,
Santa
CA
Clara
95128
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
P O Box
$6,000
5/16/2014
27 Annual
l Art
350891
National
Exhibi
Miami
Art
tions
Fl
Exhibition
of the
33135
by the
Mental
Mentally
ly
Ill
Ill,
Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
110 N.
$30,000
11/17/2014
STOP THE
l
Washing
CLOT,
Blood
ton
SPREAD THE
Clot
Street
WORD VTE
Allian
Suite
Awareness
ce
328
and
Rockvil
Advocacy
le, MD
Initiative
20850
: Patient
Toolkit
($15,000),
and
Specialty
Magazines
($15,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
110
$7,500
3/17/2014
Education
l
North
briefing,
Blood
Washing
``So You
Clot
ton
Think You
Allian
Street
Can't Get A
ce
Suite
Blood Clot?
328 B
Think
Rockvil
Again!''
le, MD
20850
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1701 K
$20,000
12/10/2014
Prescription
l
Street
Drug Abuse
Counci
NW,
and Pain
l for
Suite
Management
Behavi
400
Initiative
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1701 K
$60,000
12/10/2014
Same Day
l
Street
Access
Counci
NW,
Initiative
l for
Suite
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1701 K
$35,000
12/10/2014
Early Onset
l
Street
Psychosis
Counci
NW,
Initiative
l for
Suite
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1701 K
$50,000
12/10/2014
Health
l
Street
Justice
Counci
NW,
Learning
l for
Suite
Initiative
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1701 K
$75,000
12/10/2014
2015 Policy
l
Street
Action
Counci
NW,
Center
l for
Suite
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1701 K
$30,000
12/10/2014
Leadership
l
Street
Development
Counci
NW,
Initiatives
l for
Suite
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
949 W.
$16,500
12/3/2014
Academic
l
State
Creative
Junior
Street
Engagement
Tennis
Trenton
Program
and
, NJ
($6,500.00)
Learni
08618
,
ng of
Benefactor
Trento
sponsor
n
2015 Annual
Gala
($10,000.00
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$10,000
11/19/2014
Patient
l
Easter
Navigator
Stroke
Lane,
Program /
Associ
Suite B
Stroke
ation
Centenn
Recovery
ial, CO
Navigator
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$62,290
11/19/2014
Web-based
l
Easter
health
Stroke
Lane,
game,
Associ
Suite B
``Stroke
ation
Centenn
and
ial, CO
Nonvalvular
80112
Atrial
Fibrillatio
n: Beating
Your Odds''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
444 W.
$6,000
3/17/2014
Support
Founda
Frontag
Health and
tion
e Road
Wellness
Center
Northfi
Program,
eld, IL
benefitting
60093--
clients who
3009
are
managing a
co-morbid
diagnosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
275 Rt.
$4,000
3/17/2014
New Jersey
Jersey
10
Parent's
Parent
East,
Caucus
s
Suite
Outreach RV
Caucus
220-414
Tour and
Succasu
Professiona
nna, NJ
l Parent
07876
Advocacy
Training
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NewBrid
PO Box
$2,000
7/1/2014
Day
ge
336 (7
Treatment
Servic
Industr
Program for
es,
ial
Adults
Inc.
Road,
Pequann
ock, NJ
07440)
Pompton
Plains,
NJ
07444
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NHS
620 E.
$5,000
5/27/2014
Hollywood
Human
Germant
Beauty
Servic
own
Salon
es
Pike
Documentary
Founda
Lafayet
Project--po
tion
te
st
Inc
Hill,
production
PA
costs
19444
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Northea
334
$2,500
8/26/2014
Healthy Food
st
River
for Healthy
Organi
Road
Communities
c
Hillsbo
Farmin
rough,
g
NJ
Associ
08844
ation
of NJ
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Notre
1835
$100
8/18/2014
Memorial
Dame
Catasau
donation
of
qua
Bethle
Road
hem
Bethleh
School
em, PA
18018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Oldies
PO Box
$75
3/17/2014
Employee
But
361
directed
Goodie
Newingt
donation in
s
on, VA
lieu of
Cocker
22122
company
Rescue
holiday
, Inc.
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
One
1977
$3,500
11/17/2014
Wish
Simple
North
Program:
Wish
Olden
Education
Ave,
Fund for
#292
Aging Out
Trenton
Youth
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Open
14 Lake
$2,000
7/18/2014
Support to
Road
Court
provide the
Fleming
homebound
ton, NJ
elderly and
08822
people with
disabilitie
s or mental
illness
with
stimulating
and
enriching
activities
that would
otherwise
be
unavailable
to them
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Our
2626 E
$100
8/4/2014
Memorial
Hospic
17th
Donation
e of
Street
South
Columbu
Centra
s, IN
l
47201
Indian
a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Passage
211
$5,000
12/15/2014
The State
Theatr
Mercer
Street
e
Street
Project
Compan
PO Box
y Inc.
967
Trenton
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
Kids
Lawrenc
associated
e Road
with 2014
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares
NJ
volunteer
08648
activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$17,500
10/14/2014
Comprehensiv
Kids
Lawrenc
e Juvenile
e Road
Offenders
Lawrenc
Outreach
eville,
Services
NJ
(CJOOS)
08648
program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Penning
PO Box
$1,000
5/30/2014
Fundrasining
ton
628
event
Day,
Penning
support to
Inc.
ton, NJ
benefit
08534
general
mission of
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
People
140 East
$2,500
10/22/2014
People and
And
Hanover
Stories
Storie
Street
with Mercer
s--Gen
Trenton
County
te Y
, NJ
Seniors
Cuento
08608
s Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Planned
PO Box
$4,000
7/1/2014
Whole-Health
Living
4755
and
Assist
Austin,
Wellness
ance
TX
Program
Networ
78765
k of
Centra
l
Texas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Planned
13151
$2,500
8/26/2014
Education
Living
Emily
and Social
Assist
Road,
Skills
ance
Suite
Development
Networ
240
Program
k of
Dallas,
North
TX
Texas,
75240
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Plansma
118 West
$3,500
9/16/2014
2014
rt NJ
State
Corporate
Trenton
membership
, NJ
renewal
08608
donation to
support
efforts
around
sound land
use
planning
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
15
$25,000
12/12/2014
Path to
on
Princes
Impact--Cap
Area
s Road
acity
Commun
Lawrenc
Building
ity
eville,
Program
Founda
NJ
tion,
08648
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
123 E.
$15,000
11/17/2014
Hunger
on
Hanover
Prevention
Outrea
St.
and
ch
Trenton
Nutrition
Projec
, NJ
Education
ts /
08608
($10,000)
Crisis
and Housing
Minist
Stability
ry of
Services
Mercer
($5,000)
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
45
$2,500
10/29/2014
Living
on
Stockto
Healthy for
Senior
n St
Older
Resour
Princet
Adults
ce
on, NJ
Center
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
350
$10,000
9/22/2014
United
on-
Alexand
Leaders of
Blairs
er Road
Tomorrow
town
Princet
(ULOT) at
Center
on, NJ
Trenton
Inc.
08540
Central
High School-
West Campus
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Printma
440
$5,000
10/20/2014
Roving Press
king
River
Center
Road
of New
Branchb
Jersey
urg, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Printma
440
$15,000
10/20/2014
Combat Paper
king
River
NJ
Center
Road
of New
Branchb
Jersey
urg, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
1515
$5,000
7/18/2014
Mental
HOME
Fairmou
Health/
nt
Recovery
Avenue
Treatment
Philade
Services
lphia,
for Adults
PA
Who Have
19130
Experienced
Homelessnes
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
P.O. Box
$8,000
11/17/2014
WaterWays
Headwa
273
Environment
ters
Gladsto
al
Associ
ne, NJ
Education
ation
07934
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
118
$20,000
11/5/2014
Promoting
Valley
Lamingt
Access to
Commun
on Road
STEM and
ity
Branchb
Nursing
Colleg
urg, NJ
Education
e
08876
at Raritan
Founda
Valley
tion
Community
College:
Nursing
Scholarship
s
($10,000),
Galileo
Scholarship
s ($5,000),
Textbooks
($2,500),
STEM
Institute
($2,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Regions
640
$5,000
5/9/2014
Mental
Hospit
Jackson
Health Drug
al
Street
Assistance
Founda
St.
Program
tion
Paul,
MN
55101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Regions
640
$12,500
5/9/2014
Make It OK
Hospit
Jackson
Campaign to
al
Street
fight
Founda
St.
stigma
tion
Paul,
MN
55101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rescue
98
$25,000
9/22/2014
Emergency
Missio
Carroll
Services
n of
Street,
program
Trento
PO Box
n
790
Trenton
, NJ
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Resourc
427
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
e
Homeste
associated
Center
ad Road
with 2014
Of
Hillsbo
Janssen
Somers
rough,
Cares
et,
NJ
volunteer
Inc
08844
activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rider
2083
$20,000
11/5/2014
Urban STEM
Univer
Lawrenc
($10,000),
sity
eville
Janssen
Road
Science and
Lawrenc
Business
eville,
Scholarship
NJ
s ($7,500),
08648
Environment
al
Symposium
($2,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverbe
PO Box
$5,000
7/1/2014
In-SHAPE
nd
2032
Program
Commun
Concord
ity
, NH
Mental
03302-
Health
2032
Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riversi
4 South
$7,500
10/20/2014
Riverside
de
Union
Symphonia
Sympho
Street
Senior
nia
P.O.
Outreach
Inc
Box 650
Program
Lambert
ville,
NJ
08530
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
2789
$5,000
5/27/2014
San
Franci
25th
Francisco
sco
Street
Collaborati
Genera
Suite
ve Court's
l
2028 PO
Behavioral
Hospit
Box
Health
al
410836
Court--Supp
Founda
San
orted
tion
Francis
Employment
co, CA
and
94110
Motivationa
l
Incentives
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Schizop
PO Box
$2,500
8/15/2014
2014
hrenia
941222
National
And
Houston
Conference,
Relate
, TX
``Call to
d
77094-
Action:
Disord
8222
Shattering
ers
Stigma''
Allian
ce Of
Americ
a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$5,000
5/27/2014
12th Annual
Founda
Scotch
SERV
tion,
Road
Recovery NJ
Inc.
Ewing,
conference
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$5,000
5/27/2014
SERV
Founda
Scotch
Foundation
tion,
Road
Scholarship
Inc.
Ewing,
Fund
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shannon
PO Box
$500
8/28/2014
Donation in
Daley
1271 36
lieu of
Memori
Indian
event
al
Run
sponsorship
Fund
Whiteho
to help
use
local area
Station
residents
, NJ
battling
08889
serious
ailments
and their
families
facing
hardship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sharing
1920
$2,000
7/31/2014
Art program
Place
10th
at the 1920
Inc
Avenue
Club
South
P.O.
Box
55945
Birming
ham, AL
35255
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sisters
1201
$1,000
2/3/2014
Blue Ribbon
Networ
Hamilto
sponsor
k of
n
2014 Health
Centra
Street
Summit and
l New
Somerse
Breakfast
Jersey
t, NJ
08873
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sisters
1201
$5,000
8/28/2014
Fundraising
Networ
Hamilto
event
k of
n
support to
Centra
Street
benefit
l New
Somerse
general
Jersey
t, NJ
mission of
08873
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
PO Box
$100
11/12/2014
Memorial
t
3000
donation
County
Somervi
Office
lle, NJ
on
08876-
Aging
1262
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
49
$680
2/3/2014
General
t Home
Brahma
Operating
for
Avenue
Support
Tempor
Bridgew
arily
ater,
Displa
NJ
ced
08807
Childr
en
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
49
$7,500
10/20/2014
Street
t Home
Brahma
Smart--HIV
for
Avenue
Prevention
Tempor
Bridgew
program
arily
ater,
within
Displa
NJ
Somerset
ced
08807
county
Childr
en
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
501 St
$100
1/14/2014
Memorial
Jude's
Jude
Donation
Childr
Place
en's
Memphis
Resear
, TN
ch
38105
Hospit
al
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
One
$15,000
10/20/2014
Providing
Mary
Summit
Food for
Medica
Square,
School-Age
l
Suite
Children
Center
300
Living in
Founda
1717
Poverty:
tion
Langhor
The St.
ne-
Mary
Newtown
Backpacks
Road
for Kids
Langhor
Program
ne, PA
19047
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Stony
31 Titus
$15,000
11/5/2014
StreamWatch:
Brook
Mill
Science in
Millst
Road
the Service
one
Penning
of
Waters
ton, NJ
Conservatio
hed
08534
n
Associ
ation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SWIM
120
$2,000
9/22/2014
Program
Inc.
Findern
Development
e
Project in
Avenue
Somerset
Bridgew
and
ater,
Hunterdon
NJ
Counties--V
08807
olunteer
Training in
aquatic
exercise
for the
disabled,
administrat
ive
training
for
coordinator
s and co-
coordinator
s, and
sensitivity
training
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TASK,
72\1/2\
$25,000
10/14/2014
TASK Meal
Inc.
Escher
Service
Street,
Program
P.O.
Box 872
Trenton
, NJ
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$9,500
10/1/2014
Arts Council
Arts
Robeson
of
Counci
Center
Princeton
l of
for the
Community
Prince
Arts
Outreach
ton
102
programs
Withers
for youth
poon
and seniors
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2020
$2,000
11/17/2014
Art for
Center
Burnt
Special
for
Mills
Needs
Contem
Road
Children
porary
Bedmins
Art
ter, NJ
07921
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
19
$13,500
9/22/2014
Clinically-
Center
Dellwoo
managed,
For
d Lane
residential
Great
Somerse
treatment
Expect
t, NJ
program for
ations
08873
homeless,
pregnant/
parenting
adult women
in
substance
use
recovery,
and their
children
($10,000),
Annual Gala
($3,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
1040
$5,000
7/1/2014
Jail
Edinbu
Waltham
Diversion
rg
Street
Program
Center
Lexingt
on, MA
02421-
8033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
8150 N.
$40,000
11/17/2014
HeartGuide--
Mended
Central
Patient
Hearts
Express
Resource
, Inc.
way,
and
Suite
Visiting
M2248
Program
Dallas,
TX
75206
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
401
$500
1/14/2014
Flash Lite
Mental
Cypress
sponsor
Health
Street
2014 Lite
Center
Manches
Up The Nite
Of
ter, NH
Run/Walk
Greate
03103
for Mental
r
Health 5k
Manche
ster
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
400
$300
8/26/2014
Costs
Pennsb
Pennsbu
associated
ury
ry
with 2014
Societ
Memoria
Janssen
y
l Road
Cares
Morrisv
volunteer
ille,
activity
PA
19067
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
P.O. Box
$5,000
12/3/2014
The
Prince
2063
Princeton
ton
Princet
Festival
Festiv
on, NJ
Intergenera
al
08543
tional
Opera
Workshop
for Teens
and their
Families
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Thomas
101 West
$10,000
11/5/2014
Scholarships
Edison
State
for Nursing
State
Street
Students
Colleg
Trenton
Enrolled in
e
, NJ
Thomas
Founda
08608
Edison
tion
State
College's
Accelerated
Second
Degree BSN
Program.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
PO Box
$1,500
9/22/2014
Financial
Commun
5206
Aid to
ity
Trenton
subsidize
Music
, NJ
tuition
School
08638
costs for
families
qualifying
based on
family size
and income--
music
instruction
s for
students
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
635
$3,500
11/17/2014
Trenton
Educat
South
Education
ion
Clinton
Dance
Dance
Avenue
Institute
Instit
Trenton
program for
ute
, NJ
at-risk
08611
youth in
Trenton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
218 N
$10,000
10/23/2014
Inroads for
Health
Broad
Health:
Team
St
Taking it
Inc
Trenton
to the
, NJ
Streets
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trinity
22
$9,000
11/17/2014
Mental
Counse
Stockto
Health and
ling
n
Wellness
Servic
Street
Programs
es
Trinity
Counsel
ing
Service
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Truist/
Departme
$32,261
12/12/2014
Truist
Fronts
nt
processing
tream,
CH16952
fee for
Inc.
Palatin
total 2014
e, IL
United Way
60055-
Campaign
6952
(fee
associated
with NJ
companies)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Twiligh
P.O. Box
$5,000
11/17/2014
Simple Needs
t Wish
1042 11
Wish
Founda
Duane
Granting
tion
Road
Program
Doylest
Expansion
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
UIH
4 North
$7,500
10/14/2014
Community of
Family
Broad
Health for
Partne
Street
Men
rs
2nd
Floor
Trenton
, NJ
08618-
4408
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
9-25
$9,000
8/26/2014
Princeton
Negro
Alling
Committee
Colleg
St.
of UNCF
e Fund
Second
Scholarship
Floor
-Scholarshi
Newark,
p support
NJ
for
07102
deserving
STEM
students in
Mercer or
Somerset
Counties
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
P.O. Box
$607,875
12/12/2014
Company
Way
418607
match to
Worldw
Boston,
employee
ide
MA
United Way
02241-
campaign
8607
for NJ
based
commercial
companies
of Janssen
Pharmaceuti
cal
Companies
of Johnson
& Johnson
less Truist
processing
fee
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
US Pain
670
$7,500
12/4/2014
INvisible
Founda
newfiel
Project
tion
d
street
suite b
middlet
own, CT
06457
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Valeo
5401 SW
$5,000
7/18/2014
Services for
Behavi
7th
Employment
oral
Street
Success
Health
Topeka,
Program
Care
KS
serving
Inc
66606
consumers
with
Schizophren
ia and
other
severe
mental
illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Volunte
P.O. Box
$8,500
10/1/2014
SkillsConnec
er
615
t skills
Connec
Princet
based
t
on, NJ
community
08542
volunteer
program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
West
120
$2,000
7/1/2014
Young Adults
Bergen
Chestnu
with
Mental
t
Schizophren
Health
Street
ia Young
care
Ridgewo
Adult Track
od, NJ
of the
07450-
Partial
2500
Care
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
West
120
$300
8/4/2014
Cost
Bergen
Chestnu
associated
Mental
t
with 2014
Health
Street
Janssen
care
Ridgewo
Cares
od, NJ
Volunteer
07450-
Activity
2500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
West
PO Box
$5,000
9/22/2014
STEM
Windso
280
Excellence
r
West
in
Plains
Windsor
Education
boro
, NJ
Grant
Educat
08550-
Program
ion
0280
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Womansp
1530
$2,500
10/20/2014
Emergency
ace
Brunswi
Domestic
ck
Violence
Avenue
Shelter
Lawrenc
program
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Wounded
4899
$100
5/16/2014
Memorial
Warrio
Belfort
Donation
r
Road
Projec
Suite
t
300
Jackson
ville,
FL
32256
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Wounded
4899
$75
12/3/2014
Employee
Warrio
Belfort
directed
r
Road
donation in
Projec
Suite
lieu of
t
300
company
Jackson
holiday
ville,
gift
FL
32256
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
YMCA of
431
$7,500
12/10/2014
The YMCA of
Trento
Penning
Trenton's
n
ton
Stars of
Avenue
Science
Trenton
Program
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Young
349 W.
$3,500
10/20/2014
College
Schola
State
Preparatory
rs'
St
Program
Instit
Trenton
ute
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
YWCA
59 Paul
$3,000
11/17/2014
Breast
Prince
Robeson
Cancer
ton
Place
Resource
Princet
Center--Wom
on, NJ
en of
08540
Wisdom
(WOW)
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$490,904
3/19/2014
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation
Founda
n
for
tion
Avenue
Humanitaria
Stamfor
n Relief in
d, CT
the U.S.,
06902
El
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Nicaragua,
Cambodia,
Pakistan,
and Peru.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$834,365
3/19/2014
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation
Founda
n
for
tion
Avenue
Humanitaria
Stamfor
n Relief in
d, CT
Guatemala,
06902
El
Salvador,
Honduras,
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$383,214
10/23/2014
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation in
Founda
n Ave
support of
tion
Stamfor
Disaster
d, CT
Response
06902
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$233,871
12/3/2014
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Malawi,
Tanzania,
West Bank,
Armenia,
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Nicaragua,
Peru,
Tanzania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$100,985
12/3/2014
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Malawi,
Tanzania,
Armenia,
Dominican
Republic,
Colombia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$825,981
11/6/2014
Product
res
Hamilto
Donations
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
Humanitaria
d, CT
n Aid for
06902
Armenia,
Dominican
Republic,
Gaza,
Pakistan,
West Bank
and
Tanzania.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$2,389,565
8/4/2014
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation in
Founda
n Ave
support of
tion
Stamfor
Humanitan
d, CT
Aid for the
06902
U.S.,
Afghanistan
,
Bangladesh,
Pakistan,
and Peru.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$5,279
12/3/2014
Pharmaceutic
c
Elevent
al Product
Medica
h
Donation
l
Street
for
Missio
Long
Humanitaria
n
Island
n Aid in
Board
City,
Haiti
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$665,263
3/19/2014
Product
Relief
Patera
Donation to
Intern
Lane
support
ationa
Santa
Humanitaria
l
Barbara
n Relief in
, CA
Haiti,
93117
Dominican
Republic,
Honduras,
Paraguay,
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$614,185
3/19/2014
Product
Relief
Patera
Donation to
Intern
Lane
support
ationa
Santa
Humanitaria
l
Barbara
n Relief in
, CA
Haiti,
93117
Dominican
Republic,
and
Paraguay.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$116,610
2/27/2014
Humanitarian
Relief
Patera
Aid for
Intern
Lane
Obstetric
ationa
Santa
Fistula
l
Barbara
program.
, CA
93117
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$322,359
11/6/2014
Humanitarian
Relief
Patera
Aid for
Intern
Lane
Ghana,
ationa
Santa
Paraguay,
l
Barbara
and Peru.
, CA
93117
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$2,354,643
12/3/2014
Pharmaceutic
Relief
Patera
al Product
Intern
Lane
Donation
ationa
Santa
for
l
Barbara
Disaster
, CA
Response
93117
and/or
Humanitaria
n Aid in
Dominican
Republic,
Guatemala,
Nicaragua,
Peru,
Panama,
Paraguay
and United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$30,164
12/3/2014
Pharmaceutic
Relief
Patera
al Product
Intern
Lane
Donation
ationa
Santa
for
l
Barbara
Humanitaria
, CA
n Aid in
93117
Nicaragua,
Peru
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$2,093,905
8/5/2014
Humanitarian
Relief
Patera
Aid for
Intern
Lane
Haiti,
ationa
Santa
Paraguay,
l
Barbara
and U.S.
, CA
93117
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$72,493
3/19/2014
Product
to
Pacific
Donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
Humanitaria
ationa
City,
n Relief in
l
KS
Papua New
66102
Guinea and
Cameroon.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$33,156
12/18/2014
Pharmaceutic
to
Pacific
al Product
Heart
Avenue
donation
Intern
Kansas
for Ebola
ationa
City,
Treatment
l
KS
Unit in
66102
Liberia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$46,435
12/3/2014
Pharmaceutic
to
Pacific
al Product
Heart
Avenue
donation
Intern
Kansas
for
ationa
City,
humanitaria
l
KS
n relief in
66102
Papua New
Guinea
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$380,566,479
3/15/2014
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$87,387,455
12/15/2014
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$74,577,911
9/15/2014
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$772,428
1/9/2014
Donation for
Intern
Glynco
Medical
ationa
Parkway
Mission
l
Brunswi
Pack Plus
ck, GA
Program
31525
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$26,142
1/9/2014
Donation for
Intern
Glynco
the Medical
ationa
Parkway
Mission
l
Brunswi
Pack Plus
ck, GA
Program
31525
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$26,394
12/3/2014
Pharmaceutic
Intern
Glynco
al Product
ationa
Parkway
Donation to
l
Brunswi
support the
ck, GA
Medical
31525
Mission
Pack Plus
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Mercy
15862
$8,397
3/19/2014
Product
Ships
State
Donation in
Intern
Highway
support of
ationa
110
Humanitaria
l
North
n Relief in
Operat
Lindale
West
ions
, TX
Africa.
Center
75771
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
New
1
$13,297
8/4/2014
Product
Jersey
Riversi
Donation.
Academ
de
y of
Drive
Aquati
Camden,
c
NJ
Scienc
08103-
es
1037
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Project
255
$149,962
3/19/2014
Product
Hope
Carter
Donation in
Hall
support of
Lane
Humanitaria
Millwoo
n Relief in
d, VA
Kosovo,
22646
Macedonia,
and
Tajikistan.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Project
255
$768,245
3/10/2014
Product
Hope
Carter
Donation
Hall
for
Lane
Humanitaria
Millwoo
n Relief in
d, VA
Tajikistan.
22646
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Project
255
$821,994
3/10/2014
Product
Hope
Carter
Donation
Hall
for
Lane
Humanitaria
Millwoo
n Aid in
d, VA
Tajikistan.
22646
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similar payments to the same organization may appear in this report as
contributions may be distributed in multiple payments.
Janssen Therapeutics, Division of Janssen Products, LP, Monetary and
Product Contributions to U.S.-based Charitable Organizations Full Year
2014
(Payments made from January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014)--Amended March
19, 2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aboundi
South
$1,500
3/24/2014
HEALTHY U! .
ng
Bouleva
. . HEALTHY
Prospe
rd
US!
rty
Dallas,
TX
75215
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Acercam
827
$7,000
6/16/2014
ContraSIDA
iento
Wildwoo
(Against
Hispan
d
AIDS)
o de
Avenue
Caroli
Suite
na del
200
Sur
Columbi
a, SC
29203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aid for
515
$5,000
11/7/2014
New York
AIDS
Greenwi
Immigrant
Intern
ch
AIDS Link
ationa
Street
Program
l
New
York,
NY
10013
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
75 Amory
$10,000
11/7/2014
Viral
Action
Street
Hepatitis
Commit
Boston,
Access
tee
MA
Project
02119
(VHAP)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
75 Amory
$15,000
3/5/2014
Mental
Action
Street
Health
Commit
Boston,
Program/
tee
MA
Charitable
02119
Contributio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aids
575
$20,000
7/9/2014
HIV Health
Commun
Eighth
Literacy
ity
Avenue
Program
Resear
Suite
(HHLP)
ch
502 New
Initia
York,
tive
NY
of
10018
Americ
a
(ACRIA
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
6260
$4,500
10/27/2014
Wall Talk
Founda
Westpar
HIV/
tion
k Drive
Hepatitis C
Housto
Houston
Co-
n
, TX
Infection
77057
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
411
$30,000
7/10/2014
Road to
Founda
South
Health:
tion
Wells
Promoting
of
Street
Successful
Chicag
Suite
Implementat
o
300
ion of
Chicago
Health Care
, IL
Reform for
60607
People
Living with
HIV/AIDS in
Illinois
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
7215
$5,000
12/15/2014
Case
Servic
Cameron
Management
e of
Road
Austin
Austin,
TX
78752
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
17982
$3,000
8/18/2014
HIV Medical
Servic
Sky
Case
es
Park
Management
Center
Circle
of
Irvine,
Orange
CA
County
92614
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
7215
$5,000
4/4/2014
Case
Servic
Cameron
Management
es of
Road
Program
Austin
Austin,
TX
78752
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
1424 K
$250,000
11/10/2014
Access to
United
Street,
Care (A2C)
NW
Initiative
Washing
ton, DC
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Allianc
825
$5,000
7/8/2014
Group Home
e for
Colorad
Care for
Housin
o
Homeless
g and
Bouleva
Persons
Healin
rd
with HIV/
g
Suite
AIDS at
100 Los
Soldano
Angeles
House and
, CA
Casa de
90041
Corazon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bay
701 Oak
$2,400
1/17/2014
Youth
Area
Street
Engagement
Young
San
Program/
Positi
Francis
Charitable
ves
co, CA
contributio
94117
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bay
701 Oak
$5,000
11/7/2014
Patient Peer
Area
Street
Navigator
Young
San
Positi
Francis
ves
co, CA
94117
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bienest
5326 E
$15,000
11/5/2014
General
ar
Beverly
Organizatio
Human
Road
nal Support
Servic
Los
es Inc
Angeles
, CA
90022
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Caring
19591 S.
$20,000
8/18/2014
Patients
Ambass
Alberta
CHOICES--Ch
adors
Beaverc
anging
reek,
Hepatitis
OR
through
97004
Outreach,
Information
,
Comprehensi
ve
Education,
and Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
3009
$5,000
11/7/2014
The Home
c
Lake
Place
Charit
Brook
ies of
Bouleva
East
rd
Tennes
Knoxvil
see
le, TN
37909
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Chicago
1925
$5,000
2/21/2014
Connect2Care
House
North
(C2C) /
and
Clybour
Charitable
Social
n Suite
Contributio
Servic
401
n
e
Chicago
Agency
, IL
60614
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Chicago
1925
$10,000
12/15/2014
Connect2Care
House
North
and
Clybour
Social
n Suite
Servic
401
e
Chicago
Agency
, IL
60614
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Christi
2440
$15,000
12/15/2014
CHANGE for
e's
Third
Women
Place
Avenue
Program
San
Diego,
CA
92101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
677 Ala
$3,000
3/24/2014
HIV and Hep
ty
Moana
C
Health
Bouleva
Prevention
Outrea
rd
in Drug-
ch
Suite
Using
Work
226
Community/
to
Honolul
Charitable
Preven
u, HI
Contributio
t AIDS
96813
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Desert
1695 N.
$5,000
1/17/2014
Case
Aids
Sunrise
Management/
Projec
Way
Charitable
t
Palm
Contributio
Springs
n
, CA
92262
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fund
121
$25,000
11/5/2014
Get SMART
For
Avenue
About
The
of the
Hepatitis C
City
America
of New
s 6th
York
Floor
Inc
New
York,
NY
10013
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gay
446 West
$15,000
11/7/2014
Community
Men's
33rd
Education
Health
Street
and
Crisis
New
Treatment
York,
as
NY
Prevention
10001
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HARM
South
$50,000
4/18/2014
Hepatitis C
Reduct
Bouleva
Innovations
ion
rd
Network/
Coalit
Dallas,
Charitbale
ion
TX
Contributio
75215
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Health
1211
$75,000
3/17/2014
``C Change''
Federa
Chestnu
Program
tion
t
of
Street
Philad
Suite
elphia
801
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hep C
601
$15,000
6/17/2014
HepC
Allian
Busines
Education
ce
s Loop
and
70 West
Testing--Th
Columbi
e Kansas
a, MO
Project
65203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hep C
1325
$10,000
3/14/2014
Expanding
Connec
South
Efforts to
tion
Colorad
Locate
o
Undiagnosed
Bouleva
HCV
rd
Patients
Suite
and Link to
302
Care
Denver,
CO
80222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hepatit
35 East
$25,000
7/25/2014
The
is C
38th
Hepatitis C
Mentor
Street
Patient
and
New
Assistance
Suppor
York,
Program
t
NY
Group,
10016
Inc
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HIV
100
$5,000
3/12/2014
The
Aids
Edgewoo
EmpowerLink
Empowe
d
Program
rment
Avenue
Resour
NE
ce
Suite
Center
1020
for
Atlanta
Young
, GA
Women,
30303-
Inc.
3065
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Housing
57
$5,000
11/13/2014
The
Works
Willoug
Undetectabl
hby
es--HIV
Street
Viral
Brookly
Suppression
n, NY
Initiative
11201
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Howard
4025 N.
$10,000
7/25/2014
Hepatitis C
Brown
Sherida
Medical
Health
n
Management
Center
Street
and Support
Chicago
for People
, IL
who Inject
60613
Drugs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Iris
2348
$7,500
2/21/2014
Hepatitis C
House
Adam
Testing,
Clayton
Education
Powell
and
Jr
Connection
Bouleva
to Care
rd New
programs/
York,
Charitbale
NY
Contributio
10030
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
J&J
One
$11,200,000
12/19/2014
Global
Family
Johnson
Public
of
&
Health
Compan
Johnson
programs in
ies
Plaza,
South
Contri
New
Africa and
bution
Brunswi
Uganda (HIV
s Fund
ck, NJ
and TB)
08933
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Josephs
1730
$5,000
3/13/2014
Care and
House
Lanier
Intensive
Place
Treatment
NW
Adherence
Washing
Support for
ton, DC
People with
20009
HIV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kansas
3515
$5,000
12/15/2014
Reducing
City
Broadwa
Risks
Free
y
through
Health
Kansas
Health
Clinic
City,
Education
MO
64111
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Legacy
4054
$5,000
10/27/2014
Mission
Counse
McKinne
Support
ling
y
Legacy
Center
Avenue
Counseling
Dallas,
Center
TX
75204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Maine
35
$5,000
6/23/2014
Harm
Genera
Medical
Reduction
l
Center
Program:
Health
Parkway
HIV and HCV
Augusta
Prevention
, ME
04330
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Making
60 Clif
$5,000
12/15/2014
Imani Park
It
Prescod
Transitiona
Possib
Lane
l Housing
e to
Edison,
Program
End
NJ
Homele
08817
ssness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minorit
5149
$7,500
2/21/2014
``The Bridge
y AIDS
West
Program''
Projec
Jeffers
t
on
Blvd.
Los
Angeles
, CA
90016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAESM,
2140
$5,000
6/16/2014
The D.C.
Inc.
Martin
Project
Luther
King Jr
Drive
Atlanta
, GA
30310
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nashvil
633
$5,000
5/13/2014
Outreach,
le
Thompso
Testing,
CARES
n Lane
Linkage to
Nashvil
Care, and
le, TN
Supportive
37204
Services
for young
AA gay/
bisexual or
other MSM
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2140
$7,000
12/15/2014
Project
l AIDS
Martin
Impact
Educat
Luther
ion
King
and
Jr. SW
Servic
Atlanta
es for
, GA
Minori
30310
ties
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
580
$175,000
4/18/2014
NATAP HIV,
l AIDS
Broadwa
HCV/HIV
Treatm
y Suite
Coinfetion
ent
1010
and Hep C
Advoca
New
Care and
cy
York,
Treatment
Projec
NY
Education/
t
10012
Information
(NATAP
and Policy/
)
Advocacy
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
444
$125,000
3/17/2014
Affordable
l
North
Care Act
Allian
Capitol
(ACA),
ce of
Street,
Viral
State
NW
Hepatitis,
and
Suite
and Ryan
Territ
339
White/ADAP
orial
Washing
Public
AIDS
ton, DC
Policy and
Direct
20001
Technical
ors
Assistance
Projects/
Charitable
Contributio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
444
$150,000
12/18/2014
2015
l
North
Affordable
Allian
Capitol
Care Act
ce of
Street,
(ACA),
State
NW
Viral
and
Suite
Hepatitis,
Territ
339
and Ryan
orial
Washing
White/ADAP
AIDS
ton, DC
Direct
20001
ors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
44 South
$5,000
8/7/2014
Community
Jersey
Street,
Based
AIDS
Morrist
Services
Servic
own NJ
es
07960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
North
5 Center
$10,000
2/3/2014
Living Well
Shore
Street
with
Health
Glouces
Hepatitis C
Projec
ter, MA
t,
01930
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nova
2946
$5,000
6/23/2014
En Direccion
Salud
Sleepyh
Positiva
ollow
Spanish-
Road
Speaking
Suite
HIV/AIDS
4A
Support
Falls
Group
Church,
VA
22044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
OPAT
1192
$2,500
3/12/2014
Infectious
Outcom
Smith
Disease
es
Street
Hepatitis C
Regist
Honolul
Virus (HCV)
ry
u, HI
Education,
96817
Screening,
Pre/Post
Education
and Linkage
to Care
2014-2015 /
Charitable
Contributio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Patient
421
$750,000
12/16/2014
Patient
Advoca
Butler
Advocate
te
Farm
Foundation'
Founda
Road
s Co-Pay
tion
Hampton
Relief
, VA
(CPR)
23666
Program
Hepatitis C
Silo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Patient
421
$5,000,000
1/14/2014
Patient
Advoca
Butler
Advocate
te
Farm
Foundation'
Founda
Road
s Co-Pay
tion
Hampton
Relief
, VA
(CPR)
23666
Program-
Hepatitis C
Silo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Philade
1233
$10,000
7/9/2014
2014 AIDS
lphia
Locust
Education
FIGHT
Street
Month
3rd
Floor
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$25,000
6/25/2014
Think Tank
Inform
Ninth
to Provide
Street
Technical
San
Assistance
Francis
to Ten
co, CA
Jurisdictio
94103
ns on the
Use of HIV
Surveillanc
e to
Support
Linkage and
Retention
in Care and
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$40,000
7/1/2014
The Support
Inform
Ninth
Partnership
Street
San
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$40,000
7/4/2014
Mission
Inform
Ninth
Support for
Street
Project
San
Inform /
Francis
Charitable
co, CA
Contributio
94103
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$25,000
12/15/2014
Educational
Inform
Ninth
and Policy
Street
Activities
San
to Support
Francis
Hepatitis C
co, CA
Care
94103
Linkage
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
2929 NE
$2,000
3/12/2014
Many Men,
Link
6
Many Voices
of
Avenue
(3MV) and
South
Wilton
Many Women,
Florid
Manors,
Many Voices
a,
FL
(3WV)
Inc.
33334
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
530 W
$5,000
11/13/2014
Transitional
Transi
Street
Housing
tions
Road
Warmins
ter, PA
18974
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Provide
1150
$40,000
7/4/2014
Providence
nce
Varnum
Hepatitis C
Health
St. NE
Program
Founda
Washing
tion
ton, DC
20721
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Ryan
1775 T
$10,000
4/25/2014
HEPATITIS:
White
Street
Education,
CARE
NW
Advocacy
Act
Washing
and
Title
ton, DC
Leadership
II
20009
(HEAL)
Commun
ity
AIDS
Nation
al
Networ
k (T
II
CANN)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
1035
$30,000
8/25/2014
The
Franci
Market
Stonewall
sco
Street
Project
AIDS
San
Founda
Francis
tion
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Southwe
300
$5,000
3/1/2014
HIV Care in
st
Southwe
a Safety
Boulev
st
Net Clinic/
ard
Bouleva
Charitable
Family
rd
Contributio
Health
Kansas
n
Care,
City,
Inc
KS
66103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
605 W
$5,000
1/28/2014
Asian
Servic
Olympic
Pacific
e for
Bouleva
AIDS
Groups
rd
Interventio
, Inc.
Suite
n Team
600 Los
(APAIT)
Angeles
Charitable
, CA
Contributio
90015
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
17 Davis
$60,000
3/5/2014
Florida
AIDS
Bouleva
Hepatitis
Instit
rd
Education
ute
Suite
and
403
Advocacy
Tampa,
Network
FL
(FHEAN) and
33606
health web
portal
(www.HepInf
oNow.org) /
Charitable
Contributio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
17 Davis
$50,000
7/9/2014
Protecting
AIDS
Bouleva
and
Instit
rd
enhancing
ute
Suite
the
403
Hepatitis C
Tampa,
and the HIV/
FL
AIDS
33606
national
and state
programs
and
policies in
the U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
121
$40,000
4/18/2014
The SHE
Fund
Avenue
Initiative
for
of the
the
America
City
s 6th
of New
Floor
York
New
York,
NY
10013
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
330
$15,000
7/22/2014
The Well
Well
Grace
Project's
Projec
Glen
Online
t
Nellysf
Resources
ord, VA
for Women
22958
and HIV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Tides
835
$20,000
11/25/2014
Website:
Center
Solano
HCVAdvocate
Street
West
Sacrame
nto, CA
95605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TPA
5537 N
$20,000
7/9/2014
Total Care
Networ
Broadwa
Portal
k
y
Incorp
Chicago
orated
, IL
-Test
60640
Positi
ve
Aware
Networ
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Treatme
261 5th
$40,000
6/17/2014
Case Studies
nt
Avenue
Project
Action
Suite
Group
2110
(TAG)
New
York,
NY10016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Univers
c/o UC
$15,000
3/5/2014
``Linkage To
ity of
San
Care, After
Califo
Diego
HIV
rnia,
AIDS
Testing''/
San
Researc
Charitable
Diego
h
Contributio
Institu
n
te 9500
Gilman
Drive
#0716
La
Jolla,
CA
92093-
0716
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Victory
965
$10,000
2/3/2014
Prevention,
Progra
Massach
Education,
ms,
usetts
and Health
Inc.
Avenue
Connections
Boston,
Services
MA
for People
02118
with HIV/
AIDS.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
VT
187
$5,000
3/13/2014
HIV Care and
Commit
Saint
Support
tee
Paul
Program
For
Street
Across
AIDS
Burling
Vermont
Resour
ton, VT
ces
05401
Educ
and
Servic
es
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Wright
8101
$5,000
3/3/2014
Case
House
Cameron
Management
Wellne
Road
for HIV/HCV
ss
Suite
Clients
Center
105
Austin,
TX
78754
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen has also made financial donations to independent charitable
foundations that assist patients who are underinsured and in financial
need with treatment-related expenses. In keeping with our donor
agreements and applicable regulatory guidance, we will only disclose
aggregate data on our charitable giving and do not publicize
information on donations to specific foundations and disease states.
In 2014, we contributed approximately $5.8 million in donations to
independent charitable foundations, enabling them to provide
assistance with medication-related copays to patients with infectious
diseases.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$5,615,443
3/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$9,794,392
6/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$26,177,458
9/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$58,375,988
12/15/2013
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen Biotech, Inc. Monetary and Product Contributions to U.S.-based
Charitable Organizations Full Year 2015
(Payments made from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2015)--Amended on
February 24, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
100
4631
$2,000
7/17/2015
The 100
Black
Delmar
Black Men
Men of
St.
of
Metrop
Louis,
Metropolita
olitan
Missour
n St. Louis
St.
i 63108
Community
Louis
Health Day
Featuring
Prostate
Cancer Run/
Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
100
4631
$1,800
12/23/2015
The 100
Black
Delmar
Black Men
Men of
St.
of
Metrop
Louis,
Metropolita
olitan
Missour
n St. Louis
St.
i 63108
Community
Louis
Health Day
Featuring
Prostate
Cancer Run/
Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Achieve
104
$5,625
12/4/2015
Achieve Now:
Now
Gladsto
Bringing
ne
Students Up
Street
to Grade
Philade
Level
lphia,
Reading
PA
19148
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
Manasqua
$10,000
4/8/2015
Road To
n
n, NJ
Recovery
Cancer
08736
Program
Societ
y,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
Manasqua
$1,000
5/27/2015
2015 Run for
n
n, NJ
Dad
Cancer
08736
Societ
y,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1626
$1,000
7/8/2015
American
n
Locust
Cancer
Cancer
Street
Society,
Societ
Philade
Relay For
y,
lphia,
Life of the
Inc.
PA
Wissahickon
19103
Valley,
Ambler, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
National
$225,000
6/5/2015
Sponsorship
is
Office
of 117
Founda
1330 W.
Jingle Bell
tion
Peachtr
Run events,
ee St.,
reaching
N.W.
more than
Atlanta
100,000
, GA
participant
30309
s and
volunteers,
across the
country
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
1817
$2,000
6/4/2015
The
is
Central
Community
Servic
Avenue
Arthritis
es
Suite
Project of
211
Charlotte,
Charlot
Mecklenburg
te, NC
County,
28205
North
Carolina
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
275
$2,000
7/3/2015
Seventh
Care,
Seventh
Annual
Inc.
Avenue
Healing
New
Hearts
York,
Family
NY
Bereavement
10001
Camp
Milford, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
3
$5,000
12/2/2015
Oncology
Suppor
Crossro
Support
t
ads
Groups
Commun
Drive
ity
Bedmins
Centra
ter, NJ
l New
07921
Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$1,000
7/10/2015
Paws 4 Life
Suppor
Road PO
Dog Walk,
t
Box
Warminster
Commun
3187
PA
ity of
Warmins
Philad
ter, PA
elphia
18974
(forme
rly
Gilda'
s Club
Bucks/
Mont
Counti
es)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$2,500
10/23/2015
Celebration
Suppor
Road PO
of Hope: A
t
Box
Free, Full-
Commun
3187
Day,
ity of
Warmins
Educational
Philad
ter, PA
and
elphia
18974
Inspiration
(forme
al
rly
Conference
Gilda'
for Greater
s Club
Philadelphi
Bucks/
a-Area
Mont
Cancer
Counti
Patients,
es)
Survivors,
and
Caregivers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
1900
$2,000
7/9/2015
Project for
for
Cherry
Medically
Child
Street
Needy
Advoca
Philade
Children
tes
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
6380
$7,500
3/17/2015
Children's
ns
Flank
Cancer
Cancer
Drive,
Recovery
Recove
Suite
Foundation'
ry
400
s Bear-Able
Founda
Harrisb
Gift
tion
urg, PA
Program:
17112
administere
d to the
Children's
Hospital of
Philadelphi
a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
6380
$7,500
12/22/2015
Bear-Able
ns
Flank
Gifts
Cancer
Drive,
program
Recove
Suite
ry
400
Founda
Harrisb
tion
urg, PA
17112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
The
$1,000
12/23/2015
General
n's
Childre
Operating
Hospit
n's
Support for
al of
Hospita
The Center
Philad
l of
for
elphia
Philade
Pediatric
Founda
lphia
Inflammator
tion
Foundat
y Bowel
ion
Disease
Attn:
Staci
Carney,
Associa
te
Directo
r,
Corpora
te and
Foundat
ion
Relatio
ns 100
Penn
Square
East
8th
Floor,
Suite
8050
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
The
$12,000
4/8/2016
Family Care
n's
Childre
Binder
Hospit
n's
Program at
al of
Hospita
The
Philad
l of
Children's
elphia
Philade
Hospital of
Founda
lphia
Philadelphi
tion
Foundat
a
ion
Philadelphi
Attn:
a, PA
Staci
Carney,
Associa
te
Directo
r,
Corpora
te and
Foundat
ion
Relatio
ns 100
Penn
Square
East
8th
Floor,
Suite
8050
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
The
$6,000
4/8/2016
6th Annual
n's
Childre
Walk for
Hospit
n's
Hope
al of
Hospita
benefiting
Philad
l of
IBD
elphia
Philade
research at
Founda
lphia
The
tion
Foundat
Children's
ion
Hospital of
Attn:
Philadelphi
Staci
a, Veterans
Carney,
Park,
Associa
Hamilton,
te
NJ
Directo
r,
Corpora
te and
Foundat
ion
Relatio
ns 100
Penn
Square
East
8th
Floor,
Suite
8050
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
300B
$20,000
12/8/2015
Free Medical
ty
Lawrenc
and Dental
Volunt
e Drive
Care to
eers
West
Uninsured,
in
Chester
Low-Income
Medici
, PA
Individuals
ne
19380
and
Families
Who Live or
Work in
Chester
County.
Community
Volunteers
in Medicine
is located
in West
Chester, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohns
733
$135,000
6/5/2015
CCFA Take
and
Third
Steps Walk/
Coliti
Avenue
Run
s
Suite
Founda
510 New
tion
York,
of
NY
Americ
10017
a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohn's
733
$18,000
7/7/2015
Camp Oasis--
and
Third
Program is
Coliti
Avenue
hosted at
s
Suite
12 campsite
Founda
510 New
locations
tion
York,
across the
of
NY
country
Americ
10017
a,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
236
$21,500
3/20/2015
Delaware
e
Randell
Valley
Valley
Hall
Science
Scienc
3141
Fairs
e
Chestnu
Philadelphi
Fairs,
t
a, PA
Inc.
Street
Philade
lphia,
PA
19104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
2001
$250,000
12/21/2015
Family Reach
Reach
Route
Programmati
Founda
46,
c Support
tion
Suite
310
Parsipp
any, NJ
07054
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
2001
$20,000
12/21/2015
Family Reach
Reach
Route
Foundation
Founda
46,
General
tion
Suite
Support
310
Parsipp
any, NJ
07054
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
113 West
$3,000
12/14/2015
Homelessness
Associ
Chestnu
to
ation
t
Independenc
For
Street
e
Care
West
Initiative
and
Chester
Protec
, PA
tion
19380
Of
Childr
en
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
815 West
$825
9/23/2015
Employee
of the
7th
directed
Queen
Street
donation in
City
Plainfi
Lieu of
Academ
eld, NJ
holiday
y
07063
gift
Charte
r
School
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
Alpharet
$1,500
8/12/2015
Georgia
Prosta
ta, GA
Prostate
te
30022
Cancer Free
Cancer
Screening
Coalit
Event
ion,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
Alpharet
$1,700
12/23/2015
Georgia
Prosta
ta, GA
Prostate
te
30022
Cancer Free
Cancer
Screening
Coalit
Event
ion,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
330
$3,000
12/14/2015
GSEP STEM
Scouts
Manor
Programming
of
Road
Southe
Miquon,
astern
PA
Pennsy
19444
lvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
501 S.
$1,250
5/27/2015
16th Annual
Scouts
College
Women of
of the
Avenue
Distinction
Chesap
Newark,
Program and
eake
DE
Celebration
Bay
19713
Counci
l,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Great
PO Box
$5,000
12/14/2015
GVNC
Valley
82 4251
Environment
Nature
State
al
Center
Road
Education
Devault
Programs
, PA
with
19432
Schools-
Water
Quality,
Pond,
Stream and
Habitat
Study
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Green
1368
$15,000
12/8/2015
Watershed
Valley
Prizer
Education
s
Road
Programs
Associ
Pottsto
ation
wn, PA
19465
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
P.O. Box
$1,000
10/27/2015
Habitat for
for
1452
Humanity of
Humani
621
Chester
ty of
Lumber
County
Cheste
Street
r
Coatesv
County
ille,
, Inc.
PA
19320
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
1829 N.
$5,000
12/14/2015
Habitat for
For
19th
Humanity
Humani
Street
Philadelphi
ty
Philade
a
Philad
lphia,
Homeownersh
elphia
PA
ip Program
, Inc.
19121
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hatboro- 229
$25,000
12/2/2015
STEM
Horsha
Meeting
Programs
m
house
for Hatboro-
Educat
Road
Horsham
ional
Horsham
Students
Founda
, PA
tion
19044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hope
129
$300
9/21/2015
Costs
for
Yerger
associated
Kids,
Road
with 2015
Inc.
Schwenk
Janssen
sville,
Cares
PA
Volunteer
19473
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kids
26071
$3,000
9/4/2015
Support
Connec
Merit
Groups for
ted
Circle,
Children of
#103
Cancer
Laguna
Patients
Hills,
Costa Mesa,
CA
Ca Brea, Ca
92653-
Santa Ana,
7016
Ca Laguna
Hills, Ca
La Jolla,
Ca
Temecula,
Ca
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Metropo
2323
$20,000
12/7/2015
Medically
litan
Ranstea
Appropriate
Area
d
Meals for
Neighb
Street
People with
orhood
Philade
Critical
Nutrit
lphia,
Illnesses
ion
PA
Allian
19103
ce
(MANNA
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Montgom
340
$10,000
12/15/2015
Bridge to
ery
DeKalb
Employment
County
Pike
Program
Commun
Blue
Enhancement
ity
Bell,
through
Colleg
PA
Strategies
e
19422
for Success
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Movembe
Culver
$5,000
5/22/2015
Movember is
r
City,
a national
Founda
CA
US campaign
tion
90232
where we
ask men to
grow
moustaches
to raise
awareness
and funds
for men's
health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
51 Locus
$5,000
7/10/2015
2015 MMRF
e
Avenue
Team for
Myelom
Suite
Cures: New
a
201
York City
Resear
Norwalk
5K Walk/Run
ch
, CT
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
51 Locus
$5,000
7/10/2015
2015 MMRF
e
Avenue
Team for
Myelom
Suite
Cures:
a
201
Philadelphi
Resear
Norwalk
a 5K Walk/
ch
, CT
Run
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
383 Main
$10,000
7/13/2015
MMRF Team
e
Avenue
for Cures
Myelom
5th
Sponsor--NY
a
Floor
C Marathon,
Resear
Norwalk
(NY, NY)
ch
, CT
and Fenway
Founda
06851
Spartan
tion
Race
(Boston, MA
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
4719
$2,500
4/8/2015
17th Annual
l
Reed
Break the
Ovaria
Road
Silence on
n
#150
Ovarian
Cancer
Holicon
Cancer
Coalit
g, PA
Philadelphi
ion--C
18928
a, PA
entral
Ohio
Chapte
r
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
6600 SW
$75,000
4/14/2015
2015 Team
l
02nd
NPF Walk--
Psoria
Avenue,
National
sis
Ste.
(19 U.S.
Founda
300
cities)
tion
Portlan
d, OR
97223
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Pennypa
7005
$300
9/21/2015
Costs
ck
Sheaff
associated
Farm
Lane
with 2015
and
Fort
Janssen
Educat
Washing
Cares
ion
ton, PA
Volunteer
Center
19034
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
1515
$1,000
12/2/2015
Mental
HOME
Fairmou
Health and
nt
Recovery
Avenue
Services
Philade
for
lphia,
Individuals
PA
Who Have
19130
Experienced
Homelessnes
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Prostat
7009 S.
$30,000
7/13/2015
Prostate
e
Potomac
Cancer
Cancer
Street
Disparities
Educat
Suite
Outreach
ion
125
Program--A
Counci
Centenn
national,
l
ial, CO
ten city
80112
event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Prostat
7009 S.
$20,000
12/23/2015
Prostate
e
Potomac
Cancer
Cancer
Street
Disparities
Educat
Suite
Outreach
ion
125
Program--A
Counci
Centenn
national,
l
ial, CO
ten city
80112
event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rebuild
P.O. Box
$6,000
3/17/2015
House Build
ing
42752
Togeth
Philade
er
lphia,
Philad
PA
elphia
19101-
2752
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
925
$10,000
3/20/2015
RSVP's My
and
Harvest
Free Tutor
Senior
Drive,
(MFT) and
Volunt
Suite
Family
eer
100
Literacy
Progra
Blue
Volunteer
m of
Bell,
Program
Montgo
PA
(FLVP)
mery
19422
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
925
$5,000
7/9/2015
RSVP's
and
Harvest
Protege and
Senior
Drive,
America
Volunt
Suite
Reads/
eer
100
Writes
Progra
Blue
Programs
m of
Bell,
Montgo
PA
mery
19422
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
925
$10,000
12/7/2015
RSVP's
and
Harvest
Family
Senior
Drive,
Literacy
Volunt
Suite
Volunteer
eer
100
Program
Progra
Blue
(FLVP) and
m of
Bell,
My Free
Montgo
PA
Tutor (MFT)
mery
19422
virtual
County
STEM
tutoring
and career
awareness
program.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverbe
1950
$6,000
7/3/2015
Outreach to
nd
Spring
Children/
Enviro
Mill
Access to
nmenta
Road
Nature
l
Gladwyn
(Norristown
Educat
e, PA
, PA)
ion
19035
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sandy
2010
$2,000
5/15/2015
11th Annual
Rollma
West
Sandy
n
Chester
Sprint 5K/
Ovaria
Pike
10K Run/
n
Suite
Walk
Cancer
300
Founda
Haverto
tion,
wn, PA
Inc.
19083
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Senior
536
$500
8/12/2015
2015 Meals
Adult
George
On Wheels
Activi
St.
Outrunning
ties
Norrist
Senior
Center
own, PA
Hunger 5k/
of
19401
3k. Mont Co
Montgo
Comm
mery
College,
County
Blue Bell,
PA. Meals
On Wheels
of the
Senior
Adult
Activities
Center of
Montgomery
County
impacts
homebound
seniors in
Central,
North Penn
and the
Eastern
Montgomery
Co areas.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Senior
536
$300
8/20/2015
Costs
Adult
George
associated
Activi
St.
with 2015
ties
Norrist
Janssen
Center
own, PA
Cares
of
19401
Volunteer
Montgo
Activity
mery
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
2800
$300
8/20/2015
Costs
Equest
Street
associated
rians
Road
with 2015
P.O.
Janssen
Box
Cares
1001
Volunteer
Warring
Activity
ton, PA
18976
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
2800
$4,000
9/23/2015
Special
Equest
Street
Equestrians
rians
Road
Equine
P.O.
Assisted
Box
Learning
1001
and
Warring
Therapeutic
ton, PA
Riding
18976
Program
Warrington,
PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Starfin
4015
$10,000
3/20/2015
Youth
der
Main
Development
Founda
Street
through
tion
Philade
Soccer and
lphia,
Education
PA
Philadelphi
19127
a, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Stop
2501
$40,700
5/22/2015
Janssen
Hunger
Clark
Biotech and
Now
Street,
Stop Hunger
Suite
Now Engage
301
Employee
Raleigh
Volunteers
, NC
in Dallas,
27607
Texas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
222
$10,000
11/26/2015
Corporate
Frankl
North
Membership
in
20th
Instit
Street
ute
Philade
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Gwynedd
$3,000
7/3/2015
General
Giving
Valley,
Operating
Tree
PA
Support
19437
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2600
$10,000
4/8/2015
Hubert J.P.
Melmar
Wayland
Schoemaker
k
Road
Classic
Charit
Berwyn,
able
PA
Founda
19312
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2600
$300
8/21/2015
Costs
Melmar
Wayland
associated
k
Road
with 2015
Charit
Berwyn,
Janssen
able
PA
Cares
Founda
19312
Volunteer
tion
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
400
$300
8/20/2015
Costs
Pennsb
Pennsbu
associated
ury
ry
with 2015
Societ
Memoria
Janssen
y
l Road
Cares
Morrisv
Volunteer
ille,
Activity
PA
19067
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trustee
3025
$5,000
12/23/2015
WXPN
s Of
Walnut
Musicians
The
Street
On Call
Univer
Philade
sity
lphia,
Of
PA
Pennsy
19104
lvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
1709
$260,045
12/23/2015
United Way
Way of
Benjami
Campaign
Southe
n
Match
astern
Frankli
Pennsy
n
lvania
Parkway
Philade
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Us Too
5003
$1,000
4/8/2015
11th Annual
Intern
Fairvie
SEA Blue
ationa
w Ave.
Prostate
l,
Downers
Cancer 5K
Inc.
Grove,
Run and
IL
Celebration
60515
Walk in
Chicago, IL
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Zero
515 King
$75,000
4/8/2015
ZERO
The
Street,
Prostate
Projec
Suite
Cancer Run/
t To
420
Walk Series
End
Alexand
40-plus
Prosta
ria, VA
cities
te
22314
nationwide
Cancer
running
from March
to November
2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Zero
515 King
$8,000
10/23/2015
ZERO
The
Street,
Baltimore
Projec
Suite
Free
t To
420
Prostate
End
Alexand
Cancer
Prosta
ria, VA
Screening
te
22314
Program
Cancer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen has also made financial donations to independent charitable
foundations that assist patients who are underinsured and in financial
need with treatment-related expenses. In keeping with our donor
agreements and applicable regulatory guidance, we will only disclose
aggregate data on our charitable giving and do not publicize
information on donations to specific foundations and disease states.
In 2015, we contributed $29.5 million in donations to independent
charitable foundations, enabling them to provide assistance with
medication-related copays to patients with cancer and autoimmune
diseases.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$87,940,000
3/15/2015
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$69,856,000
6/15/2015
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$60,259,000
9/15/2015
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$70,842,000
12/15/2015
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza, New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated February 24, 2017
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Monetary and Product Contributions to U.S.-
based Charitable Organizations Full Year 2015
(Payments made from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2015)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
180
1
$1,000
11/3/2015
Youth
Turnin
Bethany
Helpline
g
Road,
Lives
Buildin
Around
g 3,
, Inc.
Suite
42
Hazlet,
NJ
07730
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Adult
872. E.
$600
8/20/2015
Costs
Day
Main
associated
Center
Street
with 2015
of
Bridgew
Janssen
Somers
ater,
Cares
et
NJ
Volunteer
County
08807
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Advanci
1005
$2,500
10/23/2015
College
ng
Whitehe
Aspire and
Opport
ad Road
Inquire
unitie
Extensi
Program
s,
on,
Inc.
Suite 1
Ewing,
NJ
08520
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Allies,
1262
$7,500
11/16/2015
Project Grow-
Inc.
Whiteho
Allies Farm
rse-
Program
Hamilto
located on
n
the Grounds
Square
of Mercer
Road
County
Buildin
Community
g A,
College,
Suite
West
101
Windsor, NJ
Hamilto
n, NJ
08690
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
6500
$600
1/22/2015
Employee
n
Sugarlo
directed
Cancer
af
donation in
Societ
Parkway
lieu of
y
, Suite
company
260
holiday
Duluth,
gift
GA
30097
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
Buffalo
$100
3/12/2015
Memorial
n
Hope
donation
Cancer
Lodge
Societ
197
y
Summer
Street
Buffalo
, NY
14222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1160
$30,000
10/29/2015
Diabetes
n
Route
Interventio
Diabet
22 East
n Project
es
Suite
($30K) and
Associ
103
the General
ation
Bridege
Education
water,
Outreach
NJ
($10K)
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1701
$125,000
12/8/2015
American
n
North
Diabetes
Diabet
Beaureg
Association
es
ard
's What Can
Associ
Street
I Eat?
ation,
Alexand
Choices for
Inc.
ria, VA
People with
22311
Type 2
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1392 CR
$30,000
12/23/2015
Atrial
n
2740,
Fibrillatio
Founda
Decatur
n Patient
tion
, TX
Education
For
76234-
and Support
Womens
7401
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
7272
$10,000
12/8/2015
Garden State
n
Greenvi
Go Red For
Heart
lle
Women
Avenue
Luncheon
Dallas,
TX
75231
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$210,000
12/17/2015
Judges'
n
Wilson
Leadership
Psychi
Blvd,
Initiative-
atric
Suite
Psychiatric
Founda
1825
Leadership
tion
Arlingt
for
on, VA
Criminal
22209
Justice
(JLI/PLCJ)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$35,000
12/17/2015
Partnership
n
Wilson
for
Psychi
Blvd,
Workplace
atric
Suite
Mental
Founda
1825
Health
tion
Arlingt
on, VA
22209
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$100,000
12/17/2015
Typical or
n
Wilson
Troubled?
Psychi
Blvd,
Student
atric
Suite
Mental
Founda
1825
Health
tion
Arlingt
Education
on, VA
Program
22209
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
707
$94,250
12/17/2015
Effort to
n Red
Alexand
support
Cross
er Road
disaster
Princet
relief
on, NJ
american
08550
military
families,
health and
safety
services,
internation
al aid, and
blood
donation
services
within
central New
Jersey and
across the
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AmeriCa
88
$4,600
12/8/2015
General
res
Hamilto
mission
Founda
n Ave
support
tion
Stamfor
d, CT
06902
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anchor
482
$812
4/16/2015
General
House,
Centre
Operating
Inc.
Street
Support
Trenton
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anderso
PO Box
$300
8/19/2015
Costs
n
134 532
associated
House
Route
with 2015
523
Janssen
Whiteho
Cares
use
Volunteer
Station
Activity
, NJ
08889
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anderso
532
$19,000
12/3/2015
Integrated
n
County
Care
House
Road
Management
523
P.O.
Box 134
Whiteho
use
Station
, NJ
08889
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Ann
595 West
$9,500
11/12/2015
Ann
Silver
State
Silverman
man
Street
Community
Commun
Doylest
Health
ity
own, PA
Clinic for
Health
18901
Bucks
Clinic
County
residents
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arc
141
$3,500
11/2/2015
Fundraising
Founda
South
event
tion
Main
support to
Of
Street
benefit
Somers
Manvill
general
et
e, NJ
mission of
County
08835
organizatio
, Inc.
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Associa
819
$9,000
11/16/2015
Partial Care
tion
Alexand
Day
for
er Road
Treatment,
Advanc
Princet
Physical
ement
on, NJ
Health
of
08540
Expansion
Mental
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Athens
7 N.
$1,000
7/1/2015
Mental
Mental
Congres
Health
Health
s St.
Awarenss
, Inc.
Athens,
Event: 2nd
OH
Annual
45701
Community
Illuminatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Autism
1060
$1,000
11/16/2015
Autism
Speaks
State
Resource
Road
Fair
2nd
Sponsor
Floor
2016
Princet
Central NJ
on, NJ
Walk Now
08540
for Autism
Speaks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bay
66 Canal
$5,000
6/22/2015
Bay Cove
Cove
St
Wellness
Human
Boston,
Center to
Servic
MA
assist
es,
02114
diverse low-
Inc.
income
clients who
are working
towards
recovery
from severe
mental
illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bentley
PO Box
$300
8/11/2015
Costs
Commun
1093
associated
ity
Belle
with 2015
Servic
Mead,
Janssen
es,
NJ
Cares
Inc.
08502
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
2875
$6,500
11/16/2015
The STEM
Brothe
York
School
rs Big
Road
Mentoring
Sister
Jamison
program
s of
, PA
(Centennial
Bucks
18966
, Bensalem,
County
Bristol
Township,
and
Pennsbury
school
districts
in Bucks
County, PA)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
2 West
$7,500
10/13/2015
Big Brothers
Brothe
Washing
Big Sisters
rs Big
ton
of
Sister
Avenue,
Hunterdon
s of
Suite
Somerset
Hunter
210 PO
and Warren
don
Box 123
Somers
Washing
et and
ton, NJ
Warren
07882
Counti
es
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
535 East
$6,500
9/28/2015
Youth
Brothe
Frankli
Mentoring
rs Big
n
Program
Sister
Street
Support
s of
Trenton
Mercer
, NJ
County
08610
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Boys
212
$22,500
12/8/2015
Career
and
Centre
Launch
Girls
Street
Club
Trenton
of
, NJ
Trento
08611
n and
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bristol
120
$7,500
11/12/2015
ArtRageous
Rivers
Radclif
Theatre
ide
fe
Arts
Theate
Street
Education
r Co,
Bristol
Program
Inc.
, PA
19007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Broward
305 SE
$12,500
7/21/2015
Affordable
County
18th
Rental
Commun
Court
Housing
ity
Fort
program
Develo
Lauderd
pment
ale, FL
Corpor
33316
ation,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bucks
1069
$5,000
11/16/2015
Bucks County
County
Jackson
Veterans
Housin
ville
Housing
g
Road
Assistance
Group
Ivyland
Program
, PA
18974
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Caminar
2600 S.
$2,500
4/9/2015
First Annual
El
Mental
Camino
Health
Real,
Symposium:
Suite
New
200 San
Research in
Mateo,
Mental
CA
Health and
94403
its Impact
on
Treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Camp
P.O. Box
$10,000
12/11/2015
Camp Odayin--
Odayin
2068
a camp with
Stillwa
heart
ter, MN
55082
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Carrier
PO Box
$300
8/19/2015
Costs
Clinic
147 252
associated
Route
with 2015
601
Janssen
Belle
Cares
Mead,
Volunteer
NJ
Activity
08502
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
25 Ikea
$4,000
10/2/2015
Catholic
c
Drive
Charities,
Charit
Westham
Diocese of
ies
pton,
Trenton On
NJ
My Own--
08060
Supportive
Housing
Program
Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
25 Ikea
$15,000
10/6/2015
Partners In
c
Drive
Recovery
Charit
Westham
ies
pton,
NJ
08060
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
920
$4,000
11/16/2015
CYO's Broad
c
South
St. Center
Youth
Broad
After
Organi
Street
School
zation
Trenton
Program
of
, NJ
Tutoring
Mercer
08611
Project
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
11
$600
8/19/2015
Costs
for
Minneak
associated
Educat
oning
with 2015
ional
Road
Janssen
Advanc
Fleming
Cares
ement
ton, NJ
Volunteer
08822
activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
11
$12,000
11/25/2015
CORE Values
for
Minneak
job
Educat
oning
readiness
ional
Road
program
Advanc
Fleming
ement
ton, NJ
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Child
204 N.
$3,000
9/28/2015
Teen
Home
West
Prenatal
and
Street
and
Commun
#101
Parenting
ity
Doylest
Continuum
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
635
$5,000
3/30/2015
Fundraising
n's
South
event
Home
Clinton
support to
Societ
Avenue
benefit
y of
Trenton
general
New
, NJ
mission of
Jersey
08611
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
635
$5,000
12/22/2015
Fundraising
n's
South
event
Home
Clinton
support to
Societ
Avenue
benefit
y of
Trenton
general
New
, NJ
mission of
Jersey
08611
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
635
$10,000
12/22/2015
CUNA and
n's
South
Body and
Home
Clinton
Soul
Societ
Avenue
Prenatal
y of
Trenton
Health
New
, NJ
Education
Jersey
08611
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cit
111 S.
$3,000
10/13/2015
Silver level
Intern
Highlan
sponsor of
ationa
d St.
the 2016
l,
Box 71
Internation
Inc.
Memphis
al
, TN
Conference
38111
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
50 Milk
$20,000
12/8/2015
Assessing
Diabet
St 16th
the unmet
es
Floor
needs of
Networ
Boston,
young
k,
MA
adults with
Inc.
02109
diabetes on
college
campuses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
2000
$22,500
12/17/2015
Nursing
of New
Penning
Merit
Jersey
ton
Scholarship
Road
s ($10,000)
P.O.
and
Box
Educational
7718
Opportunity
Ewing,
Fund
NJ
Promise
08628
Awards
($12,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Colorad
1031
$2,500
7/28/2015
Peer Support
o
33rd
Coach
Mental
Street,
Training
Wellne
Suite
ss
237
Networ
Denver,
k
CO
80205
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$5,000
8/18/2015
Rise Summer
ty
88 116
Healthy
Action
North
Food
Servic
Main
Initiative
e
Street
for low
Center
Hightst
income
, Inc.
own, NJ
youth.
08520
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$200,000
11/25/2015
Johnson &
ty
338
Johnson
Founda
Morrist
Somerset
tion
own, NJ
County
of New
07963
Companies
Jersey
Contributio
n Fund at
the
Community
Foundation
of NJ
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
15
$7,000
12/25/2015
Donation to
ty
Highlan
be split
Health
d
evenly
Charit
Avenue
across
ies
Matawan
charitable
, NJ
organizatio
07747
ns which
serve
patients in
their
therapeutic
areas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
P.O. Box
$16,000
11/24/2015
Each One,
ty
15176
Teach One:
Health
407
An Evidence
Coalit
Crutchf
Based
ion,
ield
Diabetes
Inc.
Street
Self-
Durham,
Management
NC
Workshop
27704
and
Community
Leaders
Training
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
959
$12,000
5/15/2015
Pathway to
ty
Route
Recovery
Hope,
46
Residential
Inc.
East,
Programs
Suite
($10,000)
402
The Annual
Parsipp
Learning
any, NJ
Forum on
07054
Mental
Health and
Wellness
Fair
($2,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
959
$12,000
10/6/2015
Hope for
ty
Route
Veterans
Hope,
46
and Valley
Inc.
East,
Brook
Suite
Village for
402
Veterans
Parsipp
any, NJ
07054
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
310 W.
$5,000
9/28/2015
Making the
ty
State
Invisible
Justic
Street,
Visible--Le
e
3rd
gal
Center
Floor
Services
, Inc.
Trenton
for the
, NJ
Underserved
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
507 E.
$4,000
7/1/2015
Compeer
ty
College
Program of
Mental
Street
Johnson
Health
Iowa
County,
Center
City,
Iowa
For
IA
Mid-
52245
Easter
n Iowa
dba
Compee
r
Progra
m,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Compeer
259
$2,500
7/16/2015
Youth and
Roches
Monroe
Family
ter,
Avenue
Mentoring
Inc.
Rochest
Program--Fa
er, NY
mily
14607
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Contact
60 S.
$5,000
8/18/2015
Fundraising
Of
Main
event
Mercer
Street
support to
County
Penning
benefit
New
ton, NJ
general
Jersey
08534
mission of
, Inc.
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Contact
60 S.
$8,500
12/1/2015
CRISIS
Of
Main
HOTLINE,
Mercer
Street
CRISIS
County
Penning
CHAT, and
New
ton, NJ
TxtToday
Jersey
08534
Programs
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
CONTACT
P.O. Box
$3,500
5/14/2015
Crisis
We
2376
Interventio
Care,
Westfie
n for
Inc.
ld, NJ
Nonprofessi
07091
onals for
People
Experiencin
g Psychosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Court
1450
$15,000
11/13/2015
CASA of
Appoin
Parksid
Mercer
ted
e
County
Specia
Avenue,
Child
l
Suite
Advocacy
Advoca
22
Program for
tes
Suite
Abused and
22
Neglected
Ewing,
Children
NJ
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Daytop
362
$2,500
12/10/2015
Daytop of NJ
Villag
Sunset
at Crawford
e Of
Rd
House--work
New
Skillma
readiness
Jersey
n, NJ
initiative
, Inc.
08558
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Deborah
212
$2,000
11/3/2015
Women's
Hospit
Trenton
Heart
al
Road
Health
Founda
Browns
Symposium
tion
Mills,
NJ
08015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
14
$300
8/19/2015
Costs
e
Michael
associated
River
McCorri
with 2015
Steamb
stin
Janssen
oat
Road
Cares
Floati
Hamilto
Volunteer
ng
n, NJ
Activity
Classr
08690
oom,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
14
$4,900
11/16/2015
Environmenta
e
Michael
l education
River
McCorri
for
Steamb
stin
underfunded
oat
Road
and
Floati
Hamilto
underserved
ng
n, NJ
schools and
Classr
08690
youth
oom,
groups
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Denver
3501 E
$75
2/6/2015
Employee
Rescue
46th
directed
Missio
Avenue
donation in
n
Denver,
lieu of
CO
company
80216
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Depress
C/O
$1,000
6/4/2015
DBSA NJ
ion
David
Annual
and
Mizenko
Conference
Bipola
5
for Support
r
Village
Group
Suppor
Ct
Participant
t
Lawrenc
s
Allian
eville,
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Depress
C/O
$1,000
6/4/2015
DBSA NJ
ion
David
Mutual Aid
and
Mizenko
Support
Bipola
5
Group
r
Village
Facilitator
Suppor
Ct
Training
t
Lawrenc
Allian
eville,
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Desert
1695 N.
$3,500
7/28/2015
Quality of
Aids
Sunrise
life
Projec
Way
services
t
Palm
for
Springs
patients
, CA
with
92262
schizophren
ia and
schizo-
affective
disorders
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Detroit
10
$5,000
7/16/2015
InSHAPE
Centra
Peterbo
Program
l City
ro
(Individual
Commun
Detroit
ized Self
ity
, MI
Health
Mental
48201
Action Plan
Health
for
, Inc.
Empowerment
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Detroit
645
$750
2/9/2015
Employee
Metrop
Griswol
directed
olitan
d,
donation in
Bar
Suite
lieu of
Associ
1356
company
ation
Detroit
holiday
Founda
, MI
gift
tion
48226
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Diabete
13
$15,000
10/21/2015
Medical
s
Sunflow
Assistance
Founda
er
and Patient
tion
Avenue,
Support
Suite
Services
1010
Paramus
, NJ
07652
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Diabete
13
$5,000
12/11/2015
Medical
s
Sunflow
Assistance
Founda
er
and Patient
tion
Avenue,
Support
Suite
Services
1010
Paramus
, NJ
07652
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Diabete
319 N.
$20,000
12/1/2015
DiabetesSist
s
Weber
ers'
Sister
Road,
Minority
s
pmb
Initiative
#163
Bolingb
rook,
IL
60490
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Dress
3131
$9,000
11/16/2015
Roads to
for
Princet
Success:
Succes
on
The Latina
s
Pike,
Literacy
Buildin
Mobile
g 4,
Program.
Suite
209
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Emory
Rollins
$10,000
12/23/2015
Emory Latino
Univer
School
Diabetes
sity
of
Education
Public
Program
Health
(ELDEP)
1518
Clifton
Rd, NE
Room
606
Atlanta
, GA
30322
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Emory
Rollins
$12,500
12/23/2015
Emory Latino
Univer
School
Diabetes
sity
of
Education
Public
Program
Health
(ELDEP)
1518
Clifton
Rd, NE
Room
606
Atlanta
, GA
30322
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Enable,
13
$7,500
11/12/2015
Connect with
Inc.
Roszel
Enable
Road,
Suite
B110
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Every
Fred
$9,000
11/16/2015
Every Child
Child
Vereen,
Valued
Valued
Jr.
After
A NJ
Communi
School
Nonpro
ty
Program
fit
Center
Corpor
175
ation
Johnson
Avenue
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Everybo
PO Box
$4,000
11/16/2015
Coming Up
dy
3127
for AIRTM
Loves
Princet
Kenny
on, NJ
Projec
08543
t,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$9,000
6/4/2015
Outpatient
Guidan
Notting
Mental
ce
ham Way
Health
Center
Hamilto
Treatment
Corpor
n, NJ
for the
ation
08619
Chronically
Mentally
Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$300
6/26/2015
Costs
Guidan
Notting
associated
ce
ham Way
with 2015
Center
Hamilto
Janssen
Corpor
n, NJ
Cares
ation
08619
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$300
9/24/2015
Costs
Guidan
Notting
associated
ce
ham Way
with 2015
Center
Hamilto
Janssen
Corpor
n, NJ
Cares
ation
08619
Volunteer
Activity
September
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1 AAA
$10,000
10/2/2015
Get FIT @
Resour
Dr.
YMCA
ce
Suite
Networ
203
k
Trenton
, NJ
08691
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
4
$9,500
11/16/2015
Nursing
Servic
Corners
services at
e
tone
the
Associ
Drive
emergency
ation
Langhor
homelss
of
ne, PA
shelter
Bucks
19047
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
790 Park
$4,000
4/16/2015
STEPS to
Servic
Avenue
Wellness
e
Hunting
program
League
ton, NY
, Inc.
11743
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Federat
One
$1,000
4/16/2015
Big Nosh
ion of
Farming
Vocational
Organi
dale
Services
zation
Road
s
West
Babylon
, NY
11704
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Feed
Central
$75
1/14/2015
Employee
More,
Virgini
directed
Inc.
a Food
donation in
Bank
lieu of
1415
company
Rhoadmi
holiday
ller
gift
Street
Richmon
d, VA
23220
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Feed
333 N.
$75
2/25/2015
Employee
the
Meridia
directed
Childr
n
donation in
en,
Avenue
lieu of
Inc.
Oklahom
company
a City,
holiday
OK
gift
73107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Forsyth
61
$75
11/19/2015
Employee
Humane
Miller
directed
Societ
Street
donation in
y
Winston-
lieu of
Salem,
Company
NC
Holiday
21704
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$2,000
11/16/2015
Fundraising
ion of
Lawrenc
event
Morris
eville
support to
Hall/
Road
benefit
St.
Lawrenc
general
Lawren
eville,
mission of
ce
NJ
organizatio
08648
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$7,500
11/16/2015
Communicatin
ion of
Lawrenc
g for
Morris
eville
Success
Hall/
Road
St.
Lawrenc
Lawren
eville,
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fountai
425 West
$1,000
3/30/2015
Silver
n
47th
sponsor
House
Street
Fountain
New
House
York,
Wellness
NY
Campaign
10036
and One in
Four 5K
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fountai
425 West
$5,000
10/13/2015
Fundraising
n
47th
event
House
Street
support to
New
benefit
York,
general
NY
mission of
10036
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gateway
11901
$7,500
7/16/2015
Support for
Homes,
Reedy
an
Inc.
Branch
Occupationa
Road
l Therapist
Chester
field,
VA
23238
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
246
$1,500
7/1/2015
Consumer
Mental
Sycamor
scholarship
Health
e St.
s to attend
Consum
Suite
the 24th
er
260
Annual
Networ
Decatur
Statewide
k
, GA
Consumer
30030
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
1171
$2,000
12/3/2015
GSHNJ
Scouts
Route
Robotics
Heart
28
Program
of New
North
Expansion--
Jersey
Branch,
Make It and
, Inc.
NJ
Take It
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Greater
16 W.
$100,000
12/22/2015
Greater
Trento
Lafayet
Trenton
n
te St.
Initiative
Trenton
operating
, NJ
activities
08608
in support
of its
strategic
plan for
2015 and
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Grounds
80
$7,200
12/15/2015
Supporting
for
Sculpto
Wellness
Sculpt
rs Way
Walks for
ure
Hamilto
Low Income
n, NJ
Seniors
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
601 N
$7,500
11/16/2015
Community
for
Clinton
Development
Humani
Ave
Grant for 7-
ty--Tr
Trenton
Plex Build
enton
, NJ
Area
08638-
3446
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
31 Oak
$4,000
11/16/2015
Women Build
for
Ave
Homes and
Humani
Chalfon
Strong
ty of
t, PA
Families
Greate
18914
r
Bucks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
212 Yost
$300
8/24/2015
Costs
for
Bouleva
associated
Humani
rd
with 2015
ty of
Suite A
Janssen
Greate
Pittsbu
Cares
r
rgh, PA
Volunteer
Pittsb
15221
Activity
urgh
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hamilto
1315
$15,000
12/15/2015
Healthy
n Area
Whiteho
Living
YMCA
rse-
Programs:
Mercerv
Diabetes
ille
Prevention
Road
Program
Hamilto
($7,500.00)
n, NJ
, ACT
08619
($7,500.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heart
1325 G
$20,000
1/19/2015
Improving
Rhythm
Street
Health
Societ
NW,
Literacy
y,
Suite
and Health
Inc.
400
Information
Washing
in Atrial
ton, DC
Fibrillatio
20005
n and
Stroke
Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heartla
4750 N.
$7,500
7/16/2015
Pathways
nd
Sherida
Home,
Health
n Road
supportive
Outrea
Chicago
housing
ch
, IL
program for
60640
those
living with
mental
health
conditions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Henders
4740
$5,800
8/5/2015
Mental
on
North
Health
Behavi
State
First Aid:
oral
Road 7
Helping
Health
Lauderd
Persons in
ale
Need
Lakes,
FL
33319
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HiTops,
21
$6,000
11/12/2015
HiTops'
Inc.
Wiggins
Adolescent
Street
Women and
Princet
Girls'
on, NJ
Sexual
08540
Health
Programming
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Homecar
240
$100
8/5/2015
Memorial
e and
North
donation
Hospic
Radnor-
e
-Cheste
Founda
r Road,
tion
Suite
100
Radnor,
PA
19087-
5174
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$365
7/10/2015
Costs
nt
Princet
associated
on Ave.
with 2015
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares
NJ
Volunteer
08648
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$9,000
10/13/2015
Huchet House
nt
Princet
on Ave.
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
35
$750
11/16/2015
Hopewell
l
Princet
Elementary
Elemen
on
Science
tary
Avenue
Fair 2016
School
Hopewel
Parent
l, NJ
Teache
08525
r
Organi
zation
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
P.O. Box
$750
12/21/2015
``aMAZing
l
145
Pumpkin
Valley
Hopewel
Carve''
Arts
l, NJ
Exhibition
Counci
08525
l,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
PO Box
$5,400
7/27/2015
Scholarship
l
553
for a
Valley
Penning
Hopewell
Educat
ton, NJ
Valley
ion
08534
Regional
Founda
School
tion
District
graduating
student
($1,000),
district-
wide
workshops
on
childhood
mental
health
($4,400)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
48
$2,500
2/12/2015
Hopewell
l
Orchard
Valley
Valley
Avenue
Rides
Senior
Penning
Founda
ton, NJ
tion
08534
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Humane
1201
$75
2/3/2015
Employee
Societ
Macklin
directed
y of
d
donation in
Missou
Avenue
lieu of
ri
St.
company
Louis,
holiday
MO
gift
63110
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
1410
$300
8/19/2015
Costs
on
Route
associated
County
22 West
with 2015
YMCA
Annanda
Janssen
le, NJ
Cares
08801
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
1410
$2,500
10/13/2015
Fundraising
on
Route
event
County
22 West
support to
YMCA
Annanda
benefit
le, NJ
general
08801
mission of
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
8 Main
$10,000
4/20/2015
Prescription
on
Street
Drug Abuse
Drug
Fleming
Education
Awaren
ton, NJ
and
ess
08822
Evaluation
Progra
Project.
m,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
111 Mine
$1,000
12/8/2015
Stewardship
on
Street
of the
Land
Fleming
Hunterdon
Trust
ton, NJ
Land
08822
Trust's
Dvoor Farm
Preserve
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Institu
P.O. Box
$3,500
10/2/2015
Nursing
te of
7869
Experiences
Wonder
West
hip Program
ful
Trenton
Women
, NJ
Workin
08628
g For
Empowe
rment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Interfa
3635
$15,000
11/13/2015
Neighbors
ith
Quakerb
Helping
Caregi
ridge
Neighbors
vers
Rd.
Program
Trento
Suite
n,
16
Inc.
Hamilto
n, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Isles,
10 Wood
$7,500
11/16/2015
Healthy
Inc.
Street
Homes
Trenton
Training to
, NJ
Reduce
08618
Asthma and
Lead
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$300
7/14/2015
Costs
Family
Alexand
associated
and
er
with 2015
Childr
Road,
Janssen
en's
Suite
Cares
Servic
102
Volunteer
e of
Princet
Activity
Greate
on, NJ
r
08540
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$7,500
12/15/2015
Mercer
Family
Alexand
County
and
er
Caregiver
Childr
Road,
Help Line
en's
Suite
and
Servic
102
Caregiver
e of
Princet
Services
Greate
on, NJ
2016
r
08540
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$10,000
12/15/2015
Fundraising
Family
Alexand
event
and
er
support to
Childr
Road,
benefit
en's
Suite
general
Servic
102
mission of
e of
Princet
organizatio
Greate
on, NJ
n
r
08540
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Johnson
One
$6,000,000
6/29/2015
Funding to
&
Johnson
support the
Johnso
&
Johnson &
n
Johnson
Johnson
Patien
Plaza
Patient
t
New
Assistance
Assist
Brunswi
Foundation
ance
ck, NJ
(JJPAF) to
Founda
08933
help fund
tion
their
mission to
provide
pharmaceuti
cal product
to needy
patients on
a
nondiscrimi
natory
basis
without
charge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Junior
4365
$5,850
9/25/2015
2016 J&J
Achiev
Route 1
Pharma Day
ement
South,
Program
of New
2nd
Jersey
flr.
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kansas
1919
$450
1/10/2015
Employee
Foodba
East
directed
nk
Douglas
donation in
Wareho
Wichita
lieu of
use
, KS
company
67211
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kidsbri
4556
$7,500
9/28/2015
Kidsbridge
dge,
South
Anti-
Inc.
Broad
Bullying
St, 2nd
Life Skills
Floor
Program for
Trenton
At-Risk
, NJ
Children in
08620
Trenton at
the
Elementary
School
Level
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Lawrenc
PO Box
$2,500
11/16/2015
WaterBotics:
e
6531 17
An
Townsh
Philips
underwater
ip
Ave.
robotics
Educat
Lawrenc
program for
ion
eville,
6th grade
Founda
NJ
students in
tion,
08648
Lawrence
Inc.
Township
Public
Schools
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Leyden
10001 W
$5,000
6/23/2015
Peer Support
Family
Grand
Center
Servic
Ave
e and
Frankli
Mental
n Park,
Health
IL
Center
60131
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
55
$2,500
11/12/2015
Early
y And
Primros
Childhood--
Life,
e
Building
Inc.
Circle
Blocks for
Princet
the Future
on, NJ
Program
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
121
$5,000
9/28/2015
Adult
y New
Chestnu
Literacy
Jersey
t
Program
, Inc.
Street
Suite
203
Roselle
, NJ
07203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
120
$4,000
12/1/2015
Let's Talk
y
Findern
About
Volunt
e Ave--
Health
eers
Box 7
Literacy
of
Bridgew
Somers
ater,
et
NJ
County
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Main
8
$2,500
4/16/2015
Serious
Street
Marcell
Mental
Counse
a
Disorders:
ling
Avenue
Improving
Center
West
Access to
Orange,
Treatment
NJ
Without
07052
Insurance
As an
Obstacle
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Massach
15
$4,000
2/25/2015
Changing
usetts
Vernon
Minds and
Clubho
Street
Improving
use
Waltham
Lives of
Coalit
, MA
People with
ion
02453
Mental
Illness
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
McCarte
91
$12,000
12/15/2015
OnStage
r
Univers
Seniors: A
Theatr
ity
Community
e
Place
Project of
Compan
Princet
McCarter
y
on, NJ
Theatre
08450
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
5 Walter
$300
8/20/2015
Costs
On
Foran
associated
Wheels
Blvd
with 2015
In
Suite
Janssen
Hunter
2006
Cares
don,
Fleming
Volunteer
Inc.
ton, NJ
Activity
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
320
$15,000
10/2/2015
Meals on
on
Hollowb
Wheels
Wheels
rook
Program
of
Drive
Trento
Ewing,
n
NJ
Ewing
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2000 N.
$90,000
12/17/2015
It's My
Health
Beaureg
Life:
Americ
ard St.
Social Self
a
6th
Directed
Floor
Care
Alexand
ria, VA
22311
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2221
$15,000
7/27/2015
School
Health
Norfolk
Behavioral
Americ
, Suite
Health
a of
810
Initiative
Greate
Houston
r
, TX
Housto
77098
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2323 W
$10,000
8/6/2015
Get
Health
5th
Connected
Americ
Ave.
program
a of
Suite
Frankl
160
in
Columbu
County
s, OH
43204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
205
$1,500
9/4/2015
2015 Montana
Health
Haggert
Mental
Americ
y Lane,
Health
a of
Suite
Policy
Montan
170
Summit
a
Bozeman
, MT
59715
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1210 San
$2,500
8/10/2015
Mental
Health
Antonio
Health
Americ
, Suite
Education
a of
200
and
Texas
Austin,
Advocacy
TX
Campaign
78701
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 W.
$1,000
4/16/2015
Bronze
Health
10th
sponsor
Associ
St.
2015 E-
ation
Ste.
Racing the
in
600
Blues for
Delawa
Wilming
Mental
re
ton, DE
Health
19801
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 W.
$1,500
9/25/2015
Annual
Health
10th
Community
Associ
St.
Mental
ation
Ste.
Health
in
600
Conference-
Delawa
Wilming
-Understand
re
ton, DE
ing Mental
19801
Wellness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
617
$2,500
5/22/2015
Support of
Health
Garden
the Mental
Associ
Street
Wellness
ation
Santa
Center
in
Barbara
Santa
, CA
Barbar
93101
a
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3701
$7,500
6/4/2015
ParentVOICE:
Health
Latrobe
Bringing
Associ
Drive,
Hope to
ation
Suite
Families in
of
140
Need
Centra
Charlot
l
te, NC
Caroli
28211
nas,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1301
$10,000
7/27/2015
Equitable
Health
York
Access to
Associ
Road,
Effective
ation
Suite
Care
of
505
Project--(p
Maryla
Lutherv
rint, web,
nd,
ille,
media,
Inc.
MD
salaries)
21093
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
580
$1,000
2/25/2015
Supporting
Health
White
sponsor
Associ
Plains
2015 MHA on
ation
Road
the Move:
of
Suite
Run/Walk
Westch
510
ester
Tarryto
wn, NY
10591
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1870
$2,000
4/16/2015
Costs
Health
South
associated
Associ
Boulder
with Peer
ation
Avenue
Outreach
Oklaho
Tulsa,
Services
ma
OK
program
74119
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
555 N
$4,000
6/22/2015
MHA Housing
Health
Woodlaw
Initiative:
Associ
n, Ste.
Ensuring
ation
3105
Housing for
Reside
Wichita
Our Most
ntial
, KS
Vulnerable
Care,
67208
Populations
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3809
$10,000
7/28/2015
Outreach and
Illnes
Rosewoo
Behavioral
s
d Drive
Healthcare
Recove
PO Box
for
ry
4246
Homeless
Center
Columbi
Individuals
, Inc.
a, SC
with Mental
29240
Illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
3150
$8,000
11/16/2015
Integrating
Allian
Brunswi
housing and
ce to
ck Pike
healthcare
End
Lawrenc
access for
Homele
eville,
veteran and
ssness
NJ
senior
08648-
homeless
2420
populations
in the
Trenton/
Mercer
CEASE
HOMELESSNES
S System
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
PO Box
$19,500
12/15/2015
Supporting
County
17202
STEM
Commun
Trenton
Education:
ity
, NJ
Making
Colleg
08690
Physics
e
Available
Founda
to Students
tion
at the
James
Kerney
Campus at
Trenton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$300
7/10/2015
Costs
Street
Mercer
associated
Friend
Street
with 2015
s
Trenton
Janssen
, NJ
Cares
08611
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$20,000
10/23/2015
Food Bank-
Street
Mercer
Food
Friend
Street
Distributio
s
Trenton
n Programs
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Middle
P.O. Box
$15,000
11/24/2015
Outreach
Earth
8045
Program and
520
Community
North
Youth
Bridge
Centers
Street
Bridgew
ater,
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
MIDJers
1A
$1,500
11/23/2015
Urban Youth
ey
Quakerb
Employment
Center
ridge
Initiative
for
Plaza
Econom
Drive,
ic
Suite 2
Develo
Hamilto
pment
n, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Midland
60
$7,500
10/6/2015
Midland
Adult
Industr
Meals on
Servic
ial
Wheels
es,
Parkway
Employment
Inc.
PO Box
Training
5026
Program
North
Branch,
NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mighty
10th and
$100
5/14/2015
Memorial
Rivers
Poplar
Donation
Region
Cairo,
al
IL
Worshi
62914
p
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101
$15,000
10/2/2015
Millhill
l
Oakland
Trenton
Child
Street
PEERS
and
Trenton
Family
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101
$5,000
10/2/2015
Trenton Area
l
Oakland
Stakeholder
Child
Street
s
and
Trenton
Family
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minding
2083
$5,000
6/4/2015
Minding Our
Our
Lawrenc
Business
Busine
eville
Summer
ss,
Road
Program: A
Inc.
Lawrenc
Bridge to
eville,
the Future
NJ
for Mercer
08648
County Low-
Income
Youth
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Morven
55
$5,000
9/28/2015
Morven
Museum
Stockto
Museum and
and
n
Garden
Garden
Street
Summer
Princet
Internship
on, NJ
Program for
08540
Isles of
Trenton
Youths
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mount
73 North
$15,000
11/2/2015
Mount Carmel
Carmel
Clinton
Guild Home
Guild
Avenue
Health
Trenton
Nursing
, NJ
Program
08609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI--C
1904
$2,000
4/10/2015
Community
VA
Byrd
Mental
Centra
Avenue,
Health
l
Suite
Education
Virgin
207
and Social
ia's
(POB
Inclusion
Voice
18086)
on
Richmon
Mental
d, VA
Illnes
23230
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nami
1401 I-
$1,000
7/1/2015
Bronze
Alabam
85
sponsor
a
Parkway
2015 NAMI
, Suite
Alabama
A
Walk
Montgom
ery, AL
36106
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
2400 W.
$1,000
2/12/2015
Bronze
Delawa
4th St.
sponsor
re
Wilming
2015
ton, DE
NAMIWalks
19805
Delaware
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
3371
$9,500
8/18/2015
Education
Mercer
Brunswi
and Support
NJ
ck
Programs
Pike,
Suite
124
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
85 N.
$1,000
8/6/2015
Bronze
New
State
sponsor
Hampsh
Street
2015
ire
Concord
NAMIWalks
, NH
New
03301
Hampshire
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
2100
$7,500
7/28/2015
Living Room-
DuPage
Manches
Peer to
County
ter Rd,
Peer
Illino
Bldg B,
program
is
Suite
925
Wheaton
, IL
60187
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
One
$1,500
7/1/2015
Start to
Lake
Victori
Finish
County
a Sq.,
sponsor
Ste.
2015
260
Strides for
Painesv
Awareness
ille,
Walk
OH
44077
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
One
$2,000
7/1/2015
Supporting
Lake
Victori
Families
County
a Sq.,
and
Ste.
Individuals
260
Impacted by
Painesv
Schizophren
ille,
ia: NAMI
OH
Family-to-
44077
Family
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
100 W.
$1,000
2/13/2015
Bronze
PA
Main
sponsor
Montgo
Street
2015
mery
Suite
Greater
County
204
Philadelphi
Lansdal
a NAMIWalk
e, PA
19446
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
6122 E
$1,000
12/15/2015
Bronze
Southe
22nd St
sponsor
rn
Tucson,
2016
Arizon
AZ
Southern
a
85711
Arizona
NAMIWalks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1750 S.
$1,000
2/27/2015
Bronze
St.
Brentwo
sponsor
Louis
od
2015 St.
Blvd.
Louis
Suite
NAMIWalks
511 St.
Louis,
MO
63144
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
150
$1,000
5/14/2015
Bronze
Summit
Cross
sponsor
County
Street,
2015
Akron
NAMIWalks
Ohio
44311
PO Box
462,
Cuyahog
a
Falls,
Ohio
44222
Akron,
OH
44311
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
5251
$1,000
3/13/2015
Bronze
Ventur
Verdugo
sponsor
a
Way, #K
2015
County
(PO Box
NAMIWalk
1613)
Ventura
Camaril
County
lo, CA
93011
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
217
$1,000
6/10/2015
Bronze
Waukes
Wiscons
sponsor
ha
in Ave
2015
Suite
NAMIWalks
300
in Waukesha
Waukesh
a, WI
53186
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
90 Park
$2,500
8/10/2015
27th Annual
l
Avenue
New York
Allian
16
Mental
ce for
Floor
Health
Resear
New
Research
ch on
York,
Symposium
Schizo
NY
phreni
10016
a and
Depres
sion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
90 Park
$2,500
9/13/2015
Meet the
l
Avenue
Scientist:
Allian
16
A Virtual
ce for
Floor
Q&A Webinar
Resear
New
Series
ch on
York,
Schizo
NY
phreni
10016
a and
Depres
sion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
100
$1,000
1/20/2015
Bronze
l
Clearbr
sponsor
Allian
ook
2015 NAMI
ce for
Drive
Walks
the
Elmsfor
Westchester
Mental
d, NY
ly Ill
10523
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
576
$1,000
1/20/2015
Bronze
l
Farming
sponsor
Allian
ton
2015 NAMI
ce for
Avenue
Connecticut
the
Hartfor
Walk
Mental
d, CT
ly Ill
06105
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3250
$1,000
2/13/2015
Bronze
l
Wilshir
sponsor
Allian
e
2015
ce for
Blvd.,
NAMIWalk
the
Suite
Los Angeles
Mental
1501
County
ly Ill
Los
Angeles
, CA
90010
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
309 W.
$1,000
2/25/2015
Bronze
l
Millbro
sponsor
Allian
ok
2015
ce for
Road,
NAMIWalks
the
Suite
Mental
121
ly Ill
Raleigh
, NC
27609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1706
$1,000
3/12/2015
Bronze
l
Brady
sponsor
Allian
Street
2015
ce for
Suite
NAMIWalk
the
101
Greater
Mental
Davenpo
Mississippi
ly Ill
rt, IA
Valley
52803
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
5095
$1,000
3/12/2015
Bronze
l
Murphy
sponsor
Allian
Canyon
2015 San
ce for
Road,
Diego
the
Suite
County NAMI
Mental
320 San
Walk
ly Ill
Diego,
CA
92123
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
The
$1,000
3/30/2015
Bronze
l
Schraff
sponsor
Allian
t's
2015
ce for
Center,
NAMIWalks
the
529
Massachuset
Mental
Main
ts
ly Ill
Street
Suite
1M17
Boston,
MA
02129
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
800
$5,000
4/17/2015
Understandin
l
Transfe
g
Allian
r Road
Psychosis:
ce for
#31 St.
Resources
the
Paul,
and
Mental
MN
Recovery
ly Ill
55114
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3250
$5,000
5/14/2015
Crisis
l
Wilshir
Interventio
Allian
e
n Team
ce for
Blvd.,
training
the
Suite
for Custody
Mental
1501
Program for
ly Ill
Los
Los Angeles
Angeles
County
, CA
Sheriff's
90010
Department
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1225
$10,000
5/14/2015
2015 State
l
Dublin
Conference
Allian
Road,
ce for
Suite
the
125
Mental
Columbu
ly Ill
s, OH
43215
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1 Bangor
$1,000
6/10/2015
Supporter
l
Street
sponsor
Allian
Augusta
2015 NAMI
ce for
, ME
Maine
the
04330
Annual
Mental
Awareness
ly Ill
Walk Walk
the Walk to
Start the
Talk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3440
$1,000
6/10/2015
Bronze
l
Viking
sponsor
Allian
Drive
2016
ce for
Suite
Northern
the
104
California
Mental
Sacrame
NAMI Walk
ly Ill
nto, CA
95827
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
7/15/2015
Platinum
l
550039
level
Allian
Birming
sponsor
ce for
ham, AL
NAMI
the
35255-
Birmingham
Mental
0039
2015 Walk
ly Ill
for Mental
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
808
$1,000
7/15/2015
2015 Annual
l
Montice
Conference,
Allian
llo
``Shatterin
ce for
Street
g the
the
Somerse
Stigma--Fac
Mental
t, KY
ts vs.
ly Ill
42501
Fiction--Ho
w Much Do
You Know?''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1536 W
$6,000
7/16/2015
Coming out
l
Chicago
Proud
Allian
Chicago
Program
ce for
, IL
the
60642
Mental
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
7/20/2015
2015 Mental
l
4096
Health
Allian
2206 N.
Awareness
ce for
Gordon
Conference
the
Street
(MHAC)
Mental
Alvin,
ly Ill
TX
77512
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2059
$1,000
7/28/2015
Bronze
l
Atwood
sponsor
Allian
Avenue
2015 Dane
ce for
Madison
County
the
, WI
NAMIWalk
Mental
53704
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
P.O Box
$1,500
8/25/2015
Silver
l
8260
sponsor
Allian
Richmon
2015
ce for
d, VA
NAMIWalks
the
23226
Virginia
Mental
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
99 Pine
$4,000
8/28/2015
2015 NAMI-
l
St.
NYS
Allian
Suite
Education
ce for
302
Conference-
the
Albany,
Redefining
Mental
NY
Recovery:
ly Ill
12207
New
Challenges,
New
Opportuniti
es, New
Hopes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2601
$2,000
8/28/2015
Support of
l
Cold
the 2015
Allian
Spring
NAMI
ce for
Road
Indiana
the
P.O.
State
Mental
Box
Conference
ly Ill
22697
Indiana
polis,
IN
46222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1562
$2,500
9/25/2015
Healing
l
Route
Ourselves,
Allian
130
Healing
ce for
North
Others:
the
Brunswi
NAMI NJ
Mental
ck, NJ
2015 Annual
ly Ill
08902
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$75,000
12/17/2015
NAMI
l
Fairfax
Helpline
Allian
Drive
ce for
Suite
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$50,000
12/17/2015
NAMI
l
Fairfax
Multicultur
Allian
Drive
al Action
ce for
Suite
Center
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$1,000
6/10/2015
Bronze
l
West
sponsor
Allian
25th
NAMIWalks
ce for
Street,
2015
the
#600
Mental
Clevela
ly
nd, OH
Ill--G
44113
reater
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$2,000
6/23/2015
Mental
l
West
Illness
Allian
25th
Peer
ce for
Street,
Support and
the
#600
Education
Mental
Clevela
programs
ly
nd, OH
Ill--G
44113
reater
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2753
$1,000
2/13/2015
Bronze
l
West
sponsor
Allian
Central
2015 NAMI
ce for
Avenue
Walk
the
Toledo,
Mental
OH
ly Ill
43606
of
Greate
r
Toledo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
505 8th
$1,000
2/25/2015
Bronze
l
Avenue,
sponsor
Allian
Ste
2015
ce for
1103
NAMIWalks
the
New
NYC
Mental
York,
ly Ill
NY
of New
10018
York
City
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1981
$1,000
11/17/2015
Bronze
l
Marcus
sponsor
Allian
Ave,
2016 Long
ce for
C117
Island/
the
Lake
Queens/
Mental
Success
NAMIWalks
ly Ill
, NY
Queens/
11042
Nassau
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
5963
$1,000
7/27/2015
Bronze
l
Boymel
sponsor
Allian
Dr.
2015
ce on
Fairfie
National
Mental
ld, OH
Alliance on
Illnes
45014
Mental
s
Illness of
Butler
County
NAMIWAlk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
324A
$1,000
1/9/2015
Gold sponsor
l
Springf
of the 2015
Allian
ield
NAMI-WM
ce on
Street
Annual
Mental
Agawam,
Walkathon:
Illnes
MA
A Journey
s
01001
of Hope and
Wester
Recovery
n
Mass.,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$6,000
4/16/2015
28 Annual
l Art
350891
National
Exhibi
Miami,
Art
tions
FL
Exhibition
of the
33135
by the
Mental
Mentally
ly
Ill
Ill,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
110 N
$30,000
12/1/2015
MY BLOOD
l
Washing
CLOT--An
Blood
ton St.
Online
Clot
Suite
Resource
Allian
328
for
ce
Rockvil
Patients
le, MD
and
20850
Caregivers
Managing
Life with
VTE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$75,000
12/17/2015
2016 Policy
l
Street
Action
Counci
NW,
Center
l for
Suite
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$75,000
12/17/2015
Early Onset
l
Street
Psychosis
Counci
NW,
Project
l for
Suite
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$75,000
12/17/2015
Health
l
Street
Justice
Counci
NW,
Learning
l for
Suite
Initiative
Behavi
400
oral
Washing
Health
ton, DC
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
949 W.
$7,500
11/16/2015
Academic
l
State
Creative
Junior
Street
Engagement
Tennis
Trenton
(ACE) and
and
, NJ
STEM Pilot
Learni
08618
Program
ng of
Trento
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$100
11/3/2015
Memorial
l
Easter
Donation
Stroke
Lane,
Associ
Suite B
ation
Centenn
ial, CO
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$15,000
12/3/2015
Navigator
l
Easter
training,
Stroke
Lane,
program
Associ
Suite B
development
ation
Centenn
, services
ial, CO
delivered,
80112
participant
materials
and
resources,
and
outcomes
measurement
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$35,000
12/4/2015
Develop a
l
Easter
multi-
Stroke
Lane,
channel
Associ
Suite B
marketing
ation
Centenn
plan
ial, CO
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
P.O. Box
$1,500
12/8/2015
Fundraising
Jersey
7683
event
Capita
Trenton
support to
l
, NJ
benefit
Philha
08628
general
rmonic
mission of
Orches
organizatio
tra,
n
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
275 Rt.
$4,000
7/1/2015
NJPC
Jersey
10 East
Strengtheni
Parent
Suite
ng Family
s
220-414
and Youth
Caucus
Succasu
Involvement
nna, NJ
Conference
07876
and
Professiona
l Parent
Advocacy
Training
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NewBrid
7
$2,000
6/10/2015
NewBridge
ge
Industr
Day
Servic
ial
Treatment
es,
Road
Program for
Inc.
Pequann
Adults
ock, NJ
07440
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Ohio
433
$75
2/6/2015
Employee
Great
Canal
directed
Dane
Ct
donation in
Rescue
Watervi
lieu of
lle, OH
company
43566
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Paralyz
2235
$75
2/6/2015
Employee
ed
Enterpr
directed
Vetera
ise
donation in
ns of
Drive,
lieu of
Americ
Suite
company
a
3501
holiday
Westche
gift
ster,
IL
60154
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Parent
P.O. Box
$2,000
12/8/2015
Steinert
Booste
3352
High
r USA
Mercerv
Robotics
dba
ille,
FIRST FRC
Steine
NJ
Team 2180
rt
08690
Parents
High
Association
Roboti
cs
Parent
s
Associ
ation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Partner
888
$10,700
12/15/2015
General
s in
Commonw
mission
Health
ealth
support of
Ave,
organizatio
3rd
n
Floor
Boston,
MA
02215
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Passage
PO Box
$5,000
12/8/2015
The State
Theatr
967
Street
e
Trenton
Project
Compan
, NJ
y,
08608
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$300
8/27/2015
Costs
Kids
Lawrenc
associated
e Road
with 2015
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares event
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$17,500
10/27/2015
Comprehensiv
Kids
Lawrenc
e Juvenile
e Road
Offenders
Lawrenc
Outreach
eville,
Services
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
People
140 E
$2,500
11/16/2015
People and
And
Hanover
Stories
Storie
Street
with Mercer
s--Gen
Trenton
County
te Y
, NJ
Seniors
Cuento
08608
s,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Plansma
118 West
$3,500
6/4/2015
2015
rt NJ
State
Corporate
PlanSma
membership
rt NJ
renewal
Trenton
donation to
, NJ
support
08608
efforts
around
sound land
use
planning
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
P.O. Box
$1,500
10/30/2015
Giving Voice
on
145 190
To
Girl
Nassau
Communities
Choir
Street,
: PGC's
Lower
Music
Level
Afterschool
Princet
Program
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
78 LEIGH
$5,000
11/16/2015
PNS Role
on
AVE
Models for
Nurser
PRINCET
Health
y
ON, NJ
School
08542
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
123 E.
$12,500
12/15/2015
Hunger
on
Hanover
Prevention
Outrea
St.
and
ch
Trenton
Nutrition
Projec
, NJ
Education
ts /
08608
($7,500.00)
Crisis
Healthy
Minist
Living and
ry of
Housing
Mercer
Stability
County
Services
($5,000.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
P.O. Box
$2,500
12/8/2015
Princeton
on
250
Symphony
Sympho
Princet
Orchestra @
ny
on, NJ
Isles Youth
Orches
08542
Institute--
tra
a series of
interactive
music
appreciatio
n programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
13
$7,500
11/16/2015
Princeton-
on-
Roszel
Blairstown
Blairs
Road,
Center's
town
Suite
2015-16
Center
C204A
Summer
, Inc.
Princet
Bridge
on, NJ
Program for
08540-
Mercer
7137
County At-
Risk Youth
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Printma
440
$5,000
11/3/2015
Roving Press
king
River
Center
Road
of New
Branchb
Jersey
urg, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Printma
440
$15,000
11/24/2015
Combat paper
king
River
of NJ
Center
Road
of New
Branchb
Jersey
urg, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PTA New
171 Old
$3,000
8/5/2015
Fundraising
Jersey
Turnpik
event
Congre
e Road
support to
ss Of
Califon
benefit
Parent
, NJ
general
s and
07830
mission of
Teache
organizatio
rs
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
P.O. Box
$8,000
12/1/2015
WaterWays
Headwa
273
Environment
ters
Gladsto
al
Associ
ne, NJ
Education
ation
07934
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
118
$20,000
11/24/2015
Promoting
Valley
Lamingt
Access to
Commun
on Road
STEM,
ity
Branchb
Nursing and
Colleg
urg, NJ
Community
e
08844
Health
Education
at Raritan
Valley
Community
College
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ReDisco
901 NE
$7,500
6/23/2015
Same-Day
ver
Indepen
Access to
dence
Care
Avenue
program
Lees
Summit,
MO
64086
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Regions
640
$15,000
7/21/2015
Make It OK
Hospit
Jackson
Stigma
al
Street,
Campaign
Founda
MS
tion
11202C
St.
Paul,
MN
55101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rescue
98
$5,000
1/14/2015
Fundraising
Missio
Carroll
event
n of
Street,
support to
Trento
PO Box
benefit
n
790
general
Trenton
mission of
, NJ
organizatio
08605
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rescue
98
$25,000
10/2/2015
Emergency
Missio
Carroll
services
n of
Street,
program
Trento
PO Box
n
790
Trenton
, NJ
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rider
2083
$20,000
11/24/2015
STEM
Univer
Lawrenc
Program;
sity
eville
Janssen
Road
Science and
Lawrenc
Business
eville,
Scholarship
NJ
s;
08648
Shakesperia
n at Rider
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverbe
3 N.
$5,000
5/22/2015
InSHAPE
nd
State
Program
Commun
Street,
ity
PO Box
Mental
2032
Health
Concord
, Inc.
, NH
03301
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riversi
4 South
$9,300
11/16/2015
Riverside
de
Union
Symphonia
Sympho
Street
Senior
nia,
P.O.
Outreach
Inc.
Box 650
Program
Lambert
ville,
NJ
08530
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
445
$5,000
5/14/2015
Culinary,
Antoni
Recolet
Education
o
a Rd.
and
Clubho
San
Nutrition
use,
Antonio
Program--Nu
Inc.
, TX
tritious
78216
meals,
culinary
training,
pre-
vocational
education,
employment
placement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
2789-
$5,000
4/16/2015
MHRC Client
Franci
25th
Wellness
sco
Street,
Enhancement
Genera
#2028
Project
l
PO Box
Hospit
410836
al
San
Founda
Francis
tion
co, CA
94110
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SAVE A
900
$300
10/13/2015
Costs
Friend
Herront
associated
to
own
with 2015
Homele
Road
Janssen
ss
Princet
Cares
Animal
on, NJ
Volunteer
s
08540
Event
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Save
501
$66,700
12/22/2015
Support
The
Kings
efforts to
Childr
Highway
give
en
East,
children a
U.S.
Suite
healthy
Headqu
400
start, the
arters
Fairfie
opportunity
ld, CT
to learn
06825
and
protection
from harm
(child
protection,
education,
emergency
response,
health and
nutrition,
hunger and
livelihoods
, HIV and
AIDS)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Schizop
602 Pink
$2,500
7/16/2015
2015
hrenia
Azalea
Conference,
And
Trl PO
``Schizophr
Relate
Box
enia: It's
d
941222
Global''
Disord
Houston
ers
, TX
Allian
77094-
ce Of
8222
Americ
Houston
a
, TX
77079-
1123
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Scripps
10140
$30,000
12/23/2015
Dulce
Founda
Campus
Prevention:
tion
Point
A Diabetes
for
Drive
Early
Medici
Suite
Prevention
ne and
200 San
Program
Scienc
Diego,
e
CA
92121
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Scripps
10140
$25,000
12/23/2015
Project
Founda
Campus
Dulce
tion
Point
for
Drive
Medici
Suite
ne and
200 San
Scienc
Diego,
e
CA
92121
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$7,500
9/22/2015
The SERV
Founda
Scotch
Foundation
tion,
Road,
Scholarship
Inc.
3rd
Fund
Floor
Ewing,
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$5,000
9/22/2015
13th Annual
Founda
Scotch
Recovery NJ
tion,
Road,
Conference
Inc.
3rd
Floor
Ewing,
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$300
9/24/2015
Costs
Founda
Scotch
associated
tion,
Road,
with 2015
Inc.
3rd
Janssen
Floor
Cares
Ewing,
Volunteer
NJ
event
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shannon
PO Box
$500
12/1/2015
Shannon
Daley
1271 36
Daley
Memori
Indian
Memorial
al
Run
Fund
Fund
Whiteho
Charity
use
Events
Station
, NJ
08889
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sharing
1920
$2,000
5/22/2015
Art and
Place,
10th
Music
Inc.
Avenue
Program at
South
the 1920
PO Box
Club
55945
Birming
ham, AL
35255-
5945
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sister
1201
$6,500
10/6/2015
Fundraising
Networ
Hamilto
event
k of
n
support to
Centra
Street
benefit
l New
Somerse
general
Jersey
t, NJ
mission of
, Inc.
08873
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sisters
1201
$1,000
2/6/2015
2015 Health
Networ
Hamilto
Summit and
k of
n
Breakfast
Centra
Street
l New
Somerse
Jersey
t, NJ
08873
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
1810
$8,292
12/1/2015
Teaching
t
Burnt
Social
Hills
Mills
Skills
Learni
Road
ng
Bedmins
Instit
ter, NJ
ute
07921
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
49
$1,250
1/20/2015
2014 Steps
t Home
Brahma
for Giving
for
Avenue,
Program
Tempor
P.O.
arily
Box
Displa
6871
ced
Bridgew
Childr
ater,
en
NJ
08807-
0871
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
49
$7,500
5/22/2015
Fundraising
t Home
Brahma
event
for
Avenue,
support to
Tempor
P.O.
benefit
arily
Box
general
Displa
6871
mission of
ced
Bridgew
organizatio
Childr
ater,
n
en
NJ
08807-
0871
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
49
$7,500
11/25/2015
Street
t Home
Brahma
Smart--HIV/
for
Avenue,
AIDS and
Tempor
P.O.
STD
arily
Box
Prevention
Displa
6871
ced
Bridgew
Childr
ater,
en
NJ
08807-
0871
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
208
$100
2/13/2015
Memorial
France
Bound
donation
s
Brook
Cabrin
Avenue
i
Piscata
Church
way, NJ
08854
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
One
$15,000
12/8/2015
Providing
Mary
Summit
Food for
Medica
Square,
School-Age
l
Suite
Children
Center
300
Living in
Founda
1717
Poverty in
tion
Langhor
Bucks
ne-
County: The
Newtown
St. Mary
Road
Backpacks
Langhor
for Kids
ne, PA
Program
19047
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Stony
31 Titus
$15,000
11/13/2015
StreamWatch
Brook
Mill
Volunteer
Millst
Road
Water
one
Penning
Quality
Waters
ton, NJ
Monitoring
hed
08534
Program
Associ
ation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
T-1
8216
$35,000
11/25/2015
Type 2
Today,
Princet
Education
Inc.
on-
for Type 1
Glendal
Families
e Road,
PMB 200
West
Chester
, OH
45069
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TASK,
72\1/2\
$300
6/23/2015
Costs
Inc.
Escher
associated
Street,
with 2015
P.O.
Janssen
Box 872
Cares
Trenton
Volunteer
, NJ
Activity
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TASK,
72\1/2\
$25,000
10/8/2015
Trenton Area
Inc.
Escher
Soup
Street,
Kitchen
P.O.
Meal
Box 872
Service
Trenton
Program
, NJ
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TASK,
72\1/2\
$20,700
12/15/2015
Support
Inc.
Escher
hunger
Street,
program in
P.O.
the Trenton
Box 872
area,
Trenton
programs to
, NJ
encourage
08605
self-
sufficiency
and improve
the quality
of life of
their
patrons
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$5,000
11/13/2015
Communiversi
Arts
Robeson
ty ArtsFest
Counci
Center
2016
l of
for the
Prince
Arts
ton
102
Withers
poon
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$10,000
11/16/2015
Community
Arts
Robeson
outreach
Counci
Center
programs
l of
for the
for youth
Prince
Arts
and seniors
ton
102
Withers
poon
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2020
$2,000
12/1/2015
``Art for
Center
Burnt
Children
for
Mills
with Autism
Contem
Road
Spectrum
porary
Bedmins
Disorder
Art
ter, NJ
and Special
07921
Needs''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
19
$300
8/19/2015
Costs
Center
Dellwoo
associated
For
d Lane
with 2015
Great
Somerse
Janssen
Expect
t, NJ
Cares
ations
08873
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
19
$13,500
10/21/2015
Trauma-
Center
Dellwoo
informed,
For
d Lane
residential
Great
Somerse
treatment
Expect
t, NJ
for
ations
08873
homeless,
pregnant/
parenting
adult women
in
substance
use
recovery,
and their
children.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
1040
$5,000
6/23/2015
Jail
Edinbu
Waltham
Diversion
rg
Street
Program
Center
Lexingt
on, MA
02421
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
8150 N.
$40,000
12/4/2015
VTE
Mended
Central
Education
Hearts
Express
and
, Inc.
way,
Outreach
Suite
Program
M2248
Dallas,
TX
75206
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
401
$500
3/2/2015
Flash Lite
Mental
Cypress
sponsor
Health
Street
2015 Lite
Center
Manches
up the Nite
Of
ter, NH
for Mental
Greate
03103
Health Run/
r
Walk
Manche
ster
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
P.O. Box
$7,500
11/16/2015
Arts
Prince
2063
education
ton
Princet
and
Festiv
on, NJ
community
al
08543
engagement
programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Thomas
101 West
$12,000
11/13/2015
Scholarships
Edison
State
for
State
Street
Students
Colleg
Trenton
Enrolled in
e
, NJ
the
Founda
08608
Accelerated
tion
Second
Degree BSN
Program at
Thomas
Edison
State
College's
W. Cary
Edwards
School of
Nursing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TPTO
51 South
$1,000
11/16/2015
2016
Inc--T
Timberl
Timberlane
imberl
ane
Science and
ane
Drive,
Engineering
Parent
Penning
Fair
Teache
ton NJ
r
08534
Organi
Penning
zation
ton, NJ
08534
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
P.O. Box
$5,000
11/12/2015
Trenton
Commun
5206
Community
ity
(physic
Music
Music
al
School
School
address
Community-
: 439
Based Music
S.
Education
Broad
Street,
Ste.
90,
Trenton
NJ
08611
Trenton
, NJ
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
635
$3,500
11/16/2015
Trenton
Educat
South
Education
ion
Clinton
Dance
Dance
Avenue
Institute
Instit
Trenton
program for
ute
, NJ
at-risk
08611
youth in
Trenton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
218 N
$15,000
10/23/2015
Further
Health
Broad
Inroads for
Team,
St
Health
Inc.
Trenton
, NJ
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trinity
22
$7,500
11/12/2015
Mental
Counse
Stockto
Health and
ling
n
Wellness
Servic
Street
Programs
es
Trinity
Counsel
ing
Service
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Twiligh
P.O. Box
$7,500
11/16/2015
Simple Needs
t Wish
1042 11
Wish
Founda
Duane
Granting
tion
Road
Program
Doylest
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
UIH
4 North
$7,500
9/28/2015
Community of
Family
Broad
Health for
Partne
Street
Men Program
rs
2nd
(Year 2)
Floor
Trenton
, NJ
08618-
4408
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
9-25
$7,500
9/25/2015
Princeton
Negro
Alling
Committee
Colleg
Street
of UNCF
e Fund
2nd
Scholarship
Floor
Newark,
NJ
07102
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
Attn:
$595,877
12/21/2015
Company
Way
Finance
match to
Worldw
Operati
employee
ide
on P.O.
United Way
Box
campaign
418607
for NJ
Boston,
based
MA
commercial
02241-
companies
8607
of Janssen
Pharmaceuti
cal
Companies
of Johnson
& Johnson
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Valeo
5401 SW
$3,500
5/22/2015
Creations of
Behavi
7th
Hope: A
oral
Street
gallery by
Health
Topeka,
artists
Care,
KS
experiencin
Inc.
66606
g mental
illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Volunte
12
$7,500
11/12/2015
SkillsConnec
er
Stockto
t program
Connec
n
t
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Washing
P.O. Box
$500
2/27/2015
Educational
ton
83
program
Crossi
Titusvi
focused on
ng
lle, NJ
New Jersey
Park
08560
in the
Associ
American
ation,
Revolutiona
Inc.
ry War
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
We Care
3035
$1,500
6/22/2015
Support
Arts
Wilming
Artowork
ton
program,
Pike
which aims
Ketteri
to use art
ng, OH
to help
45429
enrich
lives of
the
mentally
ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
West
120
$300
8/20/2015
Costs
Bergen
Chestnu
associated
Mental
t
with 2015
Health
Street
Janssen
care
Ridgewo
Cares
od, NJ
Volunteer
07450-
Activity
2500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
West
PO Box
$5,000
11/12/2015
Excellence
Windso
280
in
r
West
Education
Plains
Windsor
Grant
boro
, NJ
Program
Educat
08550-
ion
0280
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Womansp
1530
$300
6/26/2015
Costs
ace
Brunswi
associated
ck Ave.
with 2015
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares
NJ
Volunteer
08648
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Women's
3200
$75
1/14/2015
Employee
Commun
Hilltop
directed
ity,
Avenue
donation in
Inc.
Wausau,
lieu of
WI
company
54401
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Woods
40
$4,000
11/20/2015
Improving
Servic
Martin
the Health
es
Gross
of People
Founda
Drive
with
tion
PO box
Disabilitie
36
s at Woods
Langhor
Services
ne, PA
through
19047
Enhanced
Recreationa
l
Activities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
YMCA of
431
$5,000
11/16/2015
Science in
Trento
Penning
the City--
n
ton
Minorities
Avenue
in M.I.N.T.
Trenton
Mentoring
, NJ
Program
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Young
349 W.
$300
7/14/2015
Costs
Schola
State
associated
rs'
St
with 2015
Instit
Trenton
Janssen
ute
, NJ
Cares
08618
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Zufall
18 West
$300
8/3/2015
Costs
Health
Blackwe
associated
Center
ll
with 2015
, Inc.
Street
Janssen
Dover,
Cares
NJ
Volunteer
07801
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$6,802,406
3/10/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, Armenia,
Dominican
Republic,
Gaza,
Ghana,
Honduras,
Nicaragua,
Peru, US,
West Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$413,439
3/10/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
Nicaragua,
Peru, US,
West Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$292,148
4/2/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Armenia,
Columbia,
Dominican
Republic,
Gaza,
Lebanon,
Nicaragua,
West Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$219,598
4/30/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Nepal
(2015
earthquake
relief)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$673,887
5/5/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n relief in
06902
Lebanon
(ANERA
program)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$279,339
5/20/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n relief in
06902
Romania,
Senegal,
United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,454,074
6/4/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Lebanon,
West Bank,
US,
Tanzania,
Peru,
Afghanistan
, Colombia,
Malawi,
Armenia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$6,800,452
6/29/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Gaza,
West Bank,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$13,984
8/3/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$54,149,760
8/6/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Armenia,
Uzbekistan,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$84,124
9/9/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance:
disaster
relief
preparednes
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$2,921,081
10/5/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Honduras,
Peru,
Armenia,
Tanzania,
Senegal,
Afghanistan
and for
disaster
preparednes
s modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,544,676
10/5/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, Armenia,
Gaza, Peru,
Senegal,
Tanzania,
West Bank,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$456,654
11/4/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Armenia,
Gaza, Peru,
Romania,
Senegal,
Uzbekistan,
West Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,070,880
11/18/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$897,021
12/8/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Armenia,
Nicaragua,
Peru, US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$48,945
12/21/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in USA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$2,005,526
12/21/2015
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in USA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$812,025
3/10/2015
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Haiti,
10005
Honduras,
Jamaica,
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$105,683
3/10/2015
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Haiti,
10005
Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$275,375
6/4/2015
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Jamaica,
NY
Armenia,
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$313,574
6/29/2015
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in El
NY
Salvador
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$1,612,989
10/9/2015
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$563,598
10/9/2015
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$8,754
11/4/2015
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guyana,
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$343,347
12/18/2015
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in El
NY
Salvador,
Dominican
Republic,
Sierra
Leone,
Uganda,
Guatemala,
Guyana,
Philippines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$2,014,130
3/10/2015
Pharmaceutic
Relief
Patera
al Product
Lane
Donation
Goleta,
for
CA
Humanitaria
93117
n Aid in
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Haiti, US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$274,761
3/10/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
Ghana,
Guatemala,
Nicaragua,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$17,185
4/2/2015
Pharmaceutic
Relief
Patera
al Product
Lane
Donation
Goleta,
for
CA
Humanitaria
93117
n Aid in
Paraguay
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$13,131
5/4/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Nepal
(2015
earthquake
relief)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$10,680
5/5/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Congo,
Malawi,
Mali,
Somalia,
Tanzania,
Zambia
(obstetric
fistula
program)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$187,713
5/20/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n relief in
93117
El
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Dominican
Republic,
United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$852,327
6/4/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in
Paraguay,
El
Salvador,
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$9,636,065
6/29/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Haiti,
India,
Jamaica,
Paraguay,
Armenia,
Dominican
Republic,
Ghana,
Guatemala,
Hondorus,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$20,976
8/4/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Paraguay
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$13,878
8/5/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Africa
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$198,318
9/11/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance:
disaster
relief
preparednes
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$5,543,118
10/12/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in
Nicaragua,
Sierra
Leone,
Ghana, US
and for
disaster
preparednes
s modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$918,456
10/12/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Ghana,
Sierra
Leone,
Nicaragua,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$81,702
11/4/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in
Cambodia,
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Honduras,
India,
Paraguay
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$27,755
11/25/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Africa
(obstetric
fistula
program)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$186,387
12/7/2015
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Goleta,
humanitaria
CA
n
93117
assistance
in Ecuador,
Ghana,
Mexico,
Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$4,874,474
10/6/2015
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
Papua New
Guinea
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$1,148,070
10/6/2015
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$299,754,483
12/31/2015
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$2,230,112
2/20/2015
Pharmaceutic
Intern
Glynco
al Product
ationa
Parkway
Donation to
l
Brunswi
support the
ck, GA
Medical
31525
Mission
Pack+
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$1,312,483
7/20/2015
Global
Intern
Glynco
Public
ationa
Parkway
Health
l
Brunswi
programs in
ck, GA
Sub Saharan
31525
Africa
(HIV)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$46,453
9/11/2015
Product
Intern
Glynco
donations
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance:
Medical
Mission
Pack Plus
replenishme
nt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$35,015
11/25/2015
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
and medical
mission
pack +
program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$951,077
12/15/2015
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
(medical
mission
pack +
program)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
US
1300 PA
$29,310,000
12/17/2015
Global
Agency
Avenue.
Public
for
, NW,
Health
Intern
SA-44
programs--B
ationa
Rm 475-
edaquiline
l
J
Donation
Develo
Washing
Program
pment
ton, DC
20523
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated March 24, 2016
Janssen Therapeutics, Division of Janssen Products, LP, Monetary and
Product Contributions to U.S.-based Charitable Organizations Full Year
2015
(Payments made from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2015)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aboundi
2311
$5,000
5/8/2015
Project
ng
Martin
CONNECT
Prospe
Luther
rty,
King
Inc.
Blvd
Dallas,
TX
75215
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aboundi
2311
$15,000
11/13/2015
Confidential
ng
Martin
and Mature
Prospe
Luther
Explanation
rty,
King
s (C-ME):
Inc.
Blvd
HCV
Dallas,
Awareness
TX
for At-Risk
75215
Adults in
South
Dallas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aboundi
2311
$30,000
12/22/2015
Project TEST
ng
Martin
Prospe
Luther
rty,
King
Inc.
Blvd
Dallas,
TX
75215
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Acercam
827
$7,000
5/8/2015
ContraSIDA
iento
Wildwoo
(Againsts
Hispan
d Ave,
AIDS)
o de
Suite
Caroli
200
na del
Columbi
Sur
a, SC
29203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ADAP
PO Box
$5,000
3/16/2015
ADAP
Advoca
15275
Directory
cy
Physica
l:312
11th
Avenue,
#21g,
New
York,
NY
10001
Washing
ton, DC
20003
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aid For
515
$10,000
7/13/2015
Case
AIDS
Greenwi
Management
Intern
ch St
Program
ationa
New
l,
York,
Inc.
NY
10013
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AID
811
$18,259
12/22/2015
Project
Upstat
Pendlet
Healthy
e
on
Pink Parts
Street
Bldg.
#10
Greenvi
lle, SC
29601
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
75 Amory
$15,000
11/13/2015
Viral
Action
Street
Hepatitis
Commit
Boston,
Access to
tee of
MA
Care
Massac
02119
Project:
husett
Access to
s
treatment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
995
$5,000
7/27/2015
Bridges
Care
Northwe
Project
Servic
st
e,
Bouleva
Inc.
rd
Winston
Salem,
NC
27101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
575 8th
$20,000
7/13/2015
HIV Health
Commun
Ave,
Literacy
ity
Suite
Education
Resear
502 New
and
ch
York,
Training
Initia
NY
for Service
tive
10018
Providers
of
Working
Americ
with
a
Vulnerable
ACRIA
Populations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
6260
$3,000
5/27/2015
Supportive
Founda
Westpar
Services
tion
k Drive
Housto
Suite
n,
100
Inc.
Houston
, TX
77057
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
200 W.
$40,000
5/20/2015
Road to
Founda
Jackson
Health:
tion
Blvd.,
Promoting
of
Suite
Successful
Chicag
2100
Implementat
o
Chicago
ion of
, IL
Health Care
60606
Reform for
People
Living with
HIV/AIDS in
Illinois
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
400 N
$5,000
3/12/2015
Case
Outrea
Beach
Management
ch
Street,
Program for
Center
Suite
People
100 Ft.
Living with
Worth,
HIV
TX
76111
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
1320
$28,020
12/22/2015
Transcend
Projec
Webster
t of
Street
the
oakland
East
, CA
Bay
96612
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
1424 K
$150,000
11/17/2015
Disseminatio
United
Street,
n of Access
NW,
to Care and
Ste.
Retention
200
in Care
Washing
Best
ton, DC
Practices
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
Box 3068
$5,000
3/13/2015
Latino
Walk
San
Services
San
Diego,
Diego
CA
92163
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alexian
825 W.
$5,000
7/15/2015
Transitional
Brothe
Welling
Living
rs
ton
Program for
Bonave
Chicago
Homeless
nture
, IL
Adults with
House
60657
HIV/AIDS
Case
Management
Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alivene
3808
$5,000
5/27/2015
Health and
ss
Nicolle
Wellness
Projec
t Ave
Program:
t,
Minneap
Aging with
Inc.
olis,
HIV/AIDS
MN
55409
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Allianc
825
$3,000
5/27/2015
Nurse Case
e For
Colorad
Management
Housin
o
for
g And
Blvd.,
Residential
Healin
Suite
Care
g
100 Los
Facility
Angeles
Serving
, CA
Homeless
90041
Persons
with HIV/
AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Atlanta
P.O. Box
$32,000
4/16/2015
Comprehensiv
Harm
92670
e HIV and
Reduct
Atlanta
HCV
ion
, GA
treatment
Coalit
30314
for IDUs
ion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
BASIC
432
$5,000
5/15/2015
Fully
NWFL,
Magnoli
Committed
INC.
a
Avenue
Panama
City,
FL
32401
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
BASIC
432
$29,250
12/22/2015
FULLY
NWFL,
Magnoli
COMMITTED:
INC.
a
Improving
Avenue
Linkage to
Panama
Care and
City,
Retention
FL
among Young
32401
MSM of
Color
Living with
HIV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bay
701 Oak
$5,000
12/21/2015
Patient Peer
Area
Street
Navigation
Young
San
Positi
Francis
ves
co, CA
94117
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Brockto
500
$5,000
3/24/2015
HIV/AIDS
n Area
Belmont
Case
Multi-
Street
Management
Servic
Ste 300
Initiative
es,
Brockto
and
Inc.
n, MA
Hepatitis C
02301
Support
Group.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bronx
540 East
$40,000
3/10/2015
Improving
AIDS
Fordham
Care and
Servic
Rd
Treatment
es,
Bronx,
for People
Inc.
NY
who Inject
10458
Drugs
(PWID) who
are Living
with HIV
and/or
Hepatitis C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Caring
PO Box
$40,000
5/20/2015
Hepatitis C
Ambass
1748
Program
adors
Oregon
Support
Progra
City,
m,
OR
Inc.
97045
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
900
$25,000
3/10/2015
Hepatitis
for
Avila
and HIV
Health
Street,
Navigation
Justic
Suite
Project--RF
e
301,
A
Los
Angeles
, CA
90012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Central
1785
$5,000
10/12/2015
Increasing
Louisi
Jackson
Timely
ana
Street
Access to
Aids
Alexand
HIV Care,
Suppor
ria, LA
Testing and
t
71301
Prevention
Servic
Services
es,
Inc.
(CLASS
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Coaliti
127 W
$50,000
12/21/2015
Hepatitis C
on On
127th
Education
Positi
street
and
ve
Suite
Services
Health
208 New
Project
Empowe
York,
rment,
NY
Inc.
10027
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Coastal
400 Mann
$40,000
3/24/2015
Hepatitis
Bend
Street,
Education
AIDS
Suite
Program
Founda
800
(HEP)
tion
Corpus
Christi
, TX
78401
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
677 Ala
$7,500
10/3/2015
Integrating
ty
Moana
Hepatitis
Health
#226
Care
Outrea
Honolul
Coordinatio
ch
u, HI
n into
Work
96813
Hawaii AIDS
To
Service
Preven
Organizatio
t Aids
ns
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Desert
1695 N.
$5,000
3/16/2015
Get Tested
Aids
Sunrise
Coachella
Projec
Way
Valley
t
Palm
Springs
, CA
92262
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Exponen
2
$5,000
11/16/2015
HEPAware
ts,
Washing
Project
Inc.
ton
Street,
Fourth
Floor
New
York,
NY
10004
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gay
446 W
$15,000
10/3/2015
HIV
Men's
33rd St
Community
Health
New
Education
Crisis
York,
and
NY
Treatment
10001
Adherence
Support
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gay
446 W
$30,000
12/22/2015
Peer
Men's
33rd St
Navigation
Health
New
Services
Crisis
York,
for HIV-
NY
positive
10001
Transgender
and Gender
Non-
Conforming
Individuals
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Harm
22 West
$30,000
6/5/2015
Hepatitis C
Reduct
27th
and
ion
Street
Injection
Coalit
5th
Drug Use
ion
Floor
Initiative
New
York,
NY
10001
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hips
HIPS
$30,000
12/22/2015
Treatment
Center
Plus: Peer
for
Based
Health
Community
and
Health
Achieve
Worker
ment
Support to
906 H
Improve
St., NE
Health
Washing
Outcomes
ton, DC
for Highly
20002
Marginalize
d
Transgender
Women
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Housing
301 West
$7,500
12/8/2015
Hepatitis C
Works,
37th
Peer
Inc.
Street,
Navigator
#3 New
Program
York,
NY
10018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jackson
P.O. Box
$5,000
8/27/2015
JASMYN
ville
380103
Safety Net
Area
923
Program
Sexual
Peninsu
Expansion
Minori
lar
ty
Place
Youth
Jackson
Networ
ville,
k,
FL
Inc.
32205
(JASMY
N)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Legacy
4054
$5,000
12/21/2015
Counseling
Counse
McKinne
services to
ling
y
individuals
Center
Avenue,
living with
Suite
HIV/AIDS
102
Dallas,
TX
75204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Long
2740
$30,000
12/22/2015
Pride for
Island
Martin
Youth POZ
Crisis
Ave
Night
Center
Bellmor
, Inc.
e, NY
11710
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Macedon
1835
$5,000
3/24/2015
Peer
ia
Centre
Navigator
Family
Avenue,
for
And
Suite
Prevention/
Commun
285
Case
ity
Pittsbu
Management
Enrich
rgh, PA
Services
ment
15219
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Macedon
1835
$5,000
10/23/2015
Peer
ia
Centre
Navigator
Family
Avenue,
for
And
Suite
Prevention/
Commun
285
Case
ity
Pittsbu
Management
Enrich
rgh, PA
Services
ment
15219
Implementat
Center
ion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
MCCNY
446 West
$30,000
12/23/2015
Trans in
Charit
36th
Action
ies
Street
New
York,
NY
10018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mendoci
148
$39,870
3/30/2015
Linkage and
no
Clara
Support
County
Ave.
Services
AIDS
Ukiah,
for PWID's
Volunt
CA
eer
95482
Networ
k adba
Mendoc
ino
County
AIDS/
Viral
Hepati
tis
Networ
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Metropo
3251 3rd
$30,000
12/23/2015
TransHealth
litan
Avenue
Care
Charit
North
Coordinatio
ies,
Suite#1
n
Inc.
25 St
Petersb
urg, FL
33713
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minorit
5149 W.
$7,500
4/30/2015
``G.L.A.M.O.
y AIDS
Jeffers
R.''
Projec
on Blvd
Getting
t
Los
Linked And
Angeles
Managing
, CA
Our
90016
Regimen. It
is The
Missing
Link.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Missour
601
$18,000
3/24/2015
General
i
Busines
Charitable
Hepati
s Loop
Contributio
tis C
70
n
Allian
West,
ce
Suite
134K,
Columbi
a, MO
65203-
2585
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Montgom
820 W.
$18,000
3/13/2015
Alabama
ery
Wouth
eHealth
AIDS
Blvd.,
Access to
Outrea
Montgom
Rural care
ch
ery, AL
for HIV/
36105
AIDS and
Hepatitis C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nashvil
633
$18,000
12/22/2015
Brothers
le
Thompso
United
CARES,
n Lane
Network of
Inc.
Nashvil
Tennessee:
le, TN
Mobilizatio
37204
n of Young
African
American
MSM in
Rural
Middle and
East
Tennessee
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2140
$5,000
7/15/2015
Brothers
l AIDS
Martin
Like Us
Educat
Luther
(B.L.U.)
ion
King
Project
and
Jr.
Servic
Drive
es for
Atlanta
Minori
, GA
ties
30310
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2140
$30,000
12/22/2015
Be Connected
l AIDS
Martin
Mentoring
Educat
Luther
Program
ion
King
and
Jr.
Servic
Drive
es for
Atlanta
Minori
, GA
ties
30310
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
580
$200,000
2/25/2015
Hepatitis C
l AIDS
Broadwa
Project,
Treatm
y Suite
HIV Too
ent
1010
Advoca
New
cy
York,
Projec
NY
t
10012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
National
$150,000
11/17/2015
Affordable
l
Latino
Care Act
Allian
AIDS
(ACA),
ce of
Action
Viral
State
Network
Hepatitis,
and
and
and Ryan
Territ
Nationa
White/ADAP
orial
l
Public
AIDS
Allianc
Policy and
Direct
e of
Technical
ors
State
Assistance
and
Programs
Territo
rial
AIDS
Directo
rs 444
N
Capitol
St
Suite
339
Washing
ton, DC
20001
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
Post
$7,500
7/27/2015
Black LGBT
l
Office
Health and
Black
Box
Wellness
Justic
71395
Initiative
e
Washing
Coalit
ton, DC
ion,
20024
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1825
$35,000
3/10/2015
Strong
l
Connect
Communities
Minori
icut
:
ty
Avenue,
Strengtheni
AIDS
NW
ng
Counci
Washing
connections
l
ton, DC
between
20009-
communities
5721
of color
and the
healthcare
providers
that serve
them.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
44 South
$5,000
8/27/2015
Support of
Jersey
Street
case
AIDS
Morrist
management
Servic
own, NJ
es
07960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Next
99
$5,000
7/27/2015
Next Step
Step
Bishop
Transitiona
Fund,
Allen
l Support
Inc.
Drive
for HIV+
Cambrid
Teens and
ge, MA
Young
02139
Adults
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Our
2727 SE
$5,000
3/13/2015
NHCP:
House
Alder
Independent
Of
St.
Living
Portla
Portlan
Support for
nd
d, OR
Individuals
Incorp
97214
with HIV/
orated
AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Philade
1233
$10,000
6/25/2015
End AIDS
lphia
Locust
Summit/AIDS
Fight
St.
Education
Philade
Month 2015
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$40,000
3/13/2015
The Support
Inform
Ninth
Partnership
Street
San
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$65,000
6/12/2015
Mission
Inform
Ninth
Support for
Street
Project
San
Inform
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
P.O. Box
$5,000
10/3/2015
Transitional
Transi
4826
Supportive
tions,
Austin,
Housing
Inc.
TX
Programs
78765
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Resourc
2701
$3,000
5/27/2015
Valor
e
Reagan
Latino--HIV
Center
Street
Prevention
of
Dallas,
Program
Dallas
TX
, Inc.
75219
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
2508
$20,000
8/3/2015
Creating
Diego
Histori
Circles of
Human
c
Care
Dignit
Decatur
y
Road
Founda
Suite
tion
160 San
Diego,
CA
92106
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Set
8035 E.
$5,000
10/3/2015
Phenomenal
Apart
R.L.
Woman
Aiming
Thornto
Program
Victor
n Frwy.
(PWP)
iously
Suite
To
424
Elimat
Dallas,
e
TX
Diseas
75228
es
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sexual
410 7th
$30,000
12/22/2015
Peer
Minori
st SE
Education:
ty
Washing
Empowering
Youth
ton, DC
young MSM
Assist
20003
of color to
ance
end HIV.
League
(SMYAL
) DBA:
Suppor
ting
and
Mentor
ing
Youth
Advoca
tes
and
Leader
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shanti
730 Polk
$15,000
7/14/2015
Shanti's Hep
Projec
Street
C Pilot
t,
3rd
Expansion
Inc.
Floor
of our HIV
San
Services
Francis
Program
co, CA
94109
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Someone
1950
$30,000
12/22/2015
Improving
Cares
Spectru
Linkage to
Inc Of
m
Care and
Atlant
Circle
Retention
a
Ste.
among
A145
Transgender
Mariett
Women and
a, GA
Gender
30067
Nonconformi
ng People
Living with
HIV Project
title:
Transformin
g, Renewing
and
Unifying
Transgender
Health
Project
(TRUTH)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Southwe
300
$5,000
9/3/2015
HIV Care in
st
Southwe
a Safety
Boulev
st
Net Clinic
ard
Bouleva
Setting
Family
rd
Health
Kansas
Care,
City,
Inc.
KS
66103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Southwe
1101 N.
$4,500
5/15/2015
Hepatitis C
st
Central
Education
Center
Avenue,
and Support
For
Suite
for High-
HIV/
200
risk
AIDS,
phoenix
Populations
Inc.
, AZ
85004
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St
808 W.
$40,000
3/10/2015
South L.A.
Johns
58th
Mobile
Well
Street
Health--Pee
Child
Los
r Navigator
And
Angeles
Program for
Family
, CA
PWID Living
Center
90037
with HIV
, Inc.
and/or
Hepatitis C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
1111
$75,000
12/22/2015
FINISH THE
Luke's
Amsterd
JOB:
Roosev
am Ave
Providing
elt
New
HCV care to
Hospit
York,
current or
al
NY
former IV
Center
10025
drug users
previously
diagnosed
through
governmenta
l testing
programs.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
17 Davis
$65,000
7/14/2015
Ensuring
AIDS
Blvd.
Adequate
Instit
Suite
Funding for
ute
403
Domestic
Tampa,
HIV/AIDS
FL
and
33606
Hepatitis
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The Hep
1325 S.
$25,000
5/20/2015
Hepatitis C
C
Colorad
Testing and
Connec
o
Linkage to
tion
Blvd.,
Care
B-302
Denver,
CO
80222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
PO Box
$39,000
3/13/2015
The Open
Open
99243
Door: Peer
Door,
Pittsbu
Support for
Inc.
rgh, PA
HIV
15233
Engagement
and
Retention
in Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
85
$15,000
5/15/2015
Women's HIV
Well
Norman
Treatment
Projec
Avenue,
Advocacy
t
Suite 1
Development
Brookly
Program
n, NY
11222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
85
$15,000
7/21/2015
Charitable
Well
Norman
Donation
Projec
Avenue,
for Online
t
Suite 1
Resources
Brookly
and Program
n, NY
Evaluation/
11222
Outcome
Measurement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
8101
$5,000
7/15/2015
Personal
Wright
Cameron
Disease
House
Rd.,
Management
Wellne
Suite
for HIV/
ss
105
AIDS and
Center
Austin,
HepC
, Inc.
TX
Clients
78754
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TPA
5050 N.
$20,000
10/8/2015
Peer Health
Networ
Broadwa
Navigation
k
y Suite
Services
Incorp
300
orated
Chicago
Test
, IL
Positi
60640
ve
Aware
Networ
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TPA
5050 N.
$26,056
12/22/2015
Youth
Networ
Broadwa
Investment
k
y Suite
Incorp
300
orated
Chicago
Test
, IL
Positi
60640
ve
Aware
Networ
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Treatme
261
$40,000
5/21/2015
Case Studies
nt
Fifth
Action
Ave
Group,
Suite
Inc.
2110
New
York,
NY
10016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Univers
UCSF
$7,500
8/27/2015
Mission-
ity of
Allianc
Based
Califo
e
Support of
rnia
Health
UCSF
San
Project
Alliance
Franci
1855
Health
sco
Folsom
Project
Street,
Services
Ste.
for People
670 Box
Living With
0884
or at Risk
San
of HIV/AIDS
Francis
co, CA
94143
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Univers
51
$7,500
10/23/2015
The
ity of
Goodman
Cincinnati
Cincin
Drive
Exchange
nati
Suite
Project: A
100,
Public
P.O.
Health
Box
Initiative
19970
Cincinn
ati, OH
45219-
0970
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
US
1300 PA
$1,000,000
10/23/2015
Sirturo
Agency
Avenue.
Donation
for
, NW,
Program--US
Intern
SA-44
AID
ationa
Rm 475-
Agreement
l
J
Develo
Washing
pment
ton, DC
20523
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Vermont
P. O.
$40,000
3/10/2015
Expansion of
Commit
Box
Vermont's
tee
5248
Services to
For
Burling
Improve
Aids
ton, VT
Care for
Resour
05402
PWID Living
ces
with HCV
Educat
ion
and
Servic
es
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Warren-
511 Ruin
$28,800
12/22/2015
Online
Vance
Creek
Linkage and
Commun
Rd STE
Retention
ity
105
Project for
Health
Henders
YMSM
Center
on, NC
, Inc.
27536
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Washing
566 West
$40,000
3/13/2015
Engaging
ton
181st
High Risk
Height
Street,
Active
s
Floor 2
Injection
CORNER
New
Drug Users
Projec
York,
in
t
NY
Hepatitis C
10033
testing and
Treatment
in Northern
Manhattan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Wellnes
2921 NE
$5,000
7/15/2015
Sister-to-
s
6th Ave
Sister
Center
Wilton
of
Manors,
South
FL
Florid
33334
a,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
WORLD
449 15th
$15,000
12/17/2015
2nd CHANCE
Women
St.,
(Creating a
Organi
Suite
Healthy and
zed to
303
Nurturing
Respon
Oakland
Community
d to
, CA
Environment
Life-
94612
)
threat
ening
Diseas
es
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$13,174,000
3/15/2013
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza,
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$6,019,000
6/15/2013
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza,
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$59,199,000
9/15/2013
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza,
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$4,718,000
12/15/2013
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza,
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated March 24, 2016
Janssen Biotech, Inc. Monetary and Product Contribution to U.S.-based
Charitable Organizations Full Year 2016
(Payments made from January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aid For
12271
$300
9/19/2016
Costs
Friend
Townsen
associated
s
d Rd
with 2016
Philade
Janssen
lphia,
Cares
PA
Volunteer
19154
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
2310
$1,500
4/11/2016
2016 Run for
n
Route
Dad,
Cancer
34,
Awareness
Societ
Suite
Sponsor
y Inc.
1D
Manasqu
an, NJ
08736
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1626
$1,000
4/15/2016
Relay For
n
Locust
Life of the
Cancer
Street
Wissahickon
Societ
Philade
Valley
y Inc.
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
1355
$200,000
6/3/2016
Renewal
is
Peachtr
support of
Founda
ee
Arthritis
tion
Street,
Foundation
Suite
Run / Walk
600
series -
Atlanta
Walk to
, GA
Cure
30309
Arthritis
and Jingle
Bell Run
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
1355
$100,000
4/11/2016
General
is
Peachtr
Operating
Founda
ee
Support
tion
Street,
Suite
600
Atlanta
, GA
30309
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
2280
$75
3/7/2016
Employee
is
South
directed
Founda
Albion
donation in
tion,
Street
lieu of
Great
Denver,
company
West
CO
holiday
Region
80222-
gift
, Inc.
4906
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bicol
21019
$1,425
3/8/2016
Employee
Founda
47th
directed
tion
Ave W
donation in
Lynnwoo
lieu of
d, WA
company
98036
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$2,000
8/17/2016
Paws 4 Life
Suppor
Road PO
Dog Walk
t
Box
Commun
3187
ity of
Warmins
Philad
ter, PA
elphia
18974
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$2,500
8/30/2016
Celebration
Suppor
Road PO
of Hope
t
Box
Commun
3187
ity of
Warmins
Philad
ter, PA
elphia
18974
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$900
9/13/2016
Costs
Suppor
Road PO
associated
t
Box
with 2016
Commun
3187
Janssen
ity of
Warmins
Cares
Philad
ter, PA
Volunteer
elphia
18974
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
944
$3,500
8/5/2016
Cancer
Suppor
Marcon
Support and
t
Blvd.,
Education
Commun
#110
Allentown,
ity of
Allento
PA
the
wn, PA
Greate
18109
r
Lehigh
Valley
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Canine
PO Box
$300
9/14/2016
Costs
Partne
170
associated
rs for
Cochran
with 2016
Life
ville,
Janssen
PA
Cares
19330
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
1900
$5,000
5/27/2016
Project for
for
Cherry
Medically
Child
Street
Needy
Advoca
Philade
Children
tes
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
CHOP
$5,000
4/12/2016
7th Annual
n's
Foundat
Walk for
Hospit
ion
Hope
al of
ATTN:
benefiting
Philad
Holly
pediatric
elphia
Hubbard/
Inflammator
Founda
Walk
y Bowel
tion
for
Disease
Hope
Research
2016 PO
Box
40930
34th
and
Civic
Center
Blvd.
Philade
lphia,
NJ
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
300B
$20,000
12/14/2016
Free medical
ty
Lawrenc
and dental
Volunt
e Drive
care
eers
West
services
in
Chester
for
Medici
, PA
uninsured
ne
19380
families in
Chester
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohn's
733
$135,000
2/26/2016
Take Steps
and
Third
2016 Walk
Coliti
Avenue
Program
s
Suite
Founda
510 New
tion
York,
of
NY
Americ
10017
a,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohn's
733
$5,000
6/13/2016
Disease
and
Third
State
Coliti
Ave,
Awareness
s
Suite
(DSA) Word
Founda
510 New
Cloud
tion
York,
Activity
of
NY
Americ
10017
a,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohn's
733
$18,000
6/13/2016
Camp Oasis
and
Third
Coliti
Ave,
s
Suite
Founda
510 New
tion
York,
of
NY
Americ
10017
a,
Inc.-
NY
Chapte
r
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
236
$5,000
3/21/2016
Teacher
e
Randell
Development
Valley
Hall
Program
Scienc
3141
e
Chestnu
Fairs,
t
Inc.
Street
Philade
lphia,
PA
19104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Doernbe
1121 SW
$75
3/21/2016
Employee
cher
Salmon
directed
Childr
St #100
donation in
en's
Portlan
lieu of
Hospit
d, OR
company
al
97205
holiday
Founda
gift
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
142
$25,000
9/30/2016
Family Reach
Reach
Berkele
Foundation
Founda
y
General
tion
Street,
Support
4th
Floor
Boston,
MA
02116
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
142
$250,000
12/22/2016
Family Reach
Reach
Berkele
Programmati
Founda
y
c Support
tion
Street;
4th
Floor
Boston,
MA
02116
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Food
1501
$5,000
12/15/2016
Year Round
Bank
John
Youth
of
Tipton
Feeding
South
Blvd
Programs
Jersey
Pennsau
ken
Townshi
p, NJ
08110
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
113 West
$3,000
12/26/2016
Outreach to
Associ
Chestnu
Homeless
ation
t
Families
For
Street
Care
West
and
Chester
Protec
, PA
tion
19380
Of
Childr
en
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
560
$1,700
4/12/2016
Free
Prosta
Barnesl
Prostate
te
ey Lane
Cancer
Cancer
Alphare
Screening
Coalit
tta, GA
ion
30022
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
330
$4,000
10/10/2016
Girl Scouts
Scouts
Manor
of Eastern
of
Road
Pennsylvani
Southe
Miquon,
a Science,
astern
PA
Technology,
Pennsy
19444
Engineering
lvania
, and Math
(STEM)
programming
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Green
1368
$15,000
12/15/2016
Watershed
Valley
Prizer
Science
s
Road
Education
Associ
Pottsto
Program
ation
wn, PA
19465
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
1847 E
$2,000
5/30/2016
Building
for
Lincoln
communities
Humani
Hwy
and
ty of
Coatesv
changing
Cheste
ille,
lives
r
PA
County
19320
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
1829 N.
$300
11/3/2016
Costs
For
19th
associated
Humani
Street
with 2016
ty
Philade
Janssen
Philad
lphia,
Cares
elphia
PA
Volunteer
Inc.
19121
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
1829 N.
$5,000
12/26/2016
Diamond Park
For
19th
Phase 2--
Humani
Street
affordable
ty
Philade
housing
Philad
lphia,
elphia
PA
Inc.
19121
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hatboro- 229
$25,000
12/14/2016
STEM
Horsha
Meeting
Programs
m
house
for Hatboro-
Educat
Road
Horsham
ional
Horsham
Students
Founda
, PA
tion
19044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Horsham
PO Box
$1,000
8/5/2016
K9 Program
Neighb
621
Fit Out and
ors
Horsham
National
Associ
, PA
Night Out
ation
19044
Celebration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Junior
994 Old
$7,500
8/18/2016
Junior
Achiev
Eagle
Achievement
ement
School
Whole
Of
Rd
School
Delawa
Suite
Initiative
re
1014
Valley
Wayne,
PA
19087
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kids
26071
$3,000
8/30/2016
Support
Connec
Merit
Groups for
ted
Circle,
the
#103
Children of
Laguna
Cancer
Hills,
Patients
CA
92653-
7016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Melanom
250
$100
9/30/2016
Memorial
a
Maplefl
Donation
Intern
ower
ationa
Road
l
Glenmoo
Founda
re, PA
tion
19343
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Metropo
2323
$25,000
12/16/2016
Medically
litan
Ranstea
Appropriate
Area
d
Meals for
Neighb
Street
People with
orhood
Philade
Critical
Nutrit
lphia,
Illnesses
ion
PA
Allian
19103
ce
(MANNA
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mitzvah
1561
$300
9/22/2016
Costs
Circle
Gehman
associated
Founda
Road
with 2016
tion
Harleys
Janssen
ville,
Cares
PA
Volunteer
19438
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mitzvah
1561
$5,000
8/5/2016
Critical
Circle
Gehman
Needs
Founda
Road
Support for
tion
Harleys
Individuals
ville,
and
PA
Families
19438
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Montgom
340
$10,000
12/9/2016
The Study of
ery
DeKalb
Psychology
County
Pike
as a Guide
Commun
Blue
to Peer
ity
Bell,
Mentorship
Colleg
PA
for BTE--
e
19422
Wissahickon
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Montgom
340
$23,811
12/9/2016
Bridge to
ery
DeKalb
Employment-
County
Pike
-Wissahicko
Commun
Blue
n
ity
Bell,
Colleg
PA
e
19422
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mt.
One
$50,000
10/18/2016
Overcoming
Sinai
Gustave
the
Medica
L. Levy
Barriers to
l
Place
Clinical
Center
Box
Care for
1049
Underserved
New
Multiple
York,
Myeloma
NY
Patients
10029
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
383 Main
$50,000
12/22/2016
MMRF
e
Avenue
Endurance
Myelom
5th
Events
a
Floor
Resear
Norwalk
ch
, CT
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
383 Main
$100,000
12/22/2016
2017 MMRF
e
Avenue
Team for
Myelom
5th
Cures 5K
a
Floor
Walk/Run
Resear
Norwalk
Program
ch
, CT
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
383 Main
$275,000
12/22/2016
MMy Ride for
e
Avenue
a Cure
Myelom
5th
a
Floor
Resear
Norwalk
ch
, CT
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
383 Main
$40,000
12/23/2016
MMRF Patient
e
Avenue
Support
Myelom
5th
Center
a
Floor
Resear
Norwalk
ch
, CT
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
51 Locus
$100,000
2/23/2016
2016 MMRF
e
Avenue
Team for
Myelom
Suite
Cures 5K
a
201
Walk/Run
Resear
Norwalk
Program
ch
, CT
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Multipl
383 Main
$50,000
3/7/2016
2016 MMRF
e
Avenue
Team for
Myelom
5th
Cures
a
Floor
Endurance
Resear
Norwalk
Events
ch
, CT
Program
Founda
06851
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
4950
$2,500
4/15/2016
Run/Walk to
l
York
Break the
Ovaria
Rd,
Silence on
n
Unit
Ovarian
Cancer
631
Cancer
Coalit
Holicon
ion
g, PA
Inc.
18928
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
6600 SW
$50,000
5/3/2016
2016 Team
l
92nd
NPF Walk
Psoria
Ave.,
sis
#300
Founda
Portlan
tion
d, OR
97223
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NET
499 N.
$1,125
3/4/2016
Employee
Treatm
5th
directed
ent
St.,
donation in
Servic
Suite A
lieu of
es
Philade
company
lphia,
holiday
PA
gift
19123
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Philade
1729
$75,000
12/27/2016
STEAM Mural
lphia
Mount
Initiative
Mural
Vernon
Arts
Street
Progra
Philade
m
lphia,
PA
19130
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
1515
$1,000
12/16/2016
Mental
HOME
Fairmou
Health and
nt
Recovery
Avenue
Services
Philade
lphia,
PA
19130
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Prostat
7009 S.
$30,000
5/20/2016
Prostate
e
Potomac
Cancer
Cancer
Street
Disparities
Educat
Suite
Outreach
ion
125
Program
Counci
Centenn
l
ial, CO
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Prostat
500
$50,000
2/8/2016
Partnerships
e
Victory
for
Health
Road
Education,
Educat
Quincy,
Support and
ion
MA
Outreach
Networ
02170
k Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Reach
89 South
$5,000
12/21/2016
Preparing
Out
Street,
Families
and
Suite
for School
Read
201
Success
Boston,
MA
02111
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rebuild
4355
$5,000
4/12/2016
Mantua Block
ing
Orchard
Build 2016
Togeth
Street
er
Suite
Philad
2R
elphia
Philade
lphia,
PA
19124
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Regiona
30
$100
6/10/2016
Memorial
l
Milesto
Donation
Hospic
ne Road
e and
Danbury
Home
, CT
Care
06810
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
901 East
$7,000
5/23/2016
RSVP's
and
8th
America
Senior
Street
Reads/
Volunt
Suite
Writes and
eer
200
Protege One-
Progra
King of
on-One
m of
Prussia
Mentoring
Montgo
, PA
Programs.
mery
19406
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
901 East
$10,000
12/15/2016
RSVP's
and
8th
Family
Senior
Street
Literacy
Volunt
Suite
Volunteer
eer
200
Program
Progra
King of
(FLVP) and
m of
Prussia
My Free
Montgo
, PA
Tutor (MFT)
mery
19406
virtual
County
STEM
tutoring
and career
awareness
Program.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverbe
1950
$6,000
8/5/2016
Outreach to
nd
Spring
Children/
Enviro
Mill
Access to
nmenta
Road
Nature/
l
Gladwyn
Norristown
Educat
e, PA
Area School
ion
19035
District
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sandy
2010
$2,000
12/14/2016
Sandy Sprint
Rollma
West
Superhero
n
Chester
5K or 10K
Ovaria
Pike,
Run/Walk
n
Suite
Cancer
410
Founda
Haverto
tion,
wn, PA
Inc.
19083
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SARC
24 Frank
$9,500
9/22/2016
General
Lloyd
Operating
Wright
Support--We
Drive A/
bsite
3100 PO
Box 406
Ann
Arbor,
MI
48105
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
2800
$300
9/22/2016
Costs
Equest
Street
associated
rians
Road
with 2016
P.O.
Janssen
Box
Cares
1001
Volunteer
Warring
Activity
ton, PA
18976
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
2800
$4,000
10/10/2016
Special
Equest
Street
Equestrians
rians
Road
Equine-
P.O.
Assisted
Box
Learning
1001
and
Warring
Therapeutic
ton, PA
Riding
18976
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Starfin
4015
$10,000
4/19/2016
Starfinder's
der
Main
Soccer,
Founda
Street
Education,
tion
Philade
and
lphia,
Leadership
PA
Development
19127
Programs
for Youth
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
The
$12,000
4/19/2016
Family Care
Childr
Childre
Binder
en's
n's
Program
Hospit
Hospita
al of
l of
Philad
Philade
elphia
lphia
Founda
Foundat
tion
ion
Attn:
Staci
Carney,
Associa
te
Directo
r,
Corpora
te and
Foundat
ion
Relatio
ns 100
Penn
Square
East
8th
Floor,
Suite
8050
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
The
$5,000
4/12/2016
Child Life,
Childr
Childre
Education,
en's
n's
and
Hospit
Hospita
Creative
al of
l of
Arts
Philad
Philade
Therapy
elphia
lphia
Program
Founda
Foundat
tion
ion
Attn:
Staci
Carney,
Associa
te
Directo
r,
Corpora
te and
Foundat
ion
Relatio
ns 100
Penn
Square
East
8th
Floor,
Suite
8050
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
222
$10,000
12/26/2016
Corporate
Frankl
North
Membership
in
20th
Instit
St.
ute
Philade
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
622
$2,000
8/18/2016
General
Giving
Evans
Operating
Tree
Road PO
Support
Box 823
with an
Gwynedd
emphasis on
Valley,
the Public
PA
Educational
19437
Giving
Events
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2600
$10,000
3/24/2016
Hubert J.P.
Melmar
Wayland
Schoemaker
k
Road
Classic
Charit
Berwyn,
able
PA
Founda
19312
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
400
$600
9/19/2016
Costs
Pennsb
Pennsbu
associated
ury
ry
with 2016
Societ
Memoria
Janssen
y
l Road
Cares
Morrisv
Volunteer
ille,
Activity
PA
19067
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
775 E
$9,500
8/5/2016
Sarcoma
Sarcom
Blithed
Alliance
a
ale
General
Allian
#334
Support
ce
Mill
Valley,
CA
94941
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trustee
3025
$5,000
12/26/2016
WXPN
s Of
Walnut
Musicians
The
Street
On Call
Univer
Philade
sity
lphia,
Of
PA
Pennsy
19104
lvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Turning
415
$5,000
4/12/2016
Families and
Points
South
Schools
For
15th
Together
Childr
Street
(FAST)
en
Philade
Program
lphia,
PA
19146
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
1709
$245,879
12/19/2016
Impact Fund
Way of
Benjami
Greater
Southe
n
Philadelphi
astern
Frankli
a, PA and
Pennsy
n
Southern,
lvania
Parkway
NJ
Philade
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Youth
949
$5,000
12/9/2016
The Youth
Rally
Chestnu
Rally--a
Commit
t Oak
camp for
tee
Dr St.
kids/teens
Inc.
Charles
living with
, MO
conditions
63303
affecting
the bowel
(Crohn's
Disease and
UC) and
bladder
systems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Zero
2000
$50,000
4/21/2016
ZERO
The
Joseph
Prostate
Projec
E
Cancer Run/
t To
Sanker
Walk
End
BLVD
National
Prosta
Norwood
Series--Nat
te
, OH
ionwide
Cancer
45212
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen has also made financial donations to independent charitable
foundations that assist patients who are underinsured and in financial
need with treatment-related expenses. In keeping with our donor
agreements and applicable regulatory guidance, we will only disclose
aggregate data on our charitable giving and do not publicize
information on donations to specific foundations and disease states.
In 2016, we contributed $47 million in donations to independent
charitable foundations, enabling them to provide assistance with
medication-related copays to patients with cancer and autoimmune
diseases.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$71,016,839
3/31/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$58,963,086
6/30/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08934
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$60,107,176
9/30/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08935
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
99,129,337
$12/31/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08936
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated March 30, 2017
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Monetary and Product Contribution to U.S.-
based Charitable Organizations Full Year 2016
(Payments made from January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
180
1
$1,000
12/15/2016
2NDFLOOR
Turnin
Bethany
Youth
g
Road,
Helpline
Lives
Buildin
Hunterdon,
Around
g 3
Mercer, and
Inc.
Suite
Somerset
42
Operations
Hazlet,
NJ
07730
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alzheim
225 N.
$5,000
12/15/2016
Comfort Zone
er's
Michiga
Program
Associ
n
Support
ation
Avenue
Chicago
, IL
60601
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
4100
$20,000
12/7/2016
General
n
Alpha
mission
Diabet
Road,
support
es
Suite
Associ
100
ation
Dallas,
TX
75244
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1160
$10,000
7/11/2016
What Can I
n
Route
Eat?
Diabet
22
es
East,
Associ
Suite
ation
103
Bridgew
ater,
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
PO Box
$30,000
12/23/2016
Atrial
n
541
Fibrillatio
Founda
Greenwo
n Patient
tion
od, TX
Education
For
76246
and Support
Womens
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1 Union
$5,000
12/23/2016
Garden State
n
Street
Go Red For
Heart
Suite
Women
Associ
301
Luncheon
ation-
Robbins
-New
ville,
Jersey
NJ
08691
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$100,000
12/15/2016
Typical or
n
Wilson
Troubled?
Psychi
Blvd,
School-
atric
Suite
Based
Founda
1825
Mental
tion
Arlingt
Health
on, VA
Education
22209
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$200,000
12/15/2016
Judges' and
n
Wilson
Psychiatris
Psychi
Blvd,
ts'
atric
Suite
Leadership
Founda
1825
Initiative
tion
Arlingt
previously
on, VA
known as
22209
Judges'
Leadership
Initiative
(JLI)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$35,000
12/15/2016
Partnership
n
Wilson
for
Psychi
Blvd,
Workplace
atric
Suite
Mental
Founda
1825
Health
tion
Arlingt
on, VA
22209
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
150
$300
9/27/2016
Costs
's
Pittsto
associated
Grow-A-
wn Road
with 2016
Row,
Pittsto
Janssen
Inc.
wn, NJ
Cares
08867
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anchor
482
$743
1/19/2016
General
House,
Centre
Operating
Inc.
Street
Support
Trenton
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anderso
PO Box
$20,000
12/7/2016
Integrated
n
134 532
Care
House
Route
Management
523
Whiteho
use
Station
, NJ
08889
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Ann
595 W.
$9,500
12/15/2016
Improving
Silver
State
Patient
man
Street
Self-Care
Commun
Doylest
and
ity
own, PA
Management
Health
18901
of Chronic
Clinic
Illnesses
at a Free
Clinic for
the
Uninsured.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arbor
211
$75
5/17/2016
Employee
Day
North
directed
Founda
12th St
donation in
tion
Lincoln
lieu of
, NE
company
68508
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arc of
141
$3,000
9/28/2016
Day Care
Somers
South
subsidies
et
Main
for at risk
County
Street
children
Manvill
and
e, NJ
children
08835
with
disabilitie
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Asian
180 W
$2,000
4/6/2016
Cardiovascul
Health
Washing
ar Health
Coalit
ton St
Screenings
ion
Suite
for Low-
1000
Income at-
Chicago
risk Asians
, IL
Immigrants
60602
and
Refugees in
Chicago
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bay
66 Canal
$5,000
6/24/2016
Bay Cove
Cove
Street
Wellness
Human
Boston,
Center
Servic
MA
es,
02114
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bear
1162
$750
12/15/2016
The Bear
Tavern
Bear
Tavern
Parent
Tavern
Science
s
Road
Fair
Associ
Titusvi
ation
lle, NJ
08560
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bear
1162
$750
3/1/2016
Bear Tavern
Tavern
Bear
Elementary
Parent
Tavern
School
s
Road
Science
Associ
Titusvi
Fair
ation
lle, NJ
08560
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
2875
$6,500
11/18/2016
STEM School
Brothe
York
Mentoring
rs Big
Road
Initiative
Sister
Jamison
s of
, PA
Bucks
18929
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
535 East
$7,500
11/18/2016
Youth
Brothe
Frankli
Mentoring
rs Big
n
Programs
Sister
Street
s of
Trenton
Mercer
, NJ
County
08610
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Boys
212
$20,000
12/15/2016
Extended Day
and
Centre
Learning
Girls
Street
Club
Trenton
of
, NJ
Trento
08611
n and
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bristol
120
$7,500
12/15/2016
ArtRageous
Rivers
Radclif
Theatre
ide
fe
Arts
Theate
Street
Education
r Co
Bristol
Program
Inc.
, PA
19007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Broward
305 SE
$15,000
8/4/2016
Affordable
County
18th
Housing
Commun
Court
program
ity
Fort
Develo
Lauderd
pment
ale, FL
Corpor
33316
ation
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bucks
1069
$5,000
12/15/2016
Veterans
County
Jackson
Housing
Housin
ville
Assistance
g
Road
Program
Group
Ivyland
, PA
18974
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Califor
2015
$25,000
4/11/2016
Using
nia
Steiner
Community
Pacifi
Street
Health
c
San
Workers to
Medica
Francis
increase
l
co, CA
underserved
Center
94115
patients'
Founda
ability to
tion
manage type
2 diabetes.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Caminar
2600 S.
$7,500
4/12/2016
Bridges to
El
Wellness
Camino
Real,
Suite
200 San
Mateo,
CA
94403
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cardiov
PO Box
$5,000
3/31/2016
25th Annual
ascula
54632
Lansdale
r
Philade
Internation
Instit
lphia,
al Spring
ute of
PA
Festival
Philad
19148
elphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
25 Ikea
$4,000
12/22/2016
Catholic
c
Drive
Charities,
Charit
Westham
Diocese of
ies
pton,
Trenton On
NJ
My Own--
08060
Supportive
Housing
Program
Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
25 Ikea
$15,000
12/22/2016
Partners in
c
Drive
Recovery
Charit
Westham
program
ies
pton,
NJ
08060
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
212
$75
1/19/2016
Employee
c
Ninth
directed
Charit
Street
donation in
ies
Pittsbu
lieu of
Dioces
rgh,
company
e of
Pennsyl
holiday
Pittsb
vania
gift
urgh
15222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
920
$4,000
11/18/2016
CYO's Broad
c
South
St. Trenton
Youth
Broad
Center
Organi
Street
After
zation
Trenton
School
of
, NJ
Program
Mercer
08611
(ASP)
County
Tutoring
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
920
$600
10/19/2016
Costs
c
South
associated
Youth
Broad
with 2016
Organi
Street
Janssen
zation
Trenton
Cares
of
, NJ
Volunteer
Mercer
08611
Activity--(
County
2
Activities)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
11
$10,000
10/24/2016
Community
for
Minneak
Based Work
Educat
oning
Assessments
ional
Road
Advanc
Fleming
ement
ton, NJ
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
11
$300
11/3/2016
Costs
for
Minneak
associated
Educat
oning
with 2016
ional
Road
Janssen
Advanc
Fleming
Cares
ement
ton, NJ
Volunteer
08822
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
635
$300
11/19/2016
Costs
n's
South
associated
Home
Clinton
with 2016
Societ
Avenue
Janssen
y of
Trenton
Cares
New
, NJ
Volunteer
Jersey
08611
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
635
$10,000
11/22/2016
CUNA and
n's
South
Body and
Home
Clinton
Soul
Societ
Avenue
Prenatal
y of
Trenton
Health
New
, NJ
Education
Jersey
08611
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Clevela
9500
$25,000
8/19/2016
Diabetes
nd
Euclid
Center
Clinic
Ave.
Educational
Educat
Clevela
Initiatives
ional
nd, OH
at
Founda
44195
Cleveland
tion
Clinic
South
Pointe
Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
50 Milk
$20,000
12/21/2016
Establishing
Diabet
St 16th
Best
es
Floor
Practices,
Networ
Boston,
Policies,
k Inc.
MA
and
02109
Interventio
ns
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
2000
$20,000
11/22/2016
Nursing
of New
Penning
Merit
Jersey
ton
Scholarship
Road
s ($7,500)
P.O.
and
Box
Educational
7718
Opportunity
Ewing,
Fund
NJ
Promise
08628
Awards
($12,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
2000
$5,000
11/22/2016
TCNJ Stress
of New
Penning
Management
Jersey
ton
and Mental
Road
Health Days
P.O.
Box
7718
Ewing,
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Colorad
915 E.
$3,000
8/9/2016
Wellness
o
9th
Recovery
Mental
Avenue
Action
Wellne
Denver,
Planning
ss
CO
Program
Networ
80218
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$5,000
12/15/2016
Rise Summer
ty
88 116
Healthy
Action
North
Food
Servic
Main
Initiative
e
Street
for low
Center
Hightst
income
, Inc.
own, NJ
youth.
08520
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
4059
$5,000
3/1/2016
Arts for
ty
Skyron
Seniors
Conser
Drive
($3,000)
vatory
Doylest
and Music
of
own, PA
Therapy
Music
18902
($2,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$250,000
12/21/2016
Janssen
ty
338
Pharmaceuti
Founda
Morrist
cal
tion
own, NJ
Companies
of New
07963
Contributio
Jersey
n Fund
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$60,000
12/21/2016
HealtheVoice
ty
338
s Impact
Founda
Morrist
Fund
tion
own, NJ
of New
07963
Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
PO Box
$125,000
12/7/2016
Healthcare
ty
338
and Basic
Founda
Morrist
Needs Fund
tion
own, NJ
of New
07963
Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
315
$75
5/27/2016
Employee
ty
Losher
directed
Founda
Street
donation in
tion
Suite
lieu of
of
100
Company
Northw
Hernand
Holiday
est
o, MS
gift
Missis
38632
sippi
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
959
$2,000
3/10/2016
General
ty
Route
Operating
Hope,
46
Support
Inc.
East,
Suite
402
Parsipp
any, NJ
07054
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
959
$15,000
11/15/2016
Hope for
ty
Route
Veterans
Hope,
46
and Valley
Inc.
East,
Brook
Suite
Village for
402
Veterans
Parsipp
any, NJ
07054
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
959
$11,000
5/16/2016
Pathway to
ty
Route
Recovery
Hope,
46
Residential
Inc.
East,
Programs
Suite
($10,000)
402
The Annual
Parsipp
Forum and
any, NJ
Wellness
07054
Fair
($1,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Compeer
259
$2,500
5/30/2016
Youth and
Roches
Monroe
Family
ter,
Avenue
Mentoring--
Inc.
Rochest
Family Peer
er, NY
Advocate
14607
Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Contact
60 South
$1,000
10/20/2016
Fundraising
of
Main
event
Mercer
Street
support to
County
Penning
benefit
New
ton, NJ
general
Jersey
08534
mission of
Inc.
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Contact
60 South
$8,500
12/15/2016
Crisis and
Of
Main
Suicide
Mercer
Street
Prevention
County
Penning
HOTLINES,
New
ton, NJ
Telephone
Jersey
08534
and Online:
Inc.
Crisis Chat
and
TxtToday
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
CONTACT
P.O. Box
$3,500
4/12/2016
Training
We
2376
Nonprofessi
Care,
Westfie
onals in
Inc.
ld, NJ
Crisis
07091
Interventio
n for
People
Experiencin
g Psychosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Court
1450
$15,000
12/15/2016
CASA of
Appoin
Parksid
Mercer
ted
e
County
Specia
Avenue,
Child
l
Suite
Advocacy
Advoca
22
Program for
tes
Ewing,
Abused and
NJ
Neglected
08638-
Children
2946
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Curtain
1483
$5,000
12/19/2016
Deaf and
Up
Rte.
Hard of
Produc
179
Hearing
tions
Lambert
Access for
Inc.
ville,
Curtain Up
NJ
Productions
08530
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Daytop
80 West
$2,000
11/15/2016
Work
Villag
Main St
Readiness
e Of
Mendham
New
, NJ
Jersey
07945
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Deborah
212
$2,000
11/14/2016
2017 Women's
Hospit
Trenton
Heart
al
Road
Health
Founda
Browns
Symposium
tion
Mills,
NJ
08015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
14
$300
10/19/2016
Costs
e
Michael
associated
River
McCorri
with 2016
Steamb
stin
Janssen
oat
Road
Cares
Floati
Hamilto
Volunteer
ng
n, NJ
Activity
Classr
08690
oom,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Depress
C/O
$750
3/1/2016
DBSA NJ
ion
David
Annual
and
Mizenko
Conference
Bipola
5
for Support
r
Village
Group
Suppor
Ct
Participant
t
Lawrenc
s--July,
Allian
eville,
2016
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Depress
C/O
$750
3/1/2016
DBSA NJ
ion
David
Mutual Aid
and
Mizenko
Support
Bipola
5
Group
r
Village
Facilitator
Suppor
Ct
Training--M
t
Lawrenc
arch, 2016
Allian
eville,
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Desert
1695 N.
$3,500
5/16/2016
Quality of
Aids
Sunrise
Life and
Projec
Way
Wellness
t
Palm
Interventio
Springs
ns for
, CA
Desert AIDS
92262
Project
Clients
Living with
Schizophren
ia or
Schizoaffec
tive
Disorder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Diabete
319 N.
$24,000
12/22/2016
Diabetes
s
Weber
Sisters'
Sister
Road,
Minority
s
pmb
Initiative
#163
Program
Bolingb
rook,
IL
60490
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Direct
27 S. La
$4,600
2/18/2016
Support to
Relief
Patera
improve the
Lane
lives of
Santa
people
Barbara
affected by
, CA
poverty or
93117
emergency
situations
by
mobilizing
and
providing
essential
medical
resources
needed for
their care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Dress
3131
$9,000
10/11/2016
Women's
for
Princet
Empowerment
Succes
on Pike
Programs
s
Bldg 4;
Suite
209
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Eden
2
$9,500
12/15/2016
Adult
Autism
Merwick
Employment
Servic
Road
Program
es
Princet
Founda
on, NJ
tion
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Emory
49 Jesse
$25,000
10/24/2016
Emory Latino
Univer
Hill
Diabetes
sity
Jr. Dr
Education
Atlanta
Program
, GA
(ELDEP)
30303
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Enable,
13
$3,000
9/12/2016
Fundraising
Inc.
Roszel
event
Road,
support to
Suite
benefit
B110
general
Princet
mission of
on, NJ
organizatio
08540
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Enable,
13
$7,500
12/15/2016
Enable
Inc.
Roszel
Connect--Ca
Road,
mpus
Suite
Volunteer
B110
Program
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Every
Fred
$9,000
12/15/2016
Every Child
Child
Vereen,
Valued
Valued
Jr.
(ECV) After
A NJ
Communi
School
Nonpro
ty
Program
fit
Center
Corpor
175
ation
Johnson
Avenue
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Everybo
707
$7,500
12/15/2016
Coming Up
dy
Alexand
for AIRTM
Loves
er
Kenny
Road,
Projec
Suite
t Inc.
208 PO
Box
3127
Princet
on, NJ
08543
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$10,000
12/21/2016
Family
Guidan
Notting
Campus
ce
ham Way
Project--Ho
Center
Hamilto
meFront
Corpor
n, NJ
Collaborati
ation
08619
on
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$600
10/19/2016
Costs
Guidan
Notting
associated
ce
ham Way
with 2016
Center
Hamilto
Janssen
Corpor
n, NJ
Cares
ation
08619
Volunteer
Activities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1 AAA
$14,790
12/13/2016
Center on
Resour
Dr.
Nutrition
ce
Suite
and
Networ
203
Disability-
k
Trenton
-Diabetes
, NJ
Prevention
08691
and Self
Management
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
4
$10,000
12/15/2016
Nurse
Servic
Corners
Educator
e
tone
for
Associ
Drive
Homeless
ation
Langhor
Shelter
of
ne, PA
Bucks
19047
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Federat
One
$2,000
4/11/2016
Big Nosh
ion of
Farming
Vocational
Organi
dale
Services
zation
Road
Program
s
West
Babylon
, NY
11704
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Feed
Central
$75
1/19/2016
Employee
More,
Virgini
directed
Inc.
a Food
donation in
Bank
lieu of
1415
company
Rhoadmi
holiday
ller
gift
Street
Richmon
d, VA
23220
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Feeding
National
$32,200
2/18/2016
Domestic
Americ
Office
hunger
a
35 East
relief
Wacker
efforts--me
Drive
al program
Suite
2000
Chicago
, IL
6618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fleming
110
$300
9/15/2016
Costs
ton
Broad
associated
Area
Street
with 2016
Food
Box 783
Janssen
Pantry
Fleming
Cares
ton, NJ
Volunteer
08822
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$2,500
12/15/2016
Funding
ion of
Lawrenc
support for
Morris
eville
the 2017
Hall/
Road
Philly Pops
St.
Lawrenc
Benefit
Lawren
eville,
Concert
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$7,000
12/15/2016
Music and
ion of
Lawrenc
Memory
Morris
eville
Hall/
Road
St.
Lawrenc
Lawren
eville,
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fountai
425 West
$6,000
9/13/2016
2016 Mad
n
47th
About Art
House
Street
Auction and
New
Benefit
York,
NY
10036
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fountai
425 West
$1,000
3/11/2016
Silver
n
47th
sponsor
House
Street
Fountain
New
House One-
York,
in-Four 5K--
NY
April 9,
10036
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
From
1455
$12,500
8/4/2016
N.O.S. Film
The
Mandala
Project
Heart
y Beach
Produc
Road
tions
Oxnard
Inc.
Shores,
CA
93035
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gateway
11901
$10,000
5/19/2016
Community
Homes,
Reedy
Reintegrati
Inc.
Branch
on:
Road PO
Maximizing
Box 460
Work
Chester
Readiness
field,
and
VA
Independenc
23838
e for Those
with
Schizophren
ia and
Schizoaffec
tive
Disorder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
246
$1,500
8/4/2016
Consumer
Mental
Sycamor
Scholarship
Health
e St.
s to attend
Consum
Suite
the 25th
er
260
Annual
Networ
Decatur
Statewide
k
, GA
Consumer
30030
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
1171
$2,000
12/23/2016
Science,
Scouts
Route
Technology,
Heart
28
Engineering
of New
North
and Math
Jersey
Branch,
(STEM)
, Inc.
NJ
Program
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Grounds
80
$7,500
12/15/2016
Wellness
for
Sculpto
Walks/
Sculpt
rs Way
Wellness
ure
Hamilto
Talks for
n, NJ
Fixed
08619
Income
Seniors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
31 Oak
$5,000
12/15/2016
Women Build
for
Ave
and Repair
Humani
Chalfon
Homes that
ty of
t, PA
Strengthen
Greate
18914
Families
r
Bucks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
212 Yost
$500
11/3/2016
Costs
for
Bouleva
associated
Humani
rd
with 2016
ty of
Suite A
Janssen
Greate
Pittsbu
Cares
r
rgh, PA
Volunteer
Pittsb
15221
Activity
urgh
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HARK,
5
$2,000
12/15/2016
Scholarships
Inc.
Pirozzi
for low-
Lane
income
Hillsbo
participant
rough,
s in Girls
NJ
on the Run
08844
of Central
New Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heartla
4750 N.
$7,500
5/30/2016
Pathways
nd
Sherida
Home
Health
n Road
Outrea
Chicago
ch
, IL
60640
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Henders
4740
$7,500
4/12/2016
Helping
on
North
Individuals
Behavi
State
Live Longer
oral
Road 7
(HILL)
Health
Lauderd
ale
Lakes,
FL
33319
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Henry
321
$7,500
12/21/2016
Decreasing
J.
North
Opioid Use
Austin
Warren
through
Health
Street
Patient
Center
Trenton
Empowerment
, Inc.
, NJ
and
08618
Chiropracto
r Services
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
His
20000 NW
$600
1/18/2016
Employee
House
47th
directed
Childr
Avenue
donation in
en's
Hector
lieu of
Home
Buildin
company
g No. 2
holiday
Develop
gift
ment
Departm
ent
Miami
Gardens
, FL
33055
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HiTops,
21
$7,500
9/12/2016
HiTOPS'
Inc.
Wiggins
Sexual
Street
Health
Princet
Interventio
on, NJ
ns for
08540
Youth-at-
Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Holiday
968
$4,000
9/29/2016
Holiday
Expres
Shrewsb
Express
s Inc.
ury
Central
Avenue
Jersey
Tinton
Charity
Falls,
Concert
NJ
Series
07724
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$2,500
9/12/2016
Fundraising
nt
Princet
event
on
support to
Avenue
benefit
Lawrenc
general
eville,
mission of
NJ
organizatio
08648
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$10,000
10/26/2016
Breaking the
nt
Princet
Cycle of
on
Poverty for
Avenue
Homeless
Lawrenc
Families
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$300
10/20/2016
Costs
nt
Princet
associated
on
with 2016
Avenue
Janssen
Lawrenc
Cares event
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
35
$750
12/15/2016
Hopewell
l
Princet
Elementary
Elemen
on
School
tary
Avenue
Science
School
Hopewel
Fair
Parent
l, NJ
Teache
08525
r
Organi
zation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
PO Box
$6,500
12/15/2016
(1) College
l
553
Scholarship
Valley
Penning
($1,000)
Educat
ton, NJ
(2)
ion
08534
Hopewell
Founda
Valley HOSA
tion
($500) (3)
Teaching
the Stars--
Using
Starlab to
enhance
curricula
in the
HVRSD
($5,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
PO Box
$1,000
5/2/2016
Scholarship
l
553
support
Valley
Penning
Educat
ton, NJ
ion
08534
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
48
$2,000
12/21/2016
Hopewell
l
Orchard
Valley
Valley
Ave PO
Rides
Senior
Box 567
Founda
Penning
tion
ton, NJ
08534
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
7 Lower
$7,500
12/21/2016
Artistic
on Art
Center
Expressions
Center
Street
Program
Clinton
, NJ
08809
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
1410
$2,500
11/9/2016
YMCA Comedy
on
Route
Night
County
22 West
YMCA
Annanda
le, NJ
08801
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
9100
$100
1/19/2016
Memorial
on
Wescott
Donation
Health
Drive
care
Suite
Founda
202
tion
Fleming
ton, NJ
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
111 Mine
$2,000
12/15/2016
Dvoor Farm
on
Street
Public
Land
Fleming
Access
Trust
ton, NJ
Enhancement
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HVRSD
C/O
$5,000
12/22/2016
Playground
Specia
Pupil
resurfacing
l
Service
project
Educat
s 425
Stonybrook
ion
South
Elementary
PtO
Main
Street
Penning
ton, NJ
08534
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Interfa
3635
$15,000
10/26/2016
Neighbors
ith
Quakerb
Helping
Caregi
ridege
Neighbors
vers
Road,
Program
Trento
Suite
(NHN)
n,
16
Inc.
Hamilto
n, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Isles,
10 Wood
$9,000
12/15/2016
Trenton
Inc.
Street
Healthy
Trenton
Homes
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$7,500
11/22/2016
Mercer
Family
Alexand
County
and
er
Caregiver
Childr
Road,
Support
en's
Suite
Initiative
Servic
102
e of
Princet
Greate
on, NJ
r
08540
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$7,500
11/22/2016
Senior
Family
Alexand
Outreach
and
er
Service
Childr
Road,
en's
Suite
Servic
102
e of
Princet
Greate
on, NJ
r
08540
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$600
10/19/2016
Costs
Family
Alexand
associated
and
er
with 2016
Childr
Road,
Janssen
en's
Suite
Cares
Servic
102
Volunteer
e of
Princet
Activities
Greate
on, NJ
r
08540
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Junior
360 Pear
$7,150
12/21/2016
Junior
Achiev
Blossom
Achievement
ement
Drive
program in
of New
Edison,
Trenton
Jersey
NJ
Schools
08837
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Lafayet
1214
$30,000
1/6/2016
The Healthy
te
Coolidg
Heart
Genera
e
Fairs: EKG
l
Street
to
Medica
Lafayet
Survivorshi
l
te, LA
p Program
70503
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Latin
669
$5,000
12/16/2016
Welcome
Americ
Chamber
House
an
s St
Community
Legal
Suite B
Center
Defens
Trenton
e And
, NJ
Educat
08611
ional
Fund
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Lawrenc
PO Box
$3,900
12/15/2016
Mobile
e
6531 17
Makerspaces
Townsh
Philips
to create,
ip
Ave.
build,
Educat
Lawrenc
tinker,
ion
eville,
fail and
Founda
NJ
think
tion
08648
critically
Inc.
from
elementary
classrooms
in Lawrence
Township,
NJ.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Leyden
10001 W
$8,500
5/16/2016
Affordable
Family
Grand
Supportive
Servic
Ave
Housing for
e and
Frankli
Individuals
Mental
n Park,
with
Health
IL
Serious
Center
60131
Mental
Illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
PO Box
$5,000
12/21/2016
Early
y And
55636
Childhood:
Life
Trenton
Building
Inc.
, NJ
Blocks for
08638
the Future
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
100
$5,000
12/22/2016
Women
y New
Menlo
Empowered
Jersey
Park
Inc.
Dr.
#314
Edison,
NJ
08837
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
120
$4,000
12/15/2016
Let's Talk
y
Findern
About
Volunt
e Ave--
Health
eers
Box 7
of
Bridgew
Somers
ater,
et
NJ
County
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Main
8
$4,000
4/12/2016
Accessible
Street
Marcell
Mental
Counse
a
Health Care
ling
Avenue
for
Center
West
Schizoaffec
Orange,
tive
NJ
Disorder
07052
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Massach
15
$3,500
2/9/2016
Changing
usetts
Vernon
Minds and
Clubho
Street
Expanding
use
Waltham
Employment
Coalit
, MA
Campaign
ion
02453
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
McCarte
91
$10,000
11/22/2016
OnStage
r
Univers
Seniors: A
Theatr
ity
Community
e
Place
Project of
Center
Princet
McCarter
on, NJ
Theatre
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
5 Walter
$300
11/3/2016
Costs
On
Foran
associated
Wheels
Blvd
with 2016
In
Suite
Janssen
Hunter
2006
Cares
don
Fleming
Volunteer
Inc.
ton, NJ
Activity
08822
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
1501
$75
5/23/2016
Employee
On
Sunset
directed
Wheels
Ave
donation in
of
Rocky
lieu of
Rocky
Mount,
company
Mount
NC
holiday
Inc.
27804
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
320
$15,000
10/26/2016
Meals on
on
Hollowb
Wheels
Wheels
rook
Program
of
Drive
Trento
Ewing,
n
NJ
Ewing
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
500
$90,000
12/15/2016
Social Self-
Health
Montgom
Directed
Americ
ery St.
Care (SSDC)
a
Suite
820
Alexand
ria, VA
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2211
$7,500
6/21/2016
Mental
Health
Norfolk
Health
Americ
, Suite
Community
a of
810
and
Greate
Houston
Legislative
r
, TX
Advocacy
Housto
77098
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2323 W
$10,000
5/27/2016
Get
Health
5th
Connected
Americ
Ave.
program
a of
Suite
Frankl
160
in
Columbu
County
s, OH
43204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
8280
$2,500
8/24/2016
2016 Florida
Health
Princet
Mental
Americ
on
Health
a Of
Square
Summit
Northe
Blvd.
ast
W.
Florid
Suite 8
a Inc.
Jackson
ville,
FL
32256
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1210 San
$2,500
5/16/2016
Mental
Health
Antonio
Health
Americ
, Suite
Education
a of
200
and
Texas
Austin,
Advocacy
TX
Campaign
78701
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 W.
$1,000
8/9/2016
Bronze
Health
10th
sponsor
Associ
St.
2016 E-
ation
Ste.
Racing the
in
600
Blues for
Delawa
Wilming
Mental
re
ton, DE
Health--Oct
19801
ober 30,
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 W.
$2,000
10/18/2016
Community
Health
10th
Mental
Associ
St.
Health
ation
Ste.
Conference
in
600
2016:
Delawa
Wilming
Bridging
re
ton, DE
the Gaps--
19801
Through
Resources
and
Networking
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
673
$10,000
8/4/2016
MHANJ Access
Health
Morris
to Mental
Associ
Avenue,
Health Care
ation
Suite
in New
100
Jersey
Springf
ield,
NJ
07081
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
617
$2,500
4/21/2016
Operating
Health
Garden
Support for
Associ
Street
the Mental
ation
Santa
Wellness
in
Barbara
Center's
Santa
, CA
Fellowship
Barbar
93101
Club
a
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3701
$7,500
5/16/2016
ParentVOICE
Health
Latrobe
Associ
Drive,
ation
Suite
Of
140
Centra
Charlot
l
te, NC
Caroli
28211
nas
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1301
$10,000
8/4/2016
Citizens
Health
York
Action
Associ
Road,
Team:
ation
Suite
Engaging
of
505
Consumers
Maryla
Lutherv
of
nd,
ille,
Behavioral
Inc.
MD
Health in
21093
Healthcare
Reform
Initiatives
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
580
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
Health
White
sponsor MHA
Associ
Plains
on the
ation
Road
Move: Run/
of
Suite
Walk--May
Westch
510
1, 2016
ester
Tarryto
wn, NY
10591
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
555 N
$3,500
6/24/2016
Access to
Health
Woodlaw
Care Fund
Associ
n, Ste.
ation
3105
Reside
Wichita
ntial
, KS
Care
67208
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3809
$12,500
8/4/2016
Outreach and
Illnes
Rosewoo
Behavioral
s
d Drive
Healthcare
Recove
PO Box
for
ry
4246
Homeless
Center
Columbi
Individuals
, Inc.
a, SC
with Mental
29240
Illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
1001
$9,500
12/15/2016
Implementing
Allian
Spruce
a Plan to
ce to
Street,
End Chronic
End
Suite
Homelessnes
Homele
205
s in the
ssness
Trenton
Trenton/
, NJ
Mercer
08638
Community:
Utilizing
assertive
engagement,
permanent
housing and
healthcare
access to
achieve
this goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
P.O. Box
$16,680
12/15/2016
Mercer
County
17202
Student
Commun
Trenton
Competency
ity
, NJ
in Optical
Colleg
08690
Examination
e
(M-SCOPE)
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$20,000
10/26/2016
Mercer
Street
Mercer
Street
Friend
Street
Friends
s
Trenton
Food Bank
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$300
10/19/2016
Costs
Street
Mercer
associated
Friend
Street
with 2016
s
Trenton
Janssen
, NJ
Cares
08611
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Metropo
945
$5,000
7/20/2016
Supported
litan
Fawcett
Employment
Develo
Ave.
pment
Tacoma,
Counci
WA
l
98402
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Middle
P.O. Box
$15,000
11/15/2016
Outreach
Earth
8045
Program and
520
Community
North
Youth
Bridge
Centers
Street
Bridgew
ater,
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
MIDJers
423
$5,000
10/26/2016
Urban Youth
ey
Rivervi
Employment
Center
ew
Program
for
Plaza
Econom
Trenton
ic
, NJ
Develo
08611
pment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Midland
60
$6,500
9/28/2016
Midland
Adult
Industr
Helping
Servic
ial
Hands
es
Parkway
Employment
Inc.
PO Box
Training
5026
Program.
North
Branch,
NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101
$5,000
10/26/2016
Trenton Area
l
Oakland
Stakeholder
Child
Street
s
and
Trenton
Family
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101
$15,000
10/26/2016
Millhill
l
Oakland
Trenton
Child
Street
PEERS
and
Trenton
Family
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minding
2083
$6,000
12/15/2016
Minding Our
Our
Lawrenc
Business
Busine
eville
Summer
ss
Road
Program: A
Inc.
Lawrenc
Bridge to
eville,
the Future
NJ
for Mercer
08648
County Low-
Income
Youth
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minding
2083
$6,000
5/2/2016
Minding Our
Our
Lawrenc
Business
Busine
eville
Summer
ss
Road
Program: A
Inc.
Lawrenc
Bridge to
eville,
the Future
NJ
for Mercer
08648
County Low-
Income
Youth
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Morven
55
$5,000
12/15/2016
Internship
Museum
Stockto
for At-Risk
and
n
Youth
Garden
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mount
73 North
$15,000
9/15/2016
In Home
Carmel
Clinton
Health
Guild
Avenue
Nursing
Trenton
Program
, NJ
08609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
4161 NW
$1,000
4/18/2016
Bronze
Browar
5 St,
sponsor
d
Suite
NAMIWalks
County
203
Broward
, Inc.
Plantat
County--Nov
ion, FL
ember 12,
33317
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
8324
$1,000
3/21/2016
Bronze
Cook
Skokie
sponsor
County
Blvd
NAMI CCNS
North
420
Walk--Septe
Suburb
Frontag
mber 18,
an
e Road
2016
Northfi
eld
Skokie,
IL
60077
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
2400 W.
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
Delawa
4th St.
sponsor
re
Wilming
NAMIWalks
ton, DE
Delaware--M
19805
ay 7, 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
3371
$2,500
3/1/2016
Silver
Mercer
Brunswi
sponsor
NJ
ck
2016 NAMI
Pike,
Mercer
Suite
Walk--May
124
7, 2016
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
3371
$10,000
9/15/2016
NAMI Mercer
Mercer
Brunswi
Education
NJ
ck
and Support
Pike,
Programs
Suite
124
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
85 N.
$1,000
9/7/2016
Bronze
New
State
sponsor
Hampsh
Street
2016
ire
Concord
NAMIWalks
, NH
New
03301
Hampshire--
October 2,
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
115
$8,000
8/9/2016
Peer Support
DuPage
North
Specialist
County
County
Program
Illino
Farm
is
Road
Wheaton
, IL
60187
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
2701
$4,000
8/24/2016
General
Johnso
Rochest
Program
n
er
Support/
County
Avenue
Finds
dba
Iowa
Friends/
Compee
City,
Volunteer
r of
IA
Recruitment
Johnso
52245
n
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
One
$1,500
8/4/2016
Start to
Lake
Victori
Finish
County
a Sq.,
sponsor
Ste.
NAMI Lake
260
County
Painesv
Strides for
ille,
Awareness
OH
NAMI Walk--
44077
August 20,
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
100 W,
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
PA
Main
sponsor
Montgo
St.
Greater
mery
Suite
Philadelphi
County
204
a
Lansdal
NAMIWalks--
e, PA
May 14,
19446
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
4055
$2,500
5/4/2016
Hope for
Southw
Executi
Recovery
est
ve Park
Pilot
Ohio
Drive,
Suite
450
Cincinn
ati, OH
45241
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1750 S.
$1,000
3/15/2016
Kilometer
St.
Brentwo
sponsor
Louis
od
NAMIWalks
Blvd.
St. Louis--
Suite
May 28,
511 St.
2016
Louis,
MO
63144
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
PO Box
$1,000
4/19/2016
Bronze
Summit
462
sponsor
County
Cuyahog
2016
a
NAMIWalks
Falls,
Summit
OH
County--Oct
44222
ober 22,
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
217
$1,000
5/27/2016
Bronze
Waukes
Wiscons
sponsor
ha
in Ave
2016
Suite
NAMIWalks
300
Waukesha--P
Waukesh
9/17/16
a, WI
53186
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
90 Park
$2,500
5/16/2016
Meet the
l
Avenue
Scientist
Allian
16th
Monthly
ce for
Floor
Webinar
Resear
New
Series
ch on
York,
Schizo
NY
phreni
10016
a and
Depres
sion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
90 Park
$2,500
5/16/2016
28th New
l
Avenue
York Mental
Allian
16th
Health
ce for
Floor
Research
Resear
New
Symposium
ch on
York,
Schizo
NY
phreni
10016
a and
Depres
sion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1851
$2,500
2/9/2016
Bronze
l
Heritag
sponsor
Allian
e Lane,
2016 NAMI
ce for
Suite
California
the
150
Annual
Mental
Sacrame
Conference
ly Ill
nto, CA
95815
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
The
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
l
Schraff
sponsor
Allian
t's
NAMIWalks
ce for
Center
Mass--May
the
529
14, 2016
Mental
Main
ly Ill
Street,
Suite
1M17
Boston,
MA
02129
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3250
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
l
Wilshir
sponsor
Allian
e
NAMIWalks
ce for
Blvd.,
Los Angeles
the
Suite
County--Oct
Mental
1501
ober 1,
ly Ill
Los
2016
Angeles
, CA
90010
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2812
$1,000
5/16/2016
Bronze
l
Swiss
sponsor
Allian
Avenue
Dallas
ce for
Dallas,
NAMIWalk--M
the
TX
ay 14, 2016
Mental
75204
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1706
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
l
Brady
sponsor
Allian
Street
NAMIWalks
ce for
Suite
Greater
the
101
Mississippi
Mental
Davenpo
Valley--Sep
ly Ill
rt, IA
tember 24,
52803
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
8/4/2016
NAMIFest
l
4096
2016--2 Day
Allian
Alvin,
Educational
ce for
TX
Conference
the
77512
Mental
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1225
$7,500
2/9/2016
The Year of
l
Dublin
the
Allian
Road,
Affiliate:
ce for
Suite
Strengtheni
the
125
ng NAMI's
Mental
Columbu
Voice in
ly Ill
s, OH
Ohio's
43215
Local
Communities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1562
$1,000
2/2/2016
Bronze
l
Route
sponsor
Allian
130
2016 NAMI
ce for
North
Walks New
the
Brunswi
Jersey,
Mental
ck, NJ
``Step
ly Ill
08902
Forward for
Our
Heroes''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
5095
$1,000
2/2/2016
Bronze
l
Murphy
sponsor
Allian
Canyon
2016 NAMI
ce for
Road
Walk
the
Suite
Mental
320 San
ly Ill
Diego,
CA
92123
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3200 S.
$1,000
2/9/2016
Bronze
l
3rd
sponsor
Allian
Street,
2016
ce for
Unit 6
NAMIWalks
the
Milwauk
Greater
Mental
ee, WI
Milwaukee
ly Ill
53207
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2601
$2,500
2/9/2016
Supporting
l
Cold
sponsor
Allian
Spring
NAMI
ce for
Road
Indiana's
the
P.O.
13th Annual
Mental
Box
Mental
ly Ill
22697
Health and
Indiana
Criminal
polis,
Justice
IN
Summit
46222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
576
$1,500
2/9/2016
Bronze
l
Farming
sponsor
Allian
ton
2016 NAMI
ce for
Avenue
Walk
the
Hartfor
Mental
d, CT
ly Ill
06105
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
5/27/2016
Platinum
l
550039
sponsor
Allian
Birming
2016 NAMI
ce for
ham, AL
Birmingham
the
35255-
Walk for
Mental
0039
Mental
ly Ill
Health--9/
17/16
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1536
$8,000
6/24/2016
Honest,
l
West
Open, Proud
Allian
Chicago
to erase
ce for
Ave
the stigma
the
Chicago
of mental
Mental
, IL
illness
ly Ill
60642
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1562
$2,500
11/18/2016
2016 NAMI NJ
l
Route
Conference:
Allian
130
``Building
ce for
North
Better
the
Brunswi
Lives''
Mental
ck, NJ
ly Ill
08902
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3333
$1,000
12/14/2016
Pink Ribbon
l
West
Sponsor--20
Allian
Pensaco
17
ce for
la
Blueberry
the
Street
Horseshoe
Mental
Suite
5k--Februar
ly Ill
250
y 19, 2017
Tallaha
ssee,
FL
32302-0
961
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
99 Pine
$4,000
12/1/2016
2016 NAMI-
l
St.
NYS
Allian
Suite
Education
ce for
302
Conference
the
Albany,
Mental
NY
ly Ill
12207
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$75,000
12/15/2016
Strengthenin
l
Fairfax
g CIT
Allian
Drive
ce for
Suite
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$50,000
12/15/2016
NAMI
l
Fairfax
Helpline
Allian
Drive
ce for
Suite
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$5,000
6/24/2016
Mental
l
West
Illness
Allian
25th
Education
ce for
Street,
the
#600
Mental
Clevela
ly
nd, OH
Ill--G
44113
reater
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
l
West
sponsor
Allian
25th
NAMIWalks--
ce for
Street,
August 27,
the
#600
2016
Mental
Clevela
ly
nd, OH
Ill--G
44113
reater
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3839
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
l
Merle
sponsor
Allian
Hay
NAMIWalks
ce for
Road,
Iowa--Septe
the
Suite
mber 24,
Mental
226 Des
2016
ly
Moines,
Ill--I
IA
owa
50310
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
505 8th
$1,000
3/15/2016
Bronze
l
Avenue,
sponsor
Allian
Ste
NAMIWalks
ce for
1103
NYC--May 7,
the
New
2016
Mental
York,
ly Ill
NY
of New
10018
York
City
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1981
$1,000
11/11/2016
Bronze
l
Marcus
sponsor
Allian
Ave
NAMIWalks
ce for
Suite
Long Island/
the
C117
Queens May
Mental
Lake
6, 2017
ly Ill
Success
Queens/
, NY
Nassau
11042
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
5963
$1,000
7/20/2016
Bronze
l
Boymel
sponsor
Allian
Dr.
NAMIWalks
ce on
Fairfie
Butler
Mental
ld, OH
County--Oct
Illnes
45014
ober 8,
s
2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
324A
$1,000
3/15/2016
NAMI Walk--
l
Springf
May 15,
Allian
ield
2016
ce on
Street
Mental
Agawam,
Illnes
MA
s
01001
Wester
n
Mass.,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
P O Box
$6,000
5/3/2016
29th Annual
l Art
350891
NAEMI Art
Exhibi
Miami,
Exhibition
tions
FL
of the
33135
Mental
ly
Ill,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$75,000
12/15/2016
Policy
l
St NW,
Action
Counci
#400
Center
l for
Washing
Behavi
ton, DC
oral
20005
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$75,000
12/15/2016
Early Onset
l
St NW,
Psychosis
Counci
#400
Community
l for
Washing
of Practice
Behavi
ton, DC
oral
20005
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$75,000
12/15/2016
Health
l
St NW,
Justice
Counci
#400
Learning
l for
Washing
Collaborati
Behavi
ton, DC
ve
oral
20005
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
949 W.
$7,500
12/15/2016
Academic
l
State
Creative
Junior
Street
Engagement
Tennis
Trenton
(ACE)
and
, NJ
Program and
Learni
08618
Science
ng of
Technology
Trento
Engineering
n
Arts Math
(STEAM)
Pilot
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$20,000
12/22/2016
Stroke
l
Easter
Recovery
Stroke
Lane,
Navigator
Associ
Suite B
ation
Centenn
ial, CO
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$30,000
12/22/2016
National
l
Easter
Stroke
Stroke
Lane,
Awareness
Associ
Suite B
Month
ation
Centenn
ial, CO
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
275 Rt.
$4,000
4/12/2016
NJPC NJ
Jersey
10 East
Youth
Parent
Suite
Caucus
s
220-414
(Formerly
Caucus
Succasu
known as NJ
nna, NJ
Youth
07876
Coalition)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NewBrid
7
$2,000
6/24/2016
NewBridge
ge
Industr
Day
Servic
ial
Treatment
es,
Road
Progam for
Inc.
P.O.
Adults
Box 336
Pequann
ock, NJ
07440
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Northea
2900
$2,500
7/12/2016
Day of
st
Conner
Restoration
Guidan
Avenue,
-assistance
ce
Buildin
for
Center
g A
Detroit's
Detroit
Homeless
, MI
with Mental
48215
Illness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NorthSh
1033
$10,000
12/22/2016
Clot Aware
ore
Univers
Support
Univer
ity
Group
sity
Place
Health
Suite
system
450
Evansto
n, IL
60201
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Ohio
33 N.
$2,500
3/21/2016
Ohio's 2016
Associ
High
Recovery
ation
Street,
Conference:
of
Ste.
Recovery Is
County
500
Beautiful
Behavi
Columbu
oral
s, OH
Health
43215
Author
ities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Pancrea
1500
$100
2/15/2016
Memorial
tic
Rosecra
Donation
Cancer
ns Ave,
Action
Suite
Networ
200
k
Manhatt
an
Beach,
CA
90266
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Passage
PO Box
$7,500
12/15/2016
Support for
Theatr
967
the State
e
Trenton
Street
Compan
, NJ
Project
y Inc.
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$17,500
10/26/2016
Comprehensiv
Kids
Lawrenc
e Juvenile
e Road
Offenders
Lawrenc
Outreach
eville,
Services
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$300
10/20/2016
Costs
Kids
Lawrenc
associated
e Road
with 2016
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares event
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
People
295
$2,500
11/18/2016
Reading
And
Eggerts
Deeply in
Storie
Crossin
Community:
s--Gen
g Road
A
te Y
Lawrenc
Literature
Cuento
eville,
Project for
s Inc.
NJ
Mercer
08648
County
Youth and
Seniors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Places
4130
$100
3/3/2016
Memorial
for
Lindell
Donation
People
Blvd.
, Inc.
St.
Louis,
MO
63108
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Planned
P.O. Box
$5,000
4/12/2016
Life
Living
4755
Planning
Assist
Austin,
Program
ance
TX
Networ
78765
k of
Centra
l
Texas
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Positiv
1411 N.
$75
3/1/2016
Donation in
e
Westsho
lieu of
Coachi
re
company
ng
Blvd.
holiday
Allian
Suite
gift
ce
205
Tampa
Bay, FL
33607
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
15
$50,000
12/21/2016
Bridge to
on
Princes
Employment
Area
s Road
program
Commun
Lawrenc
ity
eville,
Founda
NJ
tion,
08648
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
P.O. Box
$2,500
12/15/2016
PGC
on
145 190
Afterschool
Girl
Nassau
Music
Choir
Street,
Outreach
Lower
Program
Level
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
123 E.
$10,000
12/15/2016
Hunger
on
Hanover
Prevention
Outrea
St.
and
ch
Trenton
Nutrition
Projec
, NJ
Education
ts /
08608
($7,500.00)
Crisis
Healthy
Minist
Living and
ry of
Housing
Mercer
Stability
County
Services
($2,500.00)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
45
$4,000
12/15/2016
Family
on
Stockto
Caregiver
Senior
n St
Conference:
Resour
Princet
Family
ce
on, NJ
Caregiving:
Center
08540
Compassion
for Self
and Others
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
575
$3,500
12/15/2016
BRAVO!
on
Ewing
Trenton
Sympho
Street
Initiative
ny
Princet
Orches
on, NJ
tra
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
13
$7,500
12/15/2016
Summer
on-
Roszel
Bridge
Blairs
Road,
2017--Trent
town
Suite
on
Center
C204A
Inc.
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Printma
440
$5,000
12/22/2016
Roving Press
king
River
Center
Road
of New
Branchb
Jersey
urg, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Printma
440
$15,000
12/8/2016
Combat Paper
king
River
NJ
Center
Road
of New
Branchb
Jersey
urg, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
P. O.
$7,000
12/15/2016
WaterWays
Headwa
Box 273
Environment
ters
Gladsto
al
Associ
ne, NJ
Education
ation
07934
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
118
$20,000
10/24/2016
Promoting
Valley
Lamingt
Access to
Commun
on Rd
STEM and
ity
Branchb
Nursing
Colleg
urg, NJ
Education
e
08844
at Raritan
Valley
Community
College
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Recover
3423
$15,000
5/16/2016
Healthy
y
Covingt
Start Pilot
Consul
on
Program--(M
tants
Drive,
ental
Of
Suite B
Health
Atlant
Decatur
Portion of
a
, GA
Program)
Incorp
30032
orated
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Regions
640
$15,000
5/16/2016
Make It OK,
Hospit
Jackson
the
al
Street,
campaign to
Founda
MS
fight
tion
11202C
stigma
St.
Paul,
MN
55101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rescue
98
$25,000
12/16/2016
Emergency
Missio
Carroll
Services
n of
St. PO
program
Trento
Box 790
n
Trenton
, NJ
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rider
2083
$19,500
12/6/2016
Summer STEM
Univer
Lawrenc
($12,000);
sity
eville
Scholarship
Road
Support
Lawrenc
($5,000);
eville,
Shakesperia
NJ
n at Rider
08648
($2,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverbe
PO Box
$5,000
4/12/2016
InSHAPE
nd
2032
Program
Commun
Concord
ity
, NH
Mental
03302-
Health
2032
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riversi
4 South
$10,000
12/7/2016
Riverside
de
Union
Symphonia
Sympho
Street
Senior
nia
P.O.
Outreach
Inc.
Box 650
Program
Lambert
ville,
NJ
08530
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rutgers
4
$124,863
9/19/2016
Corporate
Univer
Hunting
Social
sity
ton
Responsibil
School
Street
ity
of
New
Fellowship
Commun
Brunswi
icatio
ck, NJ
n,
08901-
Inform
1071
ation
and
Librar
y
Studie
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SAFE in
47 East
$600
9/22/2016
Costs
Hunter
Main
associated
don
Street
with 2016
Fleming
Janssen
ton, NJ
Cares
08822
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Saint
436 Port
$100
3/28/2016
Memorial
Anthon
Reading
Donation
y of
Avenue
Padua
Port
Roman
Reading
Cathol
, NJ
ic
07064
Church
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
2789-
$5,000
5/16/2016
MHRC Client
Franci
25th
Wellness
sco
Street,
Enhancement
Genera
#2028
Project
l
San
Hospit
Francis
al
co, CA
Founda
94110
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SAVE A
1010
$600
9/19/2016
Costs
Friend
Route
associated
to
601
with 2016
Homele
Cedar
Janssen
ss
Lodge
Cares
Animal
Road
Volunteer
s
Skillma
Activity
n, NJ
08558
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Schizop
602 Pink
$5,000
5/23/2016
Platinum
hrenia
Azalea
sponsor
and
Trl PO
2016
Relate
Box
symposium
d
941222
and
Disord
Houston
workshop,
ers
, TX
``You are
Allian
77094-
NOT Alone''
ce Of
8222
Self-help/
Americ
peer
a
support
Symposium
and
workshop
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Scripps
10140
$25,000
12/14/2016
Scripps
Founda
Campus
Community
tion
Point
Diabetes
for
Drive
Programs:
Medici
Suite
Dulce
ne and
200 San
Transitions
Scienc
Diego,
e
CA
92121
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Scripps
10140
$30,000
12/14/2016
Scripps
Founda
Campus
Community
tion
Point
Diabetes
for
Drive
and
Medici
Suite
Prevention
ne and
200 San
Programs:
Scienc
Diego,
Project
e
CA
Dulce
92121
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$5,000
9/15/2016
14th Annual
Founda
Scotch
SERV
tion,
Road,
Wellness
Inc.
3rd
and
Floor
Development
Ewing,
Conference
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$7,500
9/15/2016
SERV
Founda
Scotch
Foundation
tion,
Road,
Scholarship
Inc.
3rd
Fund
Floor
Ewing,
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shannon
PO Box
$500
12/14/2016
Shannon
Daley
1271 36
Daley
Memori
Indian
Memorial
al
Run
Fund
Fund
Whiteho
Charity
use
Events
Station
, NJ
08889
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sharing
1920
$2,000
5/30/2016
1920 Club
Place
10th
Art Program
Inc.
Avenue
South
PO Box
59455
Birming
ham, AL
35255
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shiloh
PO Box
$5,000
2/18/2016
Family
Commun
398
Wellness
ity
Trenton
Club--Diabe
Develo
, NJ
tes and
pment
08603
Chronic
Corpor
Disease
ation
Self
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shiloh
PO Box
$5,000
12/15/2016
Family
Commun
398
Wellness
ity
Trenton
Club--Diabe
Develo
, NJ
tes and
pment
08603
Chronic
Corpor
Disease
ation
Self
Management
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sister
1201
$5,000
9/14/2016
Pearl Grace
Networ
Hamilto
Breast
k of
n
Cancer
Centra
Street
Assistant
l New
Somerse
Tournament
Jersey
t, NJ
, Inc.
08873
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
49
$7,500
12/23/2016
Street
t Home
Brahma
Smart--HIV/
for
Avenue
AIDS
Tempor
P.O.
Program
arily
Box
Displa
6871
ced
Bridgew
Childr
ater,
en
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
49
$900
12/5/2016
Costs
t Home
Brahma
associated
for
Avenue
with 2016
Tempor
P.O.
Janssen
arily
Box
Cares
Displa
6871
Volunteer
ced
Bridgew
Activity
Childr
ater,
en
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
One
$20,000
12/13/2016
El Poder
t
Rehill
Sobre La
Medica
Avenue
Diabetes--N
l
Somervi
J Neighbor
Center
lle, NJ
of Choice
Founda
08876
Program
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somervi
51 West
$2,000
10/19/2016
A Maker
lle
Cliff
Space for
Educat
Street
Every Child
ional
P.O.
Founda
Box
tion,
8721
Inc.
Somervi
lle, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
1025
$100
3/3/2016
Memorial
Mark
Radclif
Donation
Church
fe
and
Street
School
Bristol
, PA
19007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
One
$15,000
12/21/2016
Providing
Mary
Summit
Food for
Medica
Square,
Underserved
l
Suite
School-Age
Center
300
Children in
Founda
1717
Bucks
tion
Langhor
County: The
ne-
St. Mary
Newtown
Backpacks
Road
for Kids
Langhor
Program
ne, PA
19047
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Stony
31 Titus
$15,000
10/26/2016
StreamWatch
Brook
Mill
Volunteer
Millst
Road
Water
one
Penning
Quality
Waters
ton, NJ
Monitoring
hed
08534
Program
Associ
ation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
T-1
8216
$35,000
10/25/2016
Friends for
Today
Princet
Life
Inc.
on-
Orlando
Glendal
2017
e Road,
PMB 200
West
Chester
, OH
45069
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Taking
1110
$35,000
10/25/2016
Taking
Contro
Camino
Control Of
l of
Del Mar
Your
Your
Suite C
Diabetes
Diabet
Del
(TCOYD)
es
Mar, CA
Conference
92014
and Health
Fair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TASK,
72\1/2\
$25,000
10/26/2016
Trenton Area
Inc.
Escher
Soup
Street,
Kitchen
P.O.
Meal
Box 872
Service
Trenton
Program
, NJ
08605
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$5,000
9/15/2016
Communiversi
Arts
Robeson
ty ArtsFest
Counci
Center
2017
l of
for the
Prince
Arts
ton
102
Withers
poon
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$10,000
9/15/2016
Arts Council
Arts
Robeson
of
Counci
Center
Princeton
l of
for the
Community
Prince
Arts
Outreach
ton
102
Programs
Withers
poon
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2020
$2,000
12/23/2016
Art Classes
Center
Burnt
for
for
Mills
Children
Contem
Road
with Autism
porary
Bedmins
Spectrum
Art
ter, NJ
Disorder
07921
and Other
Special
Needs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
19
$12,000
9/14/2016
Support of
Center
Dellwoo
Adult
For
d Lane
Women's
Great
Somerse
Program
Expect
t, NJ
through a
ations
08873
Program
Grant and
2016 Gift
of Hope
Gala
Sponsorship
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
1040
$7,500
8/4/2016
Jail
Edinbu
Waltham
Diversion
rg
Street
Program
Center
Lexingt
on, MA
02421
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
222
$75,000
12/22/2016
Terracotta
Frankl
North
Warriors:
in
20th
Guards for
Instit
St.
Eternity
ute
Philade
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
1289
$300
9/22/2016
Costs
Legacy
Route
associated
Treatm
38 West
with 2016
ent
Suite
Janssen
Servic
203
Cares
es
Hainesp
Volunteer
Founda
ort, NJ
Activity
tion
08036
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
8150 N.
$40,000
12/14/2016
HeartGuide--
Mended
Central
Patient
Hearts
Express
Resource
, Inc.
way
and
Suite
Visiting
M2248
Program: An
Dallas,
Educational
TX
and Support
75206
Program for
Patients,
Caregivers
and
Families
Affected by
Heart
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
401
$1,000
4/11/2016
Head Lite
Mental
Cypress
sponsor 7th
Health
Street
Annual Lite
Center
Manches
up the Nite
Of
ter, NH
Run/Walk
Greate
03103
for Mental
r
Health--Jun
Manche
e 23, 2016
ster
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
P.O. Box
$7,500
11/18/2016
Opera for
Prince
2063
All
ton
Princet
Festiv
on, NJ
al
08543
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
4101
$20,000
8/23/2016
MindStrong
Thresh
North
program
olds
Ravensw
ood
Avenue
Chicago
, IL
60613
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
100
$10,000
8/4/2016
Farm Based
Willia
Gould
Psychiatric
m J.
Road PO
Rehabilitat
Gould
Box 157
ion and
Associ
Montere
Recovery
ates,
y, MA
Inc.
01245
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Thomas
111 West
$12,000
12/15/2016
Scholarship
Edison
State
Support for
State
Street
Nursing
Colleg
Trenton
Students
e
, NJ
Enrolled in
Founda
08608
the W. Cary
tion
Edwards
School of
Nursing's
Accelerated
Second
Degree BSN
Program at
Thomas
Edison
State
University
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Tpto
51 South
$1,000
9/12/2016
2017
Inc.--
Timberl
Timberlane
Timber
ane
Science and
lane
Drive,
Engineering
Parent
Penning
Fair
Teache
ton, NJ
r
08534
Organi
zation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
439 S.
$7,000
9/12/2016
Second
Commun
Broad
Semester,
ity
Street,
Trenton
Music
Ste. 90
Community
School
Trenton
Music
, NJ
School
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
635
$5,000
12/15/2016
Trenton
Educat
South
Education
ion
Clinton
Dance
Dance
Avenue
Institute
Instit
Trenton
(TEDI)
ute
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
218 N
$15,000
11/22/2016
Navigating
Health
Broad
for Health
Team
St
Inc.
Trenton
, NJ
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trinity
22
$7,500
12/15/2016
TCS Mental
Counse
Stockto
Health and
ling
n
Wellness
Servic
Street
Program
es
Trinity
Counsel
ing
Service
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Tuscalo
PO Box
$1,000
3/30/2016
Supporting
osa
2322
sponsorship
Mental
Tuscalo
-Hot
Health
osa, AL
Hundred
Allian
35403
Bicycle
ce
Ride--July,
30, 2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Twiligh
P.O. Box
$7,500
11/9/2016
Simple Needs
t Wish
1042 11
Wish
Founda
Duane
Granting
tion
Road
Program
Doylest
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
UIH
4 North
$9,000
12/15/2016
Community of
Family
Broad
Health for
Partne
Street
Men, Year 3
rs
2nd
Floor
Trenton
, NJ
08618-
4408
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
9-25
$7,500
11/18/2016
Janssen
Negro
Alling
Pharmaceuti
Colleg
Street
cals-
e Fund
2nd
Princeton
Floor
Committee
Newark,
of UNCF
NJ
Scholarship
07102
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
Crossroa
$530,664
12/19/2016
Company
Way of
ds
match to
Greate
Corpora
employee
r
te
United Way
Mercer
Center
campaign
County
3150
for
Brunswi
Titusville
ck
based
Pike,
companies
Suite
230
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648-
2420
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
4 Walter
$600
11/29/2016
Costs
Way of
Foran
associated
Hunter
Blvd.
with 2016
don
Fleming
Janssen
County
ton, NJ
Cares
08822
Volunteer
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
PO Box
$42,219
12/21/2016
Company
Way of
6835
match to
Northe
1011
employee
rn New
Route
United Way
Jersey
22
campaign
West,
less Truist
2nd
processing
Floor
fee for
Bridgew
Raritan
ater,
campus
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Urbanpr
801 West
$3,500
10/26/2016
StreetLeader
omise
State
Program
Intern
Street
ationa
Trenton
l Inc.
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Valeo
5401 SW
$3,500
4/12/2016
Creations of
Behavi
7th
Hope: A
oral
Street
gallery by
Health
Topeka,
artists
Care
KS
experiencin
Inc.
66606
g mental
illness
focused on
advocacy
through
art.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Volunte
12
$7,500
12/15/2016
SkillsConnec
er
Stockto
t
Connec
n
t
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Washing
P. O.
$750
9/12/2016
Educational
ton
Box 83
program
Crossi
Titusvi
support:
ng
lle, NJ
``Digging
Park
08560
New Jersey:
Associ
Colonial
ation
and
Inc.
Revolutiona
ry War
Archeology'
' and ``The
Occupation
of Trenton:
December 1-
21, 1776''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
West
PO Box
$5,000
11/9/2016
Excellence
Windso
280
in
r
West
Education
Plains
Windsor
Grant
boro
, NJ
Program
Educat
08550-
ion
0280
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Womansp
1530
$5,000
11/18/2016
Domestic
ace
Brunswi
Violence
ck Ave.
Shelter
Lawrenc
(Safe
eville,
House) and
NJ
Transitiona
08648
l Housing
(Barbara's
House)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Women's
3200
$75
1/19/2016
Employee
Commun
Hilltop
directed
ity,
Avenue
donation in
Inc.
Wausau,
lieu of
WI
company
54401
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Woods
40
$600
10/24/2016
2016 Janssen
Servic
Martin
Cares
es
Gross
Volunteer
Founda
Drive
Events
tion
PO box
36
Langhor
ne, PA
19047
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Woods
40
$4,000
12/15/2016
Yoga at
Servic
Martin
Maplewood:
es
Gross
A Program
Founda
Drive
for People
tion
PO box
with Prader-
36
Willi
Langhor
Syndrome
ne, PA
19047
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 1,489,699
4/27/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Gaza,
Tanzania,
West Bank,
Afghanistan
, USA,
Jamaica,
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 1,865,102
4/27/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, Jamaica,
Nicaragua,
USA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 2,283,779
4/27/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, Armenia,
Nicaragua,
Peru, St.
Lucia, West
Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 189,778
4/27/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in USA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 871,464
5/10/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in USA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 3,176,645
5/10/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, USA,
Armenia,
Nicaragua,
Peru, St.
Lucia, West
Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 1,347,810
5/10/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, Armenia,
Nicaragua,
Peru, St.
Lucia, West
Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 1,482,447
5/10/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Tanzania,
Armenia,
St. Lucia,
Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 133,034
5/10/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia,
Tanzania,
Afghanistan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 15,673
6/8/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Tanzania.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 518,523
6/9/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua,
Tanzania,
West Bank,
and the US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$ 1,087,540
6/9/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Gaza,
Sierra
Leone,
Tanzania,
West Bank,
Afghanistan
, and US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$672,076
8/1/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in:
Dominican
Republic,
Lebanon,
Palestine
Territory,
Senegal,
St. Lucia,
Guatemala,
Nicaragua
and US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$15,291
8/1/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Guatemala,
Nicaragua,
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$536,094
8/1/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in:
Dominican
Republic,
Lebanon,
Palestine
Territory,
Senegal,
Guatemala,
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$2,923,869
8/1/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in:
Dominican
Republic,
Lebanon,
Palestine
Territory,
Senegal,
St. Lucia,
Guatemala,
Nicaragua,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$83,360
8/1/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in: Haiti,
Palestine
Territory,
St. Lucia,
Lebanon,
Senegal,
Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$481,959
8/1/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in:
Guatemala,
Nicaragua,
Palestine
Territory,
Senegal, US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$354,276
9/13/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Colombia,
Lebanon,
Tanzania
and West
Bank.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$589,968
9/13/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
Americares
d, CT
US Clinics
06902
Network.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$34,315
9/13/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Tanzania
and West
Bank.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$114,481
9/13/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, Colombia,
Tanzania,
and West
Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$613,250
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
Clinics.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$6,343,517
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Lebanon,
St. Lucia,
West Bank,
Gaza,
Afghanistan
and the US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$807,284
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Colombia,
West Bank,
Afghanistan
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$61,169
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,516,094
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in West
Bank and
the US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$252,240
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$292,992
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
Clinics.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,270,212
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
Clinics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$641,091
9/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in West
Bank and
the US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$113,318
9/13/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
, Colombia,
Tanzania,
West Bank.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$622,686
10/24/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$42,437
10/24/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Haiti,
Sierra
Leone,
Ghana.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$555,202
10/24/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in West
Bank, Gaza,
US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,321,288
11/17/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Puerto
Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$99,595
11/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia and
Colombia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$25,655
11/29/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in West
Bank, Gaza,
Dominican
Republic,
St. Lucia,
Colombia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$151,578
11/29/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Colombia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$38,160
11/29/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Colombia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$119,132
11/29/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in West
Bank and
St. Lucia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$238,579
11/29/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Colombia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$381,064
11/30/2016
Produce
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$86,941
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua
and West
Bank.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$239,612
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua,
St. Lucia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$46,647
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$10,987
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$145,709
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
Nicaragua,
West Bank
and US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$23,053
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$282,912
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$142,865
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
,
Nicaragua,
St. Lucia,
and West
Bank.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$212,731
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$54,332
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua
and
Liberia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$25,485
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$183,120
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in the US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$179,712
12/19/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Romania.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$428,182
12/21/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$270,923
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Afghanistan
and
Tanzania.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$30,737
12/22/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$291,417
12/30/2016
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation
Founda
n Ave
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
Nicaragua,
West Bank,
and US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$1,167,782
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in D.R., El
10005
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$30,737
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$30,737
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$12,212,928
12/21/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Haiti,
10005
Honduras,
Jamaica,
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$135,843
12/19/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance.
Board
NY
10005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$43,471
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Jamaica.
10005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$374,394
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$42,860
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$106,365
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$27,166
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Jamaica.
10005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$101,942
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$2,140,908
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$336,398
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$582,322
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$2,723,631
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$89,706
12/22/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$43,293
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Haiti,
10005
Jamaica and
El
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$223,922
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$218,883
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$41,696
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Haiti.
10005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$26,039,346
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$248,988
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Haiti.
10005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$381,604
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Haiti
10005
and
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$361,008
12/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala
and Haiti.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$76,321
9/13/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Haiti.
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$622,686
10/25/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador,
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$482,784
10/25/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in El
10005
Salvador
and
Guatemala.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$16,848,000
10/25/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$822,943
9/22/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n relief in
n
Island
Honduras.
Board
City,
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$139,387
9/22/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$732,675
9/22/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$76,696
9/13/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Haiti.
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$30,737
9/13/2016
Product
c
Elevent
Donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Haiti.
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$75,546
9/13/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Haiti.
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$270,923
9/13/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Haiti.
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$151,003
9/13/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Haiti.
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$275,235
8/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$48,005
8/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$208,481
8/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$1,162,207
8/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$4,168
8/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in Jamaica.
10005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$952,711
8/1/2016
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Guatemala
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$15,673
6/8/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$884,080
6/9/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$294,990
6/9/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$97,026
5/10/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$137,045
5/10/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$561,881
5/10/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Armenia,
NY
Guatemala,
Honduras,
El Salvador
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$3,165,318
5/10/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Dominican
Republic,
El
Salvador,
Haiti,
Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$439,527
4/27/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Dominican
Republic,
Haiti,
Jamaica,
Honduras
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$864,289
4/27/2016
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Dominican
Republic,
Armenia,
Haiti,
Jamaica, El
Salvador
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,970,703
4/27/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ecuador,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Liberia,
Paraguay,
Peru,
Dominican
Republic,
Ghana,
Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$2,216,643
4/27/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana,
Honduras,
Jordan,
Liberia,
Malawi,
Paraguay,
Peru,
Sierra
Leone,
Guatemala,
Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$68,096
4/4/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
disaster
Barbara
preparednes
, CA
s module
93117
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$571,913
4/27/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Nicaragua,
Malawi,
Ghana, US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,270,853
4/27/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Colombia,
Ghana,
Guatemala,
Honduras,.
Jordan,
Paraguay
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$172,405
6/8/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Dominican
Republic,
Ghana,
Pakistan,
Paraguay.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$3,702,692
5/10/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Guyana,
Armenia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$114,204
5/10/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Guyana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$4,350,366
6/9/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Dominican
Republic,
Ghana,
Jamaica,
Pakistan,
Paraguay,
Liberia,
and
Honduras
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$2,620,434
6/9/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana,
Haiti,
Paraguay,
Somaliland,
Dominican
Republic,
Honduras,
Jamaica,
Malawi,
Pakistan,
Rwanda.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$20,006
8/2/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Haiti.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$91,508
9/7/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in the
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,368,726
9/7/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Dominican
Republic,
Guyana,
Fiji.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$30,737
9/7/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$812,768
9/7/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$300,317
9/7/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Dominican
Republic
and Guyana.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$572,406
9/7/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Dominican
Republic
and Guyana.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$423,969
9/7/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Dominican
Republic
and
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$996,184
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$159,065
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$296,198
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$113,778
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$70,614
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$56,506
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$801,421
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$720,416
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$848,095
11/16/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$22,144
5/10/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in USA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,151,659
10/24/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Haiti,
Ghana,
Sierra
Leone.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,781,473
10/24/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Honduras
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$49,798
11/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Jamaica.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$18,947
11/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Peru and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$21,529
11/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Peru.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$152,642
11/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Jamaica
and
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$244,221
11/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Jamaica,
Guatemala,
Colombia,
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$54,936
11/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Peru,
Nicaragua
and
Colombia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$86,941
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Honduras
and
Afghanistan
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$381,882
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Haiti,
Afghanistan
, Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$64,354
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$145,709
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$57,146
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Lebanon
and
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$53,183
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Afghanistan
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$45,277
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Afghanistan
and
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$203,883
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n relief in
, CA
Honduras
93117
and US.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$241,908
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Haiti
and US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$102,180
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in the US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$126,300
12/22/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Haiti.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$8,017
11/28/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Peru.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$179,712
12/19/2016
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Malawi.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$8,017
11/28/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$199,190
11/28/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in Haiti.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$190,802
11/28/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in Honduras
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$83,392
11/28/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$635,226
9/26/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in Haiti.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$194,454
9/16/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in Haiti
and
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$1,327,428
9/16/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in Haiti,
Guatemala
and
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$114,481
9/16/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in Haiti.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$61,475
9/16/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in
Guatemala
and El
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$128,184
9/16/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in Haiti
and
Guatemala.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$148,499
6/9/2016
Product
to
Pacific
donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in
Dominican
Republic,
Guatemala,
Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$31,346
6/8/2016
Product
to
Pacific
donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in
Guatemala,
Jamaica.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$963,188
5/10/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
13250 W
$808,425
5/10/2016
Product
To
98th
donation
Heart
Street
for
Intern
Lenexa,
humanitaria
ationa
KS
n
l
66215
assistance
in
Swaziland
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$84,928,778
3/31/2016
Patient
and
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08933
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$86,415,842
6/31/2016
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08934
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$68,286,613
9/30/2016
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08935
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$77,655,085
12/31/2016
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
New
Assist
Brunswi
ance
ck, NJ
Founda
08936
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$168,361
10/21/2016
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
disaster
ck, GA
response in
31525
Haiti.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$35,275
11/28/2016
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
in Central
America.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$1,600,598
12/14/2016
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
Humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$1,816
12/14/2016
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
50 Hurt
$1,471,357
12/16/2016
Product
Intern
Plaza
donation
ationa
Atlanta
for
l
, GA
humanitaria
30303
n
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated March 30, 2017
Janssen Therapeutics, Division of Janssen Products, LP, Monetary and
Product Contribution to U.S.-based Charitable Organizations Full Year
2016
(Payments made from January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Acercam
827
$7,500
4/25/2016
ContraSIDA
iento
Wildwoo
(Against
Hispan
d Ave,
HIV/AIDS)
o de
Suite
Caroli
200
na del
Columbi
Sur
a, SC
29203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ADAP
312 11th
$5,000
6/1/2016
Improving
Advoca
Avenue,
Access to
cy
#21g
Care Among
New
Transgender
York,
Men and
NY
Women
10001
Living with
HIV/AIDS
under the
AIDS Drug
Assistance
Program
(ADAP)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ADAP
312 11th
$5,000
2/29/2016
ADAP
Advoca
Avenue,
Directory
cy
#21g
New
York,
NY
10001
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
African- 1833 W.
$200,000
12/6/2016
Certificatio
Americ
8th
n of the
an
St.,
U.S. HIV
Aids
Suite
Workforce:
Policy
200 Los
A Project
And
Angeles
to Increase
Traini
, CA
HIV
ng
90057
Literacy
Instit
and
ute
Competency
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
600 St.
$26,700
8/24/2016
(RFA)--Healt
Action
Clair
hy Start
Coalit
Avenue
ion of
P.O.
Huntsv
Box
ille
2409
Huntsvi
lle, AL
35801
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
75 Amory
$30,000
12/6/2016
Getting to
Action
Street
Zero MA
Commit
Boston,
tee of
MA
Massac
02119
husett
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aids
575 8th
$15,000
7/13/2016
HIV Health
Commun
Ave,
Literacy
ity
Suite
Education
Resear
502 New
and
ch
York,
Training
Initia
NY
for Service
tive
10018
Providers
of
Working
Americ
with
a
Vulnerable
ACRIA
Populations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
200 W.
$48,000
6/21/2016
Ensuring
Founda
Jackson
Access to
tion
Blvd
HIV
of
Suite
Prevention
Chicag
2100
and Care in
o
Chicago
Illinois
, IL
through
60606
Policy
Monitoring
and
Advocacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
400 N
$5,000
2/29/2016
HIV Case
Outrea
Beach
Management
ch
Street
at AIDS
Center
Fort
Outreach
Worth,
Center
TX
76111
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
The
$7,500
12/14/2016
HIV Access
Projec
David
and Care
t Los
Geffen
Coordinatio
Angele
Center
n Program
s
611 S.
Kingsle
y Dr.
Los
Angeles
, CA
90005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
64 West
$20,000
6/21/2016
Peer
Servic
35th
Education,
e
Street,
Health
Center
3rd
Coaching,
NYC
Floor
and Access
New
to Care
York,
programs
NY
10001
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
P.O. Box
$30,000
8/24/2016
(RFA)--Posit
Servic
169 121
ive Living
es
College
Coalit
Street
ion
Hatties
burg,
MS
39401
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
17982
$5,000
12/16/2016
HIV and
Servic
Sky
Hepatitis C
es
Park
Testing
Founda
Circle,
Program
tion
Suite J
Orange
Irvine,
County
CA
92614
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
17982
$5,000
2/29/2016
HIV and
Servic
Sky
Hepatitis C
es
Park
Testing
Founda
Circle,
Program
tion
Suite J
Orange
Irvine,
County
CA
92614
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
7215
$5,000
1/18/2016
HIV Case
Servic
Cameron
Management
es of
Road
Austin
Austin,
Inc.
TX
78752
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
7215
$2,500
12/14/2016
Palateria
Servic
Cameron
Cart
es of
Road
Austin
Austin,
Inc.
TX
78752
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
7215
$30,000
8/8/2016
(RFA)--Risin
Servic
Cameron
g Star
es of
Road
University
Austin
Austin,
Inc.
TX
78752
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
1424 K
$300,000
12/19/2016
Transgender
United
Street,
Leadership
NW
Demonstrati
Suite
on Project
200
Washing
ton, DC
20005-2
411
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alexian
825 W.
$5,000
6/20/2016
Transitional
Brothe
Welling
Living
rs
ton
Program for
Bonave
Chicago
Homeless
nture
, IL
Adults with
House
60657
HIV/AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Allianc
825
$3,000
12/14/2016
Continuum-of-
e For
Colorad
Care
Housin
o
Services
g And
Blvd.,
for Multi-
Healin
Suite
Diagnosed
g
100 Los
Persons
Angeles
with HIV/
, CA
AIDS
90041
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
Greater
$3,000
8/25/2016
Ask the
n
New
Experts:
Liver
York
Hepatitis C/
Founda
Divisio
HIV Co-
tion
n 39
infection
Broadwa
Seminar
y Suite
2700
New
York,
NY
10006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Atlanta
P.O. Box
$15,000
2/16/2016
Hepatitis C
Harm
92670
Prevention
Reduct
Atlanta
Program
ion
, GA
Coalit
30314
ion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bienest
5326 E
$25,000
12/6/2016
Bienestar
ar
Beverly
HIV
Blvd
Programs
Los
and
Angeles
Services
, CA
90022
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Brother
2714
$28,500
8/24/2016
(RFA)--EMPOW
hood,
Canal
ER NOLA
Inc.
Street
Suite
503A
New
Orleans
, LA
70119
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Caring
PO Box
$40,000
3/24/2016
Hepatitis C
Ambass
1748
Program
adors
Oregon
Support--SH
Progra
City,
APE and
m Inc.
OR
CHOICES
97045
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
119
$5,000
3/14/2016
The Home
c
Dameron
Place
Charit
Avenue
ies of
Knoxvil
East
le, TN
Tennes
37917
see
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Central
1785
$5,000
2/29/2016
Free On-Site
Louisi
Jackson
Neighborhoo
ana
Street
d Testing,
Aids
Alexand
Counseling,
Suppor
ria, LA
and
t
71301
Prevention
Servic
Program
es
Inc.
(CLASS
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Christi
2440
$10,000
7/13/2016
Integrated
e's
Third
Services
Place
Ave San
for Women,
Inc.
Diego,
Children
CA
and
92101
Families
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Christi
2440
$20,000
2/18/2016
CHANGE for
e's
Third
Women
Place
Ave San
Inc.
Diego,
CA
92101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Coaliti
127 W
$50,000
12/6/2016
Strengthenin
on On
127th
g Patient
Positi
Street
Education
ve
Suite
through
Health
208 New
Technology
Empowe
York,
and Social
rment
NY
Media
Inc.
10027
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Coastal
5633
$15,000
10/7/2016
HEP:
Bend
South
Hepatitis
Wellne
Staples
Education
ss
, Suite
Program
Founda
700
tion
Corpus
Christi
, TX
78411
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
714 East
$5,000
6/24/2016
Patient
ty
Sahara
Wellness
Counse
Ave.
Education
ling
Suite
Center
103 Las
Vegas,
NV
89104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
2409
$29,633
8/24/2016
(RFA)--Safe
ty
Murchis
Spaces
Health
on Rd
Ambassador
Interv
Fayette
Program
ention
ville,
s and
NC
Sickle
28301
Cell
Agency
Incorp
orated
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
60
$30,000
2/29/2016
Transgender
ty
Madison
Linkage to
Health
Avenue,
Care
care
5th
Networ
floor
k
New
York,
NY
10010
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Compreh
142 S.
$25,000
8/24/2016
(RFA)--Proje
ensive
Brunswi
ct IRIS
Aids
ck
(Improving
Resour
Street
Retention
ce
Suite B
In the
Encoun
P.O.
South)
ter
Box 552
Inc.
Jesup,
GA
31545
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crisis
1218
$75
7/12/2016
Employee
Shelte
West
directed
r of
State
donation in
Lawren
Street
lieu of
ce
New
company
County
Castle,
holiday
PA
gift
16101-
2021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Desert
1695 N.
$5,000
6/1/2016
Get Tested
AIDS
Sunrise
Coachella
Projec
Way
Valley
t
Palm
Linkage to
Springs
Care for
, CA
Newly
92262
Diagnosed
HIV-
Positive
Persons
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Frannie
30
$5,000
9/13/2016
Integrated
Peabod
Danfort
Access to
y
h St.
Care for
Center
Suite
People
Inc.
311
Living with
Portlan
HIV/AIDS
d, ME
04101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Harm
22 West
$25,000
7/13/2016
Hepatitis C
Reduct
27th
Project
ion
Street
Coalit
5th
ion
Floor
New
York,
NY
10001
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Health
1211
$5,000
12/14/2016
Pennsylvania
Federa
Chestnu
Ryan White
tion
t
Part C/D
Of
Street,
Collaborati
Philad
Suite
ve
elphia
801
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HealthH
2000 S
$30,000
2/18/2016
Do You Know
IV
Street
Me?:
NW
Engaging
Washing
and
ton, DC
Retaining
20009
Young MSM
of Color in
HIV Care
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heart
3600
$5,000
3/16/2016
BROTHA--Brot
Health
Broadwa
hers
and
y West
Responding
Healin
Palm
Openly to
g
Beach,
HIV/AIDS
Minist
FL
(Ujima
ries
33407
Men's
Inc.
Collective)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hepatit
35 East
$22,000
2/18/2016
The
is C
38th
Hepatitis C
Mentor
Street,
Education
And
Suite
and Support
Suppor
#4G New
Group
t
York,
Assistance
Group
NY
Program
Inc.
10016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hepatit
1261 S.
$35,000
3/14/2016
Case
is
Jackson
management
Educat
St.
($25,000);
ion
Suite
King County
Projec
201
Jail
t
Seattle
Hepatitis
, WA
Education
98144
($10,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hepatit
8121
$5,000
5/6/2016
Call To
is
Georgia
Action: A
Founda
Avenue
National
tion
Suite
Response
Intern
350
for
ationa
Silver
Hepatitis C
l Inc.
Spring,
Treatment
MD
among the
20910
Hard to
Reach, Hard
to Treat.
Proposal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jackson
P.O. Box
$30,000
8/8/2016
(RFA)--#AIDS
ville
380103
FreeJax
Area
Jackson
Linkage to
Sexual
ville,
Care (L2C)
Minori
FL
Program--a
ty
32205
Comprehensi
Youth
ve HIV/AIDS
Networ
Linkage to
k,
Care
Inc.
Program for
(JASMY
African
N)
American
YMSM, ages
13-23
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Legacy
4054
$5,000
12/14/2016
Legacy
Counse
McKinne
Counseling
ling
y
Center
Center
Avenue
Counseling
Suite
and Walk-In
102
Crisis
Dallas,
Clinic
TX
Program for
75204
People
Living with
HIV/AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Make-A-
2880
$450
2/8/2016
Employee
Wish
Slater
directed
Founda
Road,
donation in
tion
Suite
lieu of
of
108
company
Easter
Morrisv
holiday
n
ille,
gift
North
NC
Caroli
27560
na
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
MCCNY
446 West
$10,000
12/6/2016
Linkage to
Charit
36th
Care for
ies
Street
LGBTQI
New
Homeless
York,
Youth
NY
10018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minorit
5149 W.
$7,500
4/12/2016
The Missing
y AIDS
Jeffers
Link
Projec
on Blvd
``G.L.A.M.O
t
Los
.R.''
Angeles
(Getting
, CA
Linked And
90016
Managing
Our
Regimen)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Missour
601
$9,650
8/9/2016
Hep C
i
Busines
Education
Hepati
s Loop
and
tis C
70 West
Testing--Th
Allian
Suite
e Texas
ce
138
Project
Columbi
a, MO
65203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
580
$175,000
3/7/2016
NATAP HIV
l AIDS
Broadwa
and HCV
Treatm
y Suite
Information
ent
1010
and
Advoca
New
Education
cy
York,
Project
Projec
NY
t
10012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
444 N.
$150,000
12/19/2016
Health
l
Capitol
Systems
Allian
St., NW
Integration
ce of
Suite
, Ryan
State
339
White/ADAP,
and
Washing
and Viral
Territ
ton, DC
Hepatitis
orial
20001
Public
AIDS
Policy and
Direct
Technical
ors
Assistance
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1000
$50,000
12/15/2016
Strong
l
Vermont
Communities
Minori
Avenue
: Social
ty
NW
Drivers of
AIDS
Suite
HIV
Counci
200
l
Washing
ton, DC
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1000
$30,000
2/16/2016
Strong
l
Vermont
Communities
Minori
Avenue
:
ty
NW
Strengtheni
AIDS
Suite
ng
Counci
200
connections
l
Washing
between
ton, DC
LGBT
20005
communities
of color
and the
providers
that serve
them
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
44 South
$5,000
2/29/2016
Community
Jersey
Street
Based
AIDS
Morrist
Services
Servic
own, NJ
es
07960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Next
99
$5,000
6/20/2016
Expansion of
Step
Bishop
Next Step's
Fund
Allen
Year-round
Inc.
Drive
Programming
Cambrid
for teens
ge, MA
and young
02139
adults
living with
HIV.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Our
2727 SE
$5,000
8/23/2016
Neighborhood
House
Alder
Housing and
of
St.
Care
Portla
Portlan
Program
nd
d, OR
(NHCP)
Incorp
97214
orated
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Palmett
2638 Two
$7,500
5/6/2016
HIV Care
o AIDS
Notch
Coordinatio
Life
Road,
n Program
Suppor
Suite
t
108
Servic
Columbi
es
a, SC
29204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Positiv
785
$2,500
12/16/2016
Employment
e
Market
and
Resour
Street,
Benefits
ce
10th
Education
Center
Floor
San
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$60,000
10/6/2016
Policy
Inform
Ninth
Initiatives
Street
to Improve
San
Access to
Francis
Care and
co, CA
Treatment
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$20,000
7/15/2016
Hepatitis C
Inform
Ninth
Education
Street
and Linkage
San
to Care
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$30,000
12/19/2016
The Support
Inform
Ninth
Partnership
Street
San
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$70,000
5/19/2016
Mission
Inform
Ninth
Support for
Street
Project
San
Inform
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$40,000
2/18/2016
The Support
Inform
Ninth
Partnership
Street
San
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
RAIN,
601 E.
$30,000
8/8/2016
(RFA)--Impro
Inc.
5th
ving
Street,
Retention
Suite
in Care and
470
Access to
Charlot
Treatment
te, NC
for African
28202
Americans
Living with
HIV in
Charlotte
Metropolita
n area
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
RAIN,
601 E.
$5,000
4/25/2016
Medical Case
Inc.
5th
Management
Street,
for Youth,
Suite
Adults and
470
Seniors
Charlot
with HIV/
te, NC
AIDS
28202
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Recover
3423
$75,000
4/15/2016
The Healthy
y
Covingt
Start
Consul
on
Program
tants
Drive,
Of
Suite B
Atlant
Decatur
a
, GA
Incorp
30032
orated
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Resourc
5750
$3,000
12/14/2016
Valor Latino
e
Cedar
Project
Center
Springs
of
Road
Dallas
Dallas,
, Inc.
TX
75235-6
805
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sero
PO Box
$15,000
2/29/2016
HIV is Not a
Projec
1233
Crime
t Inc.
Milford
regional
, PA
and
18337
national
conferences
and webinar
trainings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shanti
730 Polk
$10,000
7/13/2016
Shanti HIV
Projec
Street,
Services
t Inc.
3rd
Program/HCV
Floor
Services
San
Francis
co, CA
94109
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
South
601
$7,500
6/27/2016
West
Centra
Bland
Virginia
l
Street
Infection
Educat
P.O.
Disease
ional
Box
Coalition
Develo
4322
pment
Bluefie
ld, WV
24701
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Southwe
1101 N.
$5,000
12/14/2016
General
st
Central
mission
Center
Avenue
support
For
Suite
HIV/
200
AIDS
Phoenix
Inc.
, AZ
85004
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Step-Up
850 N.
$5,000
12/16/2016
Indianapolis
Incorp
Meridia
Men
orated
n
Advancing
Street
Prevention
First
(IMAP)
Floor
Indiana
polis,
IN
46204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
17 Davis
$65,000
12/6/2016
Ensuring
Aids
Blvd.
Adequate
Instit
Suite
Funding for
ute
403
Domestic
Tampa,
HIV/AIDS
FL
and
33606
Hepatitis
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
429 E.
$75
2/8/2016
Employee
Health
Vermont
directed
Founda
Street,
donation in
tion
Suite
lieu of
of
400
company
Greate
Indiana
holiday
r
polis,
gift
Indian
IN
apolis
46202
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The Hep
1325 S.
$15,000
7/12/2016
HCV Patient
C
Colorad
Linkage to
Connec
o
Care and
tion
Blvd.,
Navigation
B-302
Denver,
CO
80222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
PO Box
$30,000
8/24/2016
(RFA)--``Rep
Open
99243
''
Door,
Pittsbu
presenting
Inc.
rgh, PA
the
15233
solution
for optimal
health
outcomes
and housing
stability
for African
American
``payees''
living with
HIV/AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The San
3909
$5,000
3/7/2016
[emailprotected]
Diego
Centre
Services
LGBT
St San
program
Commun
Diego,
ity
CA
Center
92103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
85
$30,000
3/24/2016
Support
Well
Norman
Information
Projec
Avenue,
,
t
Suite 1
Community,
P.O.
Advocacy
Box
and
220410
Evaluation
Brookly
n, NY
11222
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
1331
$30,000
8/24/2016
(RFA)--Enhan
Women'
Rhode
cements of
s
Island
Community
Collec
Avenue
Health
tive
NE
Worker
Washing
Program
ton, DC
20018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Tourett
4240
$75
5/4/2016
Donation in
e
Bell
lieu of
Associ
Blvd.,
company
ation
Suite
holiday
of
205
gift
Americ
Bayside
a
, NY
11361
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TPA
5050 N.
$5,000
6/1/2016
Healthy
Networ
Broadwa
Aging with
k
y Suite
HIV
Incorp
300
orated
Chicago
Test
, IL
Positi
60640
ve
Aware
Networ
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TPA
5050 N.
$25,000
10/6/2016
Total Care
Networ
Broadwa
Portal
k
y Suite
Incorp
300
orated
Chicago
Test
, IL
Positi
60640
ve
Aware
Networ
k
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Treatme
261
$25,000
5/19/2016
Case Studies
nt
Fifth
Action
Ave
Group,
Suite
Inc.
2110
New
York,
NY
10016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Univers
UCSF
$7,500
6/20/2016
Mission-
ity of
Allianc
Based
Califo
e
Support of
rnia
Health
UCSF
San
Project
Alliance
Franci
1855
Health
sco
Folsom
Project
Street,
Services
Ste.
for People
670 Box
Living With
0884
or at Risk
San
of HIV/AIDS
Francis
co, CA
94143
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Univers
5801 S.
$20,741
3/7/2016
4 Her by Her
ity of
Ellis
Chicag
Avenue
o
Chicago
, IL
60637
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
US
1300 PA
$500,000
8/5/2016
Bedaquiline
Agency
Avenue.
Donation
for
, NW SA-
Program in
Intern
44 Rm
support of
ationa
475-J
World
l
Washing
Health
Develo
ton, DC
Organizatio
pment
20523
n's END TB
Strategy
for 2016-
2035
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Venice
604 Rose
$5,000
12/16/2016
Venice
Family
Ave.
Family
Clinic
Venice,
Clinic's
CA
Common
90291
Ground
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Vermont
187
$5,000
6/1/2016
Vermont HIV
Commit
Saint
Transportat
tee
Paul
ion Support
For
Street
Aids
Burling
Resour
ton, VT
ces
05401
Educat
ion
and
Servic
es
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Washing
566 West
$30,000
3/24/2016
Engaging
ton
181st
High Risk
Height
Street,
Active
s
Floor 2
Injection
CORNER
New
Drug Users
Projec
York,
in
t
NY
Hepatitis C
10033
Testing and
Treatment
in Northern
Manhattan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Women
417
$7,500
4/25/2016
SafetyPIN
On
Welshwo
Mainta
od
ining
Drive,
Educat
Suite
ion
303
And
Nashvil
Nutrit
le, TN
ion
37211-
4248
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Womens
4615
$2,500
3/23/2016
She's Still
Challe
Harrier
Got It
nge
Way
educational
Inc.
Belcamp
initiative
, MD
21017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
WORLD
389 30th
$15,000
12/14/2016
Community
Women
St
Researchers
Organi
Oakland
Engaging
zed to
, CA
Women
Respon
94609
(CREW) III
d to
Life-
threat
ening
Diseas
es
------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$ 3,700,026
3/31/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08933
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$ 3,459,402
6/30/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08934
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$ 2,280,117
9/30/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08935
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson & Johnson
One Johnson &
$ 3,874,808
12/31/2016
Patient Assistance
Patient Assistance
Johnson Plaza New
Product Donation
Foundation
Brunswick, NJ 08936
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Partnership for
1616 Fort Myer
$ 6,123,407
10/3/2016
Product donation
Supply Chain
Drive, 12th Floor
for humanitarian
Management
Arlington, VA 22209-
assistance.
3100
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
US Agency for
1300 PA Avenue., NW,
$ 44,580,000
12/1/2016
Bedaquiline product
International
SA-44 Rm 475-J
donation
Development
Washington, DC
20523
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Updated March 30, 2018
Janssen Biotech, Inc. Monetary and Product Contribution to U.S.-based
Charitable Organizations Full Year 2017
(Payments made from January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AAUW
7511
$1,000
12/14/2017
Annual
Makefi
Germant
Girl's
eld
own
Recognition
Area
Avenue
Reception
Branch
Philade
and
PA
lphia,
Scholarship
Inc.
PA
Awards
19119
American
Association
of
University
Women--Make
field
Branch
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aid For
12271
$300
11/16/2017
Costs
Friend
Townsen
associated
s
d Rd.
with
Philade
Janssen
lphia,
Cares
PA
Volunteer
19154
Activity--S
eptember
27, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aid For
12271
$300
11/16/2017
Costs
Friend
Townsen
associated
s
d Rd.
with
Philade
Janssen
lphia,
Cares
PA
Volunteer
19154
Activity--O
ctober 6,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
250
$9,500
2/2/2017
General
n
William
Operating
Cancer
s
Support
Societ
Street
y
NW
(HDQTS
Atlanta
)
, GA
30303
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
Atlanta
$300
10/25/2017
Costs
n
Hope
associated
Cancer
Lodge
with
Societ
1552
Janssen
y Inc.
Shoup
Cares
Ct
Volunteer
Decatur
Activity
, GA
30033
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1626
$1,000
4/21/2017
Relay For
n
Locust
Life of the
Cancer
Street
Wissahickon
Societ
Philade
Valley
y Inc,
lphia,
Philad
PA
elphia
19103
, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
1355
$200,000
5/24/2017
Walk To Cure
is
Peachtr
Arthritis
Founda
ee
and Jingle
tion
Street,
Bell Run
Suite
600
Atlanta
, GA
30309
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arthrit
1355
$200,000
12/21/2017
Walk To Cure
is
Peachtr
Arthritis
Founda
ee
and Jingle
tion
Street,
Bell Run
Suite
600
Atlanta
, GA
30309
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Artz
1229
$7,500
11/30/2017
``ARTZ in
Philad
Chestnu
the
elphia
t
Neighborhoo
Street,
d: A
#188
Community-
Philade
Based
lphia,
Program''
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Breathi
600 West
$5,000
12/25/2017
Program and
ng
Avenue,
Family
Room
P.O.
Services--B
Founda
Box 287
reathing
tion
Jenkint
Room
own, PA
Foundation
19046-2
729
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
3
$5,000
3/30/2017
Oncology
Suppor
Crossro
Support
t
ads
Groups
Commun
Drive
ity
Bedmins
Centra
ter, NJ
l New
07921
Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
1200 Old
$5,000
5/19/2017
Voice of the
Suppor
Henders
Patient:
t
on
Distress
Commun
Columbu
Screening
ity
s, OH
and Support
Centra
43220
for Cancer
l Ohio
Patients
and
Survivors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$2,000
7/31/2017
Paws 4 Life
Suppor
Road
Dog Walk
t
Warmins
Commun
ter, PA
ity of
18974
Philad
elphia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$300
11/30/2017
Costs
Suppor
Road
associated
t
Warmins
with
Commun
ter, PA
Janssen
ity of
18974
Cares
Philad
Volunteer
elphia
Activity--S
eptember 28
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Cancer
200 Kirk
$300
11/30/2017
Costs
Suppor
Road
associated
t
Warmins
with
Commun
ter, PA
Janssen
ity of
18974
Cares
Philad
Volunteer
elphia
Activity--S
eptember 28
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
1617
$5,000
9/4/2017
Project for
for
John F.
Medically
Child
Kennedy
Needy
Advoca
Bouleva
Children
tes
rd
Philade
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Central
2500
$300
11/30/2017
Costs
Bucks
Lower
associated
Family
State
with
YMCA
Road
Janssen
Doylest
Cares
own, PA
Volunteer
18901
Activity--O
ctober 3
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Chester
100
$5,000
12/1/2017
Outreach
County
North
Programs
Art
Bradfor
Associ
d
ation
Avenue
West
Chester
, PA
19382
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Chester
790 East
$6,000
12/22/2017
Certified
County
Market
Nurse
Opport
Street,
Assistant
unitie
Suite
(CNA)
s
100
Program
Indust
West
rializ
Chester
ation
, PA
Center
19382
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Chestnu
1710
$2,500
11/30/2017
General
t Hill
Bethleh
Operating
Meals
em Pike
Support
on
Flourto
Wheels
wn, PA
19031
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
100 Penn
$12,000
6/28/2017
Family Care
n's
Square
Binder
Hospit
East
Program
al of
8th
Philad
Floor,
elphia
Suite
Founda
8050
tion
Philade
lphia,
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
100 Penn
$6,000
4/13/2017
Walk for
n's
Square
Hope
Hospit
East
Benefiting
al of
8th
Pediatric
Philad
Floor,
Inflammator
elphia
Suite
y Bowel
Founda
8050
Disease
tion
Philade
Research at
lphia,
CHOP
PA
19107
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
300B
$25,000
12/21/2017
Provision of
ty
Lawrenc
free
Volunt
e Drive
medical and
eers
West
dental
in
Chester
healthcare
Medici
, PA
to the
ne
19380
uninsured
in Chester
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohn's
733 3rd
$18,000
6/13/2017
Camp Oasis
and
Avenue
Coliti
Suite
s
510 New
Founda
York,
tion--
NY
NY
10017
Chapte
r
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Crohn's
733 3rd
$100,000
10/30/2017
Take Steps
and
Avenue
for Crohn's
Coliti
Suite
and Colitis
s
510 New
Walks
Founda
York,
tion--
NY
NY
10017
Chapte
r
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
236
$5,000
5/22/2017
Teacher
e
Randell
Development
Valley
Hall
Program
Scienc
3141
e
Chestnu
Fairs,
t
Inc.
Street
Philade
lphia,
PA
19104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Emmanue
67
$3,500
12/21/2017
Pediatric
l
Walnut
Cancer
Cancer
Ave.
Family
Founda
Suite
Financial
tion
107
Assistance
Clark,
Fund
NJ
07040
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
142
$250,000
12/15/2017
Family Reach
Reach
Berkele
Financial
Founda
y
Assistance
tion
Street;
and
4th
Resource
Floor
Navigation
Boston,
Programs
MA
02116
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
For
620 West
$1,000
5/15/2017
7th Annual
Pete's
Germant
For Pete's
Sake
own
Sake, Walk!
Cancer
Pike
at Citizens
Respit
Suite
Bank Park
e
250
Founda
Plymout
tion
h
Meeting
, PA
19462
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
113 West
$5,000
12/14/2017
Outreach to
Associ
Chestnu
Homeless
ation
t
Families
For
Street
Care
West
and
Chester
Protec
, PA
tion
19380
Of
Childr
en
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
560
$2,500
5/11/2017
Free
Prosta
Barnesl
Prostate
te
ey Lane
Cancer
Cancer
Alphare
Screening
Coalit
tta, GA
ion
30022
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Girl
330
$4,000
11/21/2017
Science,
Scouts
Manor
Technology,
of
Road
Engineering
Southe
Miquon,
, and Math
astern
PA
Outreach
Pennsy
19444-1
Programming
lvania
741
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Global
515 N.
$25,000
12/21/2017
Puerto Rico
Health
Midland
Rheumatolog
y
Ave
y Relief
Living
Upper
Founda
Nyack,
tion,
NY
Inc.
10960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
1847 E
$2,500
12/18/2017
Cambria
for
Lincoln
Housing
Humani
Hwy
Development
ty of
Coatesv
-providing
Cheste
ille,
decent
r
PA
affordable
County
19320
housing
, Inc.
options in
Chester
County Pa.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
1829 N.
$5,000
12/13/2017
Diamond Park
For
19th
Humani
Street
ty
Philade
Philad
lphia,
elphia
PA
Inc.
19121
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hatboro- 229
$25,000
12/1/2017
STEM
Horsha
Meeting
Programs
m
house
for Hatboro-
Educat
Road
Horsham
ional
Horsham
Students
Founda
, PA
tion
19044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jack
3282
$25,000
5/31/2017
WOW!
And
Northsi
Experience
Jill
de
Late
Parkway
Stage
, NW
Cancer
Suite
Founda
100
tion
Atlanta
Inc.
, GA
33327
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Joy of
580
$525
4/11/2017
Employee
Sox
Lindsey
directed
Dr.,
donation in
Ste 150
lieu of
Radnor,
company
PA
holiday
19087
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kids
26071
$3,000
11/21/2017
Support
Connec
Merit
Groups for
ted
Circle,
the
#103
Children of
Laguna
Cancer
Hills,
Patients
CA
92653-7
016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Lenape
500 N.
$ 300
11/30/2017
Costs
Valley
West
associated
Founda
Street
with
tion
Doylest
Janssen
own, PA
Cares
18901
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember 29
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Metropo
420 N
$30,000
12/1/2017
Medical
litan
20th
Nutrition
Area
Street
for People
Neighb
Philade
with Severe
orhood
lphia,
Illnesses
Nutrit
PA
ion
19103
Allian
ce
(MANNA
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mitzvah
1561
$5,000
11/28/2017
Critical
Circle
Gehman
Needs for
Founda
Rd.
Families
tion
Harleys
and
ville,
Individuals
PA
19438
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Montgom
340
$33,660
10/27/2017
Bridge to
ery
Dekalb
Employment
County
Pike
Extension--
Commun
Blue
Wissahickon
ity
Bell,
High School
Colleg
PA
e
19422
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
100 W,
$2,500
10/4/2017
Mental
PA
Main
health
Montgo
St.
education,
mery
Suite
support and
County
204
advocacy
Lansdal
programs as
e, PA
well as
19446
support of
Ending the
Silence
program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
100 W,
$1,000
12/25/2017
NAMIWalks
PA
Main
Greater
Montgo
St.
Philadelphi
mery
Suite
a
County
204
Lansdal
e, PA
19446
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1107
$2,500
5/31/2017
National
l
Lakevie
Cancer
Cancer
w Dr,
Survivors
Surviv
Suite
Day 2017
ors
C1
Day
Frankli
Founda
n, TN
tion
37067
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
4950
$2,500
7/31/2017
19th Annual
l
York
Break the
Ovaria
Rd,
Silence on
n
Unit
Ovarian
Cancer
631
Cancer Run/
Coalit
Holicon
Walk
ion
g, PA
Inc.
18928
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
6600 SW
$50,000
3/16/2017
2017 Team
l
92nd
NPF Walk
Psoria
Ave.,
sis
#300
Founda
Portlan
tion
d, OR
97223
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
6600 SW
$20,000
12/5/2017
Patient
l
92nd
2017
Education
Psoria
Ave.,
Initiative:
sis
#300
Phase Three
Founda
Portlan
tion
d, OR
97223
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
North
P.O. Box
$5,000
12/4/2017
Project
Penn
103 16
Learn
Valley
Susqueh
Homework
Boys
anna
Program
and
Avenue
Girls
Lansdal
Club
e, PA
Inc.
19446
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
One
P.O. Box
$75
4/11/2017
Employee
Days
18071
directed
Wages
Seattle
donation in
, WA
lieu of
98118
company
holiday
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Patient
700 12TH
$5,000
3/31/2017
Patients
s
ST NW
Rising
Rising
Ste.
University:
Inc.
700
Spotlight
Washing
Rheumatoid
ton, DC
Arthritis
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Philade
325
$5,000
1/24/2017
Summer READS
lphia
Chestnu
Reads
t
Street-
-Suite
903
Philade
lphia,
PA
19106
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
1515
$2,000
11/30/2017
Ending
Home
Fairmou
Homelessnes
nt
s in
Avenue
Philadelphi
Philade
a Through
lphia,
Supportive
PA
Housing
19130
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Prostat
7009 S.
$30,000
6/2/2017
Prostate
e
Potomac
Cancer
Cancer
Street
Disparities
Educat
Suite
Outreach
ion
125
Program
Counci
Centenn
l
ial, CO
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Quest
461 Cann
$4,000
5/25/2017
Hippotherapy
Therap
Rd.
(Equine-
eutic
West
PAssisted
Servic
Chester
Therapy)
es
, PA
Program
Inc.
19382
Support to
Serve
Children
with
Special
Needs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rebuild
4355
$5,000
3/22/2017
Belmont
ing
Orchard
Block Build
Togeth
Street
2017
er
Suite
Philad
2R
elphia
Philade
lphia,
PA
19124
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
901 East
$7,000
5/31/2017
RSVP's
and
8th
America
Senior
Street
Reads/
Volunt
Suite
Writes and
eer
200
Protege
Progra
King of
Programs
m of
Prussia
Montgo
, PA
mery
19406
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Retired
901 East
$10,000
12/13/2017
RSVP's My
and
8th
Free Tutor
Senior
Street
(MFT)
Volunt
Suite
Program and
eer
200
Family
Progra
King of
Literacy
m of
Prussia
Volunteer
Montgo
, PA
Program
mery
19406
(FLVP)
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverbe
1950
$6,000
7/31/2017
Philadelphia
nd
Spring
Children
Enviro
Mill
Access
nmenta
Road
Nature
l
Gladwyn
Program
Educat
e, PA
ion
19035
Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sandy
2010
$2,000
11/21/2017
Sandy Sprint
Rollma
West
Superhero
n
Chester
5K or 10K
Ovaria
Pike,
Run/Walk
n
Suite
and Canine
Cancer
410
Sprint
Founda
Haverto
tion,
wn, PA
Inc.
19083
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sarcoma
9899
$2,500
11/16/2017
Race to Cure
Founda
Main
SarcomaT 5K
tion
Street,
Walk/Run
of
#204
Series
Americ
Damascu
a
s, MD
20872
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
2800
$4,000
11/21/2017
Special
Equest
Street
Equestrians
rians
Road
Equine-
P.O.
Assisted
Box
Learning
1001
and
Warring
Therapeutic
ton, PA
Riding
18976
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Starfin
4015
$10,000
5/24/2017
Starfinder's
der
Main
Senior
Founda
Street
Leaders
tion
Philade
Program
lphia,
PA
19127
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
222
$10,000
12/22/2017
Corporate
Frankl
North
Membership
in
20th
Instit
Street
ute
Philade
lphia,
PA
19103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
PO Box
$2,000
7/31/2017
General
Giving
823
Operating
Tree,
Gwynedd
Support
Gwyned
Valley,
d
PA
Valley
19437
, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
3
$250,000
4/12/2017
FY 2018
Leukem
Interna
Light the
ia and
tional
Night
Lympho
Drive
National
ma
Suite
Sponsor
Societ
200 Rye
y
Brook,
NY
10573
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
123
$7,500
12/14/2017
Master Class
Mann
South
Artist
Center
Broad
Residency
for
Street
the
Suite
Perfor
815
ming
Philade
Arts
lphia,
PA
19109
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2600
$10,000
4/25/2017
Hubert J.P.
Melmar
Wayland
Schoemaker
k
Road
Classic
Charit
Berwyn,
able
PA
Founda
19312
tion
Berwyn
, PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Travis
164 E
$5,000
12/13/2017
Character
Manion
State
Does Matter
Founda
Street
tion
Doylest
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trustee
3025
$6,000
12/14/2017
WXPN
s of
Walnut
Musicians
the
Street
On Call
Univer
Philade
sity
lphia,
of
PA
Pennsy
19104
lvania
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Turning
415
$5,000
4/20/2017
Families and
Points
South
Schools
For
15th
Together
Childr
Street
(FAST)
en
Philade
lphia,
PA
19146
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
8085
$2,017
8/8/2017
General
Mitoch
Saltsbu
mission
ondria
rg Road
support
l
Suite
Diseas
201
e
Pittsbu
Founda
rgh, PA
tion
15239
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Us Too
2720
$1,000
5/25/2017
13th Annual
Intern
South
SEA Blue
ationa
River
Prostate
l Inc.
Road
Cancer Walk
#112
& Run
Des
Plaines
, IL
60018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Austin, TX
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Columbus,
Cancer
22314
OH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Charleston,
Cancer
22314
SC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Boston, MA
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Cleveland,
Cancer
22314
OH
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Birmingham,
Cancer
22314
AL
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk San
te
ria, VA
Diego, CA
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk San
te
ria, VA
Antonio, TX
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Sacramento,
Cancer
22314
CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Oklahoma
Cancer
22314
City, OK
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk East
te
ria, VA
Lansing, MI
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Kansas
te
ria, VA
City, KS
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Jacksonvill
Cancer
22314
e, FL
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Harrisburg,
Cancer
22314
PA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Greensboro,
Cancer
22314
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Des
te
ria, VA
Moines, IA
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Dayton, OH
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Dallas/
te
ria, VA
Fort Worth,
Cancer
22314
TX
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Corpus
te
ria, VA
Christi, TX
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Virginia
Cancer
22314
Beach, VA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Tyler,
te
ria, VA
TX
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk St.
te
ria, VA
Louis, MO
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Puget
te
ria, VA
Sound, WA
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk San
te
ria, VA
Francisco,
Cancer
22314
CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,000
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Napa
te
ria, VA
Valley, CA
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Minneapolis
Cancer
22314
, MN
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Hollywood,
Cancer
22314
FL
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Asheville,
Cancer
22314
NC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Augusta, SC
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Towson/
te
ria, VA
Baltimore,
Cancer
22314
MD
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk El
te
ria, VA
Paso, TX
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Hartford,
Cancer
22314
CT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Wichita, KS
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Capital
Cancer
22314
Area/
Arlington,
VA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Syracuse,
Cancer
22314
NY
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Salt
te
ria, VA
Lake City,
Cancer
22314
UT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Raleigh, NC
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Portland,
Cancer
22314
OR
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Los
te
ria, VA
Angeles, CA
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk
te
ria, VA
Lincoln, NE
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$1,250
8/1/2017
ZERO
he End
Street,
Prostate
of
Ste 420
Cancer Run/
Prosta
Alexand
Walk Lehigh
te
ria, VA
Valley, PA
Cancer
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ZERO--T
515 King
$20,000
6/16/2017
Printed News
he End
Street,
Resource
of
Ste 420
for Men
Prosta
Alexand
Living with
te
ria, VA
Advanced
Cancer
22314
Disease
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$497,856,557
12/31/2017
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
Kilmer
Assist
Square,
ance
Suite
Founda
130 New
tion
Brunswi
ck, NJ
08933
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Janssen has also made financial donations to independent charitable
foundations that assist patients who are underinsured and in financial
need with treatment-related expenses. In keeping with our donor
agreements and applicable regulatory guidance, we will only disclose
aggregate data on our charitable giving and do not publicize
information on donations to specific foundations and disease states.
In 2017, we contributed approximately $61 million in donations to
independent charitable foundations, enabling them to provide
assistance with medication-related copays to patients with cancer and
autoimmune diseases.Updated
Updated March 30, 2018
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Monetary and Product Contribution to U.S.-
based Charitable Organizations Full Year 2017
(Payments made from January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Project
Donation
Payee
Payee
Payment Amount
Payment
Title/
Type
Address
(USD)
Date
Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
180
1
$2,500
12/5/2017
2NDFLOOR
Turnin
Bethany
Youth
g
Road,
Helpline--H
Lives
Buildin
unterdon,
Around
g 3
Mercer,
, Inc.
Suite
Somerset
42
Operations
Hazlet,
NJ
07730
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Adult
872 E.
$300
11/6/2017
Costs
Day
Main
associated
Center
Street
with
of
Bridgew
Janssen
Somers
ater,
Cares
et
NJ
Volunteer
County
08807
Activity--O
ctober 4,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Allianc
2021 K
$20,000
12/28/2017
``Living
e For
Street
with Atrial
Aging
N.W.
Fibrillatio
Resear
Suite
n'' Stroke
ch
305
Prevention
Washing
PSA
ton, DC
Campaign
20006
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Allies,
1262
$7,500
11/6/2017
Project Grow
Inc.
Whiteho
rse
Hamilto
n
Square
Rd.
Hamilto
n, NJ
08690
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alterna
600
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
tives
First
associated
Ave.
with
Raritan
Janssen
, NJ
Cares
08869
Volunteer
Activity
#2--Septemb
er 12, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alterna
600
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
tives
First
associated
Ave.
with
Raritan
Janssen
, NJ
Cares
08869
Volunteer
Activity
#1--Septemb
er 12, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alterna
600
$7,500
12/13/2017
Fundraising
tives
First
event
Ave.
support to
Raritan
benefit
, NJ
general
08869
mission of
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
900 Fort
$10,000
5/2/2017
Stop
n
Street
Diabetes @
Diabet
Mall,
Work
es
Suite
Associ
940
ation
Honolul
u, HI
96813
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
PO Box
$30,000
12/22/2017
Atrial
n
541
Fibrillatio
Founda
Greenwo
n Patient
tion
od, TX
Education
For
76246
Conference,
Women'
AF Patient
s
Treatment
Health
and Stroke
Prevention
Decision-
Making
Tool, and
AF
Community
Screening
Pilot
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
7272
$30,000
12/28/2017
Raising
n
Greenvi
Awareness
Heart
lle Ave
on the
Dallas,
Effects and
TX
Consequence
75231
s of
Untreated
Type 2
Diabetes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
7272
$30,000
12/28/2017
Increasing
n
Greenvi
Awareness
Heart
lle Ave
of Deep
Dallas,
Vein
TX
Thrombosis/
75231
Venous
Thromboembo
lism in
General
Population
and At-Risk
Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
One
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
n
Union
associated
Heart
Street
with
Associ
Suite
Janssen
ation-
301
Cares
-New
Robbins
Volunteer
Jersey
ville,
Activity--O
NJ
ctober 7,
08691
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
One
$5,000
12/4/2017
16th Annual
n
Union
Garden
Heart
Street
State Go
Associ
Suite
Red For
ation-
301
Women
-New
Robbins
Luncheon
Jersey
ville,
NJ
08691
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$200,000
12/12/2017
Judges and
n
Wilson
Psychiatris
Psychi
Blvd,
ts
atric
Suite
Leadership
Founda
1825
Initiative
tion
Arlingt
(JPLI)
on, VA
22209
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$100,000
12/12/2017
Typical or
n
Wilson
Troubled?
Psychi
Blvd,
School
atric
Suite
Mental
Founda
1825
Health
tion
Arlingt
Education
on, VA
Program
22209
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
1000
$35,000
12/12/2017
Center for
n
Wilson
Workplace
Psychi
Blvd,
Mental
atric
Suite
Health
Founda
1825
(formerly
tion
Arlingt
the
on, VA
Partnership
22209
for
Workplace
Mental
Health)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
88
$600
11/28/2017
Donation In
res
Hamilto
Lieu of
Founda
n Ave.
Gift
tion
Stamfor
d, CT
06902
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
150
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
's
Pittsto
associated
Grow-A-
wn Road
with
Row,
Pittsto
Janssen
Inc.
wn, NJ
Cares
08867
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
27, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
America
150
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
's
Pittsto
associated
Grow-A-
wn Road
with
Row,
Pittsto
Janssen
Inc.
wn, NJ
Cares
08867
Volunteer
Activity--O
ctober 6,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anchor
482
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
House,
Centre
associated
Inc.
Street
with
Trenton
Janssen
, NJ
Cares
08611
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
28, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Anchor
482
$8,000
12/12/2017
Anchor House
House,
Centre
Shelter
Inc.
Street
Trenton
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Ann
595 W.
$9,500
12/12/2017
Increasing
Silver
State
Access to
man
Street
Comprehensi
Commun
Doylest
ve
ity
own, PA
Healthcare
Health
18901
for Low-
Clinic
Income,
Uninsured
Bucks
County
residents
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Arm In
123 E.
$15,000
10/30/2017
Improving
Arm,
Hanover
Food
Inc.
St.
Security
Trenton
and Housing
, NJ
Stability
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bear
1162
$750
12/12/2017
2018 Bear
Tavern
Bear
Tavern
Parent
Tavern
Elementary
s
Road
Science
Associ
Titusvi
Fair
ation
lle, NJ
08560
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
2875
$6,500
10/30/2017
STEM School
Brothe
York
Mentoring
rs Big
Road
Initiative
Sister
Jamison
s of
, PA
Bucks
18929
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
535 East
$10,000
8/23/2017
Fundraising
Brothe
Frankli
event
rs Big
n
support to
Sister
Street
benefit
s of
Trenton
general
Mercer
, NJ
mission of
County
08610
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Big
535 East
$7,500
10/16/2017
Youth
Brothe
Frankli
Mentoring
rs Big
n
Programs
Sister
Street
s of
Trenton
Mercer
, NJ
County
08610
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Boys
212
$20,000
10/30/2017
Extended Day
and
Centre
Learning
Girls
Trenton
Club
, NJ
of
08611
Trento
n and
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bristol
120
$7,500
11/6/2017
ArtRageous
Rivers
Radclif
Theatre
ide
fe
Arts
Theate
Street
Education
r Co
P.O.
Program
Inc.
Box
1250
Bristol
, PA
19007
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Britesi
16 Sand
$300
11/15/2017
Costs
de
Hill
associated
Adult
Road
with
Day
Fleming
Janssen
Center
ton, NJ
Cares
s,
08822
Volunteer
Inc.
Activity--S
eptember
22, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Broward
305 SE
$15,000
6/28/2017
Affordable
County
18th
Housing
Commun
Court
ity
Fort
Develo
Lauderd
pment
ale, FL
Corpor
33316
ation,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bucks
400
$300
9/20/2017
Costs
County
Freedom
associated
Associ
Drive
with
ation
Newtown
Janssen
For
, PA
Cares
The
18940
Volunteer
Blind
Activity--S
And
eptember
Visual
26, 2017
ly
Impair
ed
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bucks
626
$5,000
12/18/2017
Veterans
County
Jackson
Housing
Housin
ville
Assistance
g
Road
Program
Group
Suite
140
Warmins
ter, PA
18974
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Bucks
100
$10,000
12/21/2017
Economic
County
Doyle
Self-
Opport
Street
Sufficiency
unity
Doylest
Program
Counci
own, PA
l,
18901
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Caminar
2600 S.
$7,500
8/11/2017
Bridges to
El
Wellness
Camino
Program
Real,
Suite
200 San
Mateo,
CA
94403
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Capital
PO Box
$8,000
2/1/2017
``I Am
City
1743
Trenton!'':
Commun
Trenton
Positive
ity
, NJ
Images
Founda
08607-1
Campaign
tion
743
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
920
$5,000
12/5/2017
CYO's Broad
c
South
St. Trenton
Youth
Broad
Center's
Organi
St.
After
zation
Trenton
School
of
, NJ
Program
Mercer
08611
Tutoring
County
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
151
$10,000
10/13/2017
Community-
for
Lawrenc
Based
Altern
e
Health
ative
Street
Services
Senten
3rd
for Justice-
cing
Floor
Involved
and
Brookly
Adults with
Employ
n, NY
Schizophren
ment
11201
ia
Servic
es
(CASES
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Central
2500
$5,000
10/3/2017
Diabetes
Bucks
Lower
Prevention
Family
State
Program
YMCA
Road
Doylest
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Child
204 N.
$3,000
3/8/2017
Upper Bucks
Home
West
Area Young
and
Street
Parent
Commun
#101
Initiative
ity
Doylest
own, PA
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Childre
635
$10,000
11/20/2017
CUNA and
n's
South
Body and
Home
Clinton
Soul
Societ
Avenue
Prenatal
y of
Trenton
Health
New
, NJ
Education
Jersey
08611
for Low-
Income
Women
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
CIT
111 S.
$5,000
8/15/2017
CIT
Intern
Highlan
Internation
ationa
d St.
al
l,
Box 71
Conference
Inc.
Memphis
2017
, TN
38111
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Clevela
9500
$20,000
10/25/2017
Diabetes
nd
Euclid
Center
Clinic
Ave.,
Educational
Founda
DV4
Initiatives
tion
Clevela
at
nd, OH
Cleveland
44195
Clinic
South
Pointe
Hospital
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
50 Milk
$20,000
12/28/2017
Campus
Diabet
St 16th
Quality
es
Floor
Improvement
Networ
Boston,
: Diabetes
k
MA
and Higher
(CDN)
02109
Education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
College
2000
$20,000
11/20/2017
Nursing
of New
Penning
Merit
Jersey
ton
Scholarship
Road
s $7,500;
P.O.
and
Box
Educational
7718
Opportunity
Ewing,
Fund (EOF)
NJ
Promise
08628
Awards
$12,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
P.O. Box
$5,000
12/5/2017
Rise Summer
ty
88 116
Healthy
Action
North
Food
Servic
Main
Initiative
e
Street
for Low-
Center
Hightst
Income
, Inc.
own, NJ
Youth
08520-
9804
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
4059
$5,000
3/8/2017
Arts for
ty
Skyron
Seniors
Conser
Drive
($3,000)
vatory
Doylest
and Music
of
own, PA
Therapy
Music
18902
($2,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
4059
$4,500
11/6/2017
Making the
ty
Skyron
Arts
Conser
Drive
Accessible
vatory
Doylest
for Seniors
of
own, PA
and Persons
Music
18902
with
Disabilitie
s: Music
Therapy and
Arts for
Seniors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
P.O. Box
$60,000
12/18/2017
HealtheVoice
ty
338
sTM Impact
Founda
Morrist
Fund
tion
own, NJ
of New
07963-
Jersey
0338
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
P.O. Box
$75,000
12/18/2017
Healthcare
ty
338
and Basic
Founda
Morrist
Needs Fund
tion
own, NJ
of New
07963-
Jersey
0338
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
P.O. Box
$14,000
7/17/2017
``Each One,
ty
15176
Teach
Health
407
One'':
Coalit
Crutchf
Community
ion,
ield
Empowerment
Inc.
Street
Diabetes
Durham,
Self-
NC
Management
27704
Education
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
959
$11,000
6/14/2017
Pathway to
ty
Route
Recovery
Hope,
46 East
Residential
Inc.
Suite
Programs/
402
The Annual
Parsipp
Forum and
any, NJ
Wellness
07054
Fair
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
959
$15,000
10/16/2017
Hope for
ty
Route
Veterans
Hope,
46 East
and Valley
Inc.
Suite
Brook
402
Village for
Parsipp
Veterans
any, NJ
07054
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
310 W.
$5,000
12/18/2017
Basic Needs:
ty
State
Legal
Justic
Street,
Services
e
3rd
Center
Floor
, Inc.
Trenton
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Compeer
259
$2,500
5/31/2017
Caregiver
Roches
Monroe
Support
ter,
Avenue
Inc.
Rochest
er, NY
14607
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Contact
60 S.
$8,500
12/4/2017
Emotional
Of
Main
Support and
Mercer
St.
Crisis
County
Penning
Services:
New
ton, NJ
HOTLINE,
Jersey
08628
Crisis Chat
Inc.
and
TxtToday
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
CONTACT
P.O. Box
$4,000
10/4/2017
Training
We
2376
Nonprofessi
Care,
Westfie
onals in
Inc.
ld, NJ
Crisis
07091
Interventio
n for
People
Experiencin
g Psychosis
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Court
1450
$300
8/29/2017
Costs
Appoin
Parksid
associated
ted
e
with
Specia
Avenue,
Janssen
l
Suite
Cares
Advoca
22
Volunteer
tes
Ewing,
Activity--S
NJ
eptember
08638-
12, 2017
2946
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Court
1450
$15,000
11/20/2017
General
Appoin
Parksid
mission
ted
e
support
Specia
Avenue,
l
Suite
Advoca
22
tes
Ewing,
NJ
08638-
2946
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Deborah
212
$5,000
12/22/2017
2018 Women's
Hospit
Trenton
Heart
al
Road
Health
Founda
Browns
Educational
tion
Mills,
Expo
NJ
08015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Delawar
14
$4,500
11/6/2017
Environmenta
e
Michael
l education
River
McCorri
for
Steamb
stin
underfunded
oat
Road
and
Floati
Hamilto
underserved
ng
n, NJ
schools and
Classr
08690
youth
oom,
groups
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Depress
5
$1,000
3/8/2017
DBSA NJ
ion
Village
Mutual Aid
and
Ct.
Support
Bipola
Lawrenc
Group
r
eville,
Facilitator
Suppor
NJ
Training
t
08648
Allian
ce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Diabete
14652
$5,000
3/23/2017
The Diabetes
s
Corkwoo
UnConferenc
Collec
d Drive
e
tive,
Tampa,
Inc.
FL
33626
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Dress
3131
$10,000
10/16/2017
Women's
for
Princet
Empowerment
Succes
on Pike
Programs
s
Buildin
g 4,
Suite
209
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Eden
2
$10,000
10/16/2017
Adult
Autism
Merwick
Employment
Servic
Road
Program
es
Princet
Founda
on, NJ
tion
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Eden
2
$10,000
12/18/2017
Eden Dreams
Autism
Merwick
Sponsorship
Servic
Road
es
Princet
Founda
on, NJ
tion
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Emory
550
$3,500
7/3/2017
Atrial
Univer
Peachtr
Fibrillatio
sity
ee
n Support
Street
Group
6th Fl,
Meeting
Suite
4300
Atlanta
, GA
30308
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Enable,
13
$7,500
12/12/2017
Connect with
Inc.
Roszel
Enable--Div
Road,
ersity
Suite
Drive
B110
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Every
Fred
$9,000
12/4/2017
Every Child
Child
Vereen,
Valued
Valued
Jr.
(ECV) After
A NJ
Communi
School
Nonpro
ty
Program
fit
Center
Corpor
175
ation
Johnson
Avenue
Lawrenc
eville,
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Everybo
707
$7,500
12/4/2017
Coming Up
dy
Alexand
for AIRTM
Loves
er
Kenny
Road,
Projec
Suite
t Inc.
208
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Familie
320 N.
$3,500
8/29/2017
DBT-Based
s and
Goodman
Coping
Friend
St.,
Skills for
s of
Suite
Families
the
102
Mental
Rochest
ly Ill
er, NY
and
14607
Emotio
nally
Distur
bed,
Inc,
dba
NAMI-
Roches
ter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$300
8/24/2017
Costs
Guidan
Notting
associated
ce
ham Way
with
Center
Hamilto
Janssen
Corpor
n, NJ
Cares
ation
08619
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
28, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1931
$10,000
10/27/2017
Outpatient
Guidan
Notting
mental
ce
ham Way
health
Center
Hamilto
treatment
Corpor
n, NJ
for
ation
08619
homeless
women and
children.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
1 AAA Dr
$12,500
11/20/2017
Caregiver
Resour
Suite
Wellness
ce
203
Series
Networ
Trenton
k
, NJ
08691
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Family
4
$14,000
12/4/2017
Nurse
Servic
Corners
Educator at
e
tone
Bucks
Associ
Drive
County
ation
Langhor
Emergency
of
ne, PA
Homeless
Bucks
19047
Shelter
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Federat
One
$2,500
5/31/2017
Big Nosh
ion of
Farming
Vocational
Organi
dale
Services
zation
Road
Program
s
West
Babylon
, NY
11704
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Feed
Central
$75
2/24/2017
Employee
More,
Virgini
directed
Inc.
a Food
donation in
Bank
lieu of
1415
company
Rhoadmi
holiday
ller
gift
Street
Richmon
d, VA
23220
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Florida
2525
$1,500
10/13/2017
2017 Florida
Coalit
Saint
Institute
ion
Lucie
on
for
Avenue
Homelessnes
the
Vero
s and
Homele
Beach,
Supportive
ss,
FL
Housing
Inc.
32960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Forsyth
4881
$75
4/11/2017
Employee
Humane
Country
directed
Societ
Club
donation in
y
Rd.
lieu of
Winston
company
Salem,
holiday
NC
gift
27104
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$2,500
12/5/2017
Funding
ion of
Lawrenc
support for
Morris
eville
the 2018
Hall/
Road
Philly Pops
St.
Lawrenc
Benefit
Lawren
eville,
Concert
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Foundat
2381
$7,000
12/5/2017
It's Never 2
ion of
Lawrenc
Late
Morris
eville
Hall/
Road
St.
Lawrenc
Lawren
eville,
ce
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fountai
425 West
$2,500
10/16/2017
Danny Zorn
n
47th
Scholarship
House
Street
Fund
New
York,
NY
10036
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fountai
425 West
$6,000
10/16/2017
Mad About
n
47th
Art Auction
House
Street
and Benefit
New
York,
NY
10036
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Fountai
425 West
$1,000
3/23/2017
Fountain
n
47th
House One-
House
Street
in-Four 5K
New
York,
NY
10036
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
P.O. Box
$10,125
11/20/2017
Project
Of
395
Hopewell
Hopewe
Penning
Healthy
ll
ton, NJ
Habitats
Valley
08534
Open
Space
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
P.O. Box
$2,500
10/27/2017
Fundraising
Of
395
event
Hopewe
Penning
support to
ll
ton, NJ
benefit
Valley
08534
general
Open
mission of
Space
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
6 Lilly
$3,600
12/18/2017
Giving Voice
of
Street
Through
Lamber
Lambert
Film
tville
ville,
Librar
NJ
y,
08530
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Friends
57
$300
10/16/2017
Costs
Of
Mountai
associated
Prince
n
with
ton
Avenue
Janssen
Open
Princet
Cares
Space
on, NJ
Volunteer
08540
Activity--S
eptember
13, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gateway
4901
$10,000
8/29/2017
Outpatient
Homes,
Libbie
Clinical
Inc.
Mill
Services to
East
Support
Bouleva
Individuals
rd
with
Suite
Schizophren
210
ia and
Richmon
Schizoaffec
d, VA
tive
23230
Disorder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Georgia
246
$2,000
8/21/2017
26th Annual
Mental
Sycamor
Statewide
Health
e St.
Consumer
Consum
Suite
Conference
er
260
Networ
Decatur
k
, GA
30030
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Globalg
1110
$825
11/30/2017
Donation In
iving
Vermont
Lieu of
Founda
Ave. NW
Gift
tion,
Suite
Inc.
550
Washing
ton, DC
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Good
38 Elm
$5,000
12/18/2017
Nights of
Grief,
Street
Support--Pr
Inc.
Morrist
inceton
own, NJ
Center
07960
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Greater
102
$150,000
2/2/2017
Greater
Trento
Barrack
Trenton
n
Street
Initiative
Trenton
, NJ
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Grounds
80
$7,500
12/4/2017
Wellness
for
Sculpto
Walks
Sculpt
rs Way
ure
Hamilto
n, NJ
08534
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
530
$300
12/18/2017
Costs
for
Route
associated
Humani
38 E
with
ty of
Maple
Janssen
Burlin
Shade,
Cares
gton
NJ
Volunteer
County
08052
Activity--O
and
ctober 6,
Greate
2017
r
Trento
n-
Prince
ton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
530
$300
12/18/2017
Costs
for
Route
associated
Humani
38 E
with
ty of
Maple
Janssen
Burlin
Shade,
Cares
gton
NJ
Volunteer
County
08052
Activity--O
and
ctober 4,
Greate
2017
r
Trento
n-
Prince
ton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
530
$300
12/18/2017
Costs
for
Route
associated
Humani
38 E
with
ty of
Maple
Janssen
Burlin
Shade,
Cares
gton
NJ
Volunteer
County
08052
Activity--S
and
eptember
Greate
29, 2017
r
Trento
n-
Prince
ton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
530
$300
12/18/2017
Costs
for
Route
associated
Humani
38 E
with
ty of
Maple
Janssen
Burlin
Shade,
Cares
gton
NJ
Volunteer
County
08052
Activity--S
and
eptember 8,
Greate
2017
r
Trento
n-
Prince
ton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
530
$5,000
12/18/2017
Affordable
for
Route
Homeownersh
Humani
38 E
ip Program
ty of
Maple
Burlin
Shade,
gton
NJ
County
08052
and
Greate
r
Trento
n-
Prince
ton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Habitat
31 Oak
$7,500
11/6/2017
Women Build
for
Avenue,
and Safe at
Humani
Suite
Home Repair
ty of
100
Clinics
Greate
Chalfon
r
t, PA
Bucks
18914
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heart
1325 G
$30,000
12/22/2017
HRS-WebMD:
Rhythm
Street
Atrial
Societ
NW,
Fibrillatio
y,
Suite
n and How
Inc.
400
to Reduce
Washing
Your Risk
ton, DC
of Stroke
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Heartla
4750 N.
$7,500
8/11/2017
Pathways
nd
Sherida
Home
Health
n Road
Outrea
Chicago
ch
, IL
60640
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Henders
4740
$7,500
5/31/2017
Helping
on
North
Individuals
Behavi
State
Live Longer
oral
Road 7
(HILL)
Health
Lauderd
ale
Lakes,
FL
33319
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HiTOPS,
21
$9,000
12/12/2017
HiTOPS
Inc.
Wiggins
Comprehensi
Street
ve
Princet
Sexuality
on, NJ
Interventio
08540
ns for
Youth-at-
Risk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$300
10/30/2017
Costs
nt
Princet
associated
on
with
Avenue
Janssen
Lawrenc
Cares
eville,
Volunteer
NJ
Activity--O
08648
ctober 20,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$300
10/30/2017
Costs
nt
Princet
associated
on
with
Avenue
Janssen
Lawrenc
Cares
eville,
Volunteer
NJ
Activity--S
08648
eptember
27, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$300
10/30/2017
Costs
nt
Princet
associated
on
with
Avenue
Janssen
Lawrenc
Cares
eville,
Volunteer
NJ
Activity--S
08648
eptember
20, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
HomeFro
1880
$10,000
11/20/2017
Helping
nt
Princet
Homeless
on
Families
Avenue
Break the
Lawrenc
Cycle of
eville,
Poverty
NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
35
$750
12/12/2017
2018
l
Princet
Hopewell
Elemen
on
Elementary
tary
Avenue
School
School
Hopewel
Science
Parent
l, NJ
Fair
Teache
08525
r
Organi
zation
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
PO Box
$6,446
12/4/2017
Scholarship
l
553
Support:
Valley
Penning
$1,000;
Educat
ton, NJ
STEM
ion
08534
Education
Founda
and
tion
Sustainabil
ity
Education
at Hopewell
Elementary
and Stony
Brook
Elementary
Schools :
$5446
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
48
$1,500
12/4/2017
Mobility for
l
Orchard
Homebound
Valley
Ave PO
Residents
Senior
Box 567
of the
Founda
Penning
Hopewell
tion
ton, NJ
Valley
08534
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hopewel
P.O. Box
$2,525
12/18/2017
Scholarship
l
159 16
Fund
Valley
Seminar
Youth
y
Choral
Avenue,
e,
Suite C
Inc.
Hopewel
l, NJ
08525
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
7 Lower
$7,500
12/4/2017
Open Studio/
on Art
Center
Open
Center
Street
Hearts:
Clinton
Artistic
, NJ
Expressions
08809
and Art
with Heart
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
1410
$2,500
11/6/2017
Fundraising
on
Route
event
County
22 West
sponsorship
YMCA
Annanda
to benefit
le, NJ
general
08801
mission of
organizatio
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
111 Mine
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
on
Street
associated
Land
Fleming
with
Trust
ton, NJ
Janssen
08822
Cares
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
14, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hunterd
111 Mine
$2,500
12/4/2017
Promotion
on
Street
and
Land
Fleming
Protection
Trust
ton, NJ
of
08822
Preserves
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Interfa
3635
$15,000
10/30/2017
Neighbors
ith
Quakerb
Helping
Caregi
ridge
Neighbors
vers
Road,
Trento
Suite
n,
#16
Inc.
Hamilto
n, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Isles,
10 Wood
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Inc.
Street
associated
Trenton
with
, NJ
Janssen
08618
Cares
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
20, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Isles,
10 Wood
$9,000
12/12/2017
Trenton
Inc.
Street
Healthy
Trenton
Homes
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Family
Alexand
associated
and
er Road
with
Childr
Suite
Janssen
en's
102
Cares
Servic
Princet
Volunteer
e of
on, NJ
Activity--S
Greate
08540
eptember
r
28, 2017
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
707
$15,000
12/18/2017
Senior
Family
Alexand
Outreach
and
er Road
Service
Childr
Suite
(SOS) PLUS
en's
102
($12,000);
Servic
Princet
Caregiver
e of
on, NJ
Program
Greate
08540
($3,000)
r
Mercer
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Jewish
150-A
$5,000
10/30/2017
Expanding
Family
West
Horizons
Servic
High
e of
St.
Somers
Somervi
et
lle, NJ
Hunter
08876
don
and
Warren
Counti
es
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Johnson
One
$5,500,000
7/3/2017
General
&
Johnson
mission
Johnso
&
support
n
Johnson
Patien
Plaza
t
Kilmer
Assist
Square
ance
Suite
Founda
130 New
tion
Brunswi
Inc.
ck, NJ
08933
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Johnson
One
$15,500,000
9/28/2017
General
&
Johnson
mission
Johnso
&
support
n
Johnson
Patien
Plaza
t
Kilmer
Assist
Square
ance
Suite
Founda
130 New
tion
Brunswi
Inc.
ck, NJ
08933
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Johnson
One
$2,400,000
12/18/2017
General
&
Johnson
mission
Johnso
&
support
n
Johnson
Patien
Plaza
t
Kilmer
Assist
Square
ance
Suite
Founda
130 New
tion
Brunswi
Inc.
ck, NJ
08933
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Junior
360 Pear
$7,150
10/30/2017
STEMCivics
Achiev
Blossom
High School
ement
Drive
Heroes JA
of New
Edison,
Day
Jersey
NJ
08837
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kidsbri
999
$10,000
10/16/2017
Bullying
dge,
Lower
Prevention
Inc.
Ferry
and
Rd
Diversity
Ewing,
Appreciatio
NJ
n Life
08628
Skills
Program for
At-Risk
Middle
School
Students in
Trenton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Kidsbri
999
$9,500
2/1/2017
Bullying
dge,
Lower
Prevention
Inc.
Ferry
and
Rd
Diversity
Ewing,
Appreciatio
NJ
n Life
08628
Skills
Program for
At-Risk
Elementary/
Middle
School
Students in
Trenton
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Latin
669
$5,000
12/12/2017
FUTURO
Americ
Chamber
an
s
Legal
Street,
Defens
Suite B
e and
Trenton
Educat
, NJ
ional
08611
Fund
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Leyden
10001 W
$25,000
12/12/2017
Transitional
Family
Grand
Living
Servic
Ave
Program
e and
Frankli
Expansion
Mental
n Park,
Health
IL
Center
60131
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
LifeTie
2205
$8,000
12/18/2017
Programs to
s,
Penning
Serve
Inc.
ton
Chronically
Road
Ill and
Ewing,
Abused and
NJ
Neglected
08638
Older Youth
Transitioni
ng Into
Adulthood.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
100
$5,000
12/12/2017
Women
y New
Menlo
Empowered
Jersey
Park
(WE)
, Inc.
Drive,
Suite
314
Edison,
NJ
08837
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Literac
120
$4,000
12/12/2017
Health
y
Findern
Literacy
Volunt
e
for All
eers
Avenue
of
Box 7
Somers
Bridgew
et
ater,
County
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Main
8
$1,000
5/31/2017
Crisis
Street
Marcell
Interventio
Counse
a
n Team
ling
Avenue
Training
Center
West
for Essex
Orange,
County Law
NJ
Enforcement
07052
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Main
8
$5,000
6/12/2017
Accessible
Street
Marcell
Mental
Counse
a
Health Care
ling
Avenue
for
Center
West
Individuals
Orange,
Suffering
NJ
From
07052
Schizoaffec
tive
Disorder
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Massach
15
$3,500
2/6/2017
Changing
usetts
Vernon
Minds and
Clubho
Street
Expanding
use
Waltham
Employment
Coalit
, MA
Campaign
ion
02453
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
McCarte
91
$10,000
11/20/2017
OnStage
r
Univers
Seniors: A
Theatr
ity
Community
e
Place
Project of
Center
Princet
McCarter
on, NJ
Theatre
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
320
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
on
Hollowb
associated
Wheels
rook
with
of
Drive
Janssen
Trento
Ewing,
Cares
n
NJ
Volunteer
Ewing
08638
Activity--O
ctober 4,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Meals
320
$15,000
11/6/2017
Subsidized
on
Hollowb
Meal
Wheels
rook
Program
of
Drive
(SMP)
Trento
Ewing,
n
NJ
Ewing
08638
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
500
$50,000
9/21/2017
General
Health
Montgom
mission
Americ
ery St.
support
a
Suite
820
Alexand
ria, VA
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
500
$100,000
12/12/2017
Social Self-
Health
Montgom
Directed
Americ
ery St.
Care (SSDC)
a
Suite
820
Alexand
ria, VA
22314
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2211
$7,500
10/20/2017
Mental
Health
Norfolk
Health
Americ
, Suite
Advocacy
a of
810
Greate
Houston
r
, TX
Housto
77098
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
2323 W
$10,000
5/24/2017
Get
Health
5th
Connected
Americ
Ave.
a of
Suite
Frankl
160
in
Columbu
County
s, OH
43204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
1210 San
$2,500
4/24/2017
Mental
Health
Antonio
Health
Americ
, Suite
Education
a of
200
and
Texas
Austin,
Advocacy
TX
Campaign
78701
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 W.
$2,000
10/13/2017
Community
Health
10th
Mental
Associ
St.
Health
ation
Ste.
Conference
in
600
2017
Delawa
Wilming
re
ton, DE
19801
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
100 W.
$1,000
10/3/2017
E-Racing the
Health
10th
Blues for
Associ
St.
Mental
ation
Ste.
Health Run/
in
600
Walk
Delawa
Wilming
re
ton, DE
19801
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
617
$2,500
5/31/2017
Operating
Health
Garden
Support for
Associ
Street
the
ation
Santa
Fellowship
in
Barbara
Club
Santa
, CA
Barbar
93101
a
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3701
$7,500
5/31/2017
ParentVOICE
Health
Latrobe
Associ
Drive,
ation
Suite
of
140
Centra
Charlot
l
te, NC
Caroli
28211
nas,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
580
$1,000
5/31/2017
Get On Your
Health
White
Mat For
Associ
Plains
Mental
ation
Road
Health
of
Suite
Westch
510
ester
Tarryto
wn, NY
10591
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mental
3809
$12,500
8/30/2017
Outreach and
Illnes
Rosewoo
Behavioral
s
d Drive
Healthcare
Recove
P.O.
for
ry
Box
Homeless
Center
4246
Individuals
, Inc.
Columbi
with Mental
a, SC
Illness
29240
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
1001
$15,000
12/19/2017
Addressing
Allian
Spruce
Young Adult
ce to
Street
Homelessnes
End
Suite
s, through
Homele
205
planning,
ssness
Trenton
assertive
, NJ
engagement,
08638
housing,
and
healthcare
access
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
P.O. Box
$6,500
11/6/2017
Miscellaneou
County
17202
s medical
Commun
Trenton
equipment
ity
, NJ
($1,000),
Colleg
08690
and work
e
study
Founda
student
tion
mentors
($3,500) to
provide
academic
enrichment
for health
profession
students
success
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
3 Creek
$1,000
11/20/2017
Mercer
Scienc
Rim
Science
e And
Drive
Fair 2018
Engine
Titusvi
ering
lle, NJ
Club
08560
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$300
8/24/2017
Costs
Street
Mercer
associated
Friend
Street
with
s
Trenton
Janssen
, NJ
Cares
08611
Volunteer
Activity--O
ctober 4,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$300
8/24/2017
Costs
Street
Mercer
associated
Friend
Street
with
s
Trenton
Janssen
, NJ
Cares
08611
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
14, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mercer
151
$25,000
10/30/2017
Mercer
Street
Mercer
Street
Friend
Street
Friends
s
Trenton
Food Bank
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Middle
P.O. Bos
$15,000
10/16/2017
Outreach
Earth
8045
Program and
520
Community
North
Youth
Bridge
Center
Street
Bridgew
ater,
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
MIDJers
423
$5,000
8/16/2017
City of
ey
Rivervi
Trenton--Su
Center
ew
mmer Youth
for
Plaza
Employment
Econom
Trenton
Program
ic
, NJ
Develo
08611
pment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Midland
60
$6,500
8/16/2017
Midland
Adult
Industr
Meals on
Servic
ial
Wheels
es,
Parkway
Employment
Inc.
P.O.
Training
Box
Program
5026
North
Branch,
NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Midland
94
$300
9/13/2017
Costs
Founda
Reading
associated
tion
ton
with
Road
Janssen
P.O.
Cares
Box
Volunteer
5026
Activity--O
North
ctober 3,
Branch,
2017
NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101
$5,000
10/30/2017
Trenton Area
l
Oakland
Stakeholder
Child
Street
s
and
Trenton
Family
, NJ
Develo
08618
pment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Millhil
101
$15,000
10/30/2017
Millhill
l
Oakland
Trenton
Child
Street
PEERS
and
Trenton
Family
, NJ
Develo
08618
pment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Morven
55
$5,000
11/6/2017
Internships
Museum
Stockto
for At-Risk
and
n
Youth
Garden
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Mount
73 North
$15,000
10/27/2017
In Home
Carmel
Clinton
Nursing
Guild
Avenue
Services
Trenton
, NJ
08609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
7500
$3,000
10/4/2017
Educational
Greenwo
and
od Ave
Training
N
Programs
Seattle
, WA
98103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI--C
1904
$2,500
8/14/2017
Education
VA
Byrd
and support
Centra
Avenue
programs
l
Suite
and
Virgin
207
HelpLine
ias
(POB
Voice
18086)
On
Richmon
Mental
d, VA
Illnes
23230
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
107
$5,000
8/29/2017
NAMI Ending
Geauga
South
the Silence
County
Street;
# 5
Chardon
, OH
44024
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
107
$2,000
8/29/2017
NAMI
Geauga
South
Connection
County
Street;
and Peer-to-
# 5
Peer
Chardon
Collaborati
, OH
on A Peer-
44024
led Support
and
Education
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
4161 NW
$1,000
5/31/2017
NAMIWalks
Browar
5 St.
Broward
d
Suite
County
County
203
, Inc.
Plantat
ion, FL
33317
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
8324
$1,000
3/20/2017
NAMI CCNS 5k
Cook
Skokie
Run/Walk
County
Blvd
2017
North
Skokie,
Suburb
IL
an
60077
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
2400 W.
$1,000
3/20/2017
2017
Delawa
4th
NAMIWalks
re
Street
Delaware
Wilming
ton, DE
19805
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
P.O. Box
$2,500
10/4/2017
Support
Hernan
5613
Services
do
Spring
and CARE
Hill,
Line
FL
34609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1235
$10,000
10/16/2017
Education
Mercer
Whiteho
and Support
NJ
rse
Programs
Mercerv
for Mental
ille
Health
Road
Consumers
Bldg.
and Family
C,
Members
Suite
303
Hamilto
n, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1235
$2,500
3/8/2017
Silver
Mercer
Whiteho
sponsor
NJ
rse
2017
Mercerv
NAMIWalks
ille
Mercer
Road
County, NJ
Bldg.
May 6, 2017
C,
Suite
303
Hamilto
n, NJ
08619
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
85 N.
$1,000
10/5/2017
NAMIWalks NH
New
State
2017
Hampsh
Street
ire
Concord
, NH
03301
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1538
$7,500
8/29/2017
1-on-1
New
Louisia
Education
Orlean
na Ave.
for People
s
New
Living with
Orleans
Schizoaffec
, LA
tive
70115
Disorder/
Schizophren
ia and
Their Loved
Ones/
Caregivers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
115
$8,000
10/3/2017
Living Room
DuPage
North
Program
County
County
Illino
Farm
is
Road
Wheaton
, IL
60187
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
2701
$3,000
10/13/2017
Compeer
Johnso
Rochest
connects
n
er Ave.
with Local
County
Iowa
Businesses
dba
City,
to Increase
Compee
IA
Volunteeris
r of
52245
m and
Johnso
Visibility
n
County
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
One
$3,000
9/29/2017
NAMI Peer-to-
Lake
Victori
Peer
County
a Sq.,
Recovery
Ste.
Education
260
Program
Painesv
ille,
OH
44077
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
One
$1,500
8/11/2017
NAMI Lake
Lake
Victori
County
County
a Sq.,
Strides for
Ste.
Awareness
260
NAMI Walk
Painesv
ille,
OH
44077
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
100 W,
$1,000
1/31/2017
Bronze
PA
Main
sponsor
Montgo
St.
NAMIWalks
mery
Suite
Greater
County
204
Philadelphi
Lansdal
a May 6,
e, PA
2017
19446
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI of
4055
$3,500
9/29/2017
Hope for
Southw
Executi
Recovery
est
ve Park
Ohio
Drive,
Suite
450
Cincinn
ati, OH
45241
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
3037 NW
$1,000
5/9/2017
NAMI Walks
Oklaho
63RD,
Oklahoma
ma
SUITE
104W
Oklahom
a City,
OK
73116
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
1750 S.
$1,000
5/4/2017
2017
St.
Brentwo
NAMIWALKS
Louis
od
St. Louis
Blvd.
Suite
511 St.
Louis,
MO
63144
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
P.O. Box
$1,000
9/7/2017
13th Annual
Summit
462,
NAMIWalks
County
Cuyahog
Summit
a Falls
County 2017
OH
44222
Akron,
OH
44311
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
5251
$1,000
5/31/2017
NAMIWalks
Ventur
Verdugo
event in
a
Way, #K
Ventura
County
P.O.
County, CA
Box
1613
Camaril
lo, CA
93011
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
217
$1,000
8/30/2017
NAMIWalks
Waukes
Wiscons
Waukesha
ha
in Ave
Suite
300
Waukesh
a, WI
53186
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NAMI
217
$1,000
8/11/2017
Crisis
Waukes
Wiscons
Interventio
ha
in Ave
n Training
Suite
for Law
300
Enforcement
Waukesh
a, WI
53186
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1851
$2,500
5/31/2017
2017 NAMI
l
Heritag
California
Allian
e Way,
Annual
ce for
Suite
Conference
the
150
Mental
Sacrame
ly Ill
nto, CA
95815
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
576
$1,500
3/20/2017
2017 NAMI
l
Farming
Connecticut
Allian
ton
Walk
ce for
Avenue
the
Hartfor
Mental
d, CT
ly Ill
06105
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
5095
$1,000
3/20/2017
NAMIWalks/
l
Murphy
Run San
Allian
Canyon
Diego
ce for
Road,
County
the
Suite
Mental
320 San
ly Ill
Diego,
CA
92123
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1562
$1,000
1/31/2017
Bronze
l
Route
sponsor
Allian
130
2017
ce for
North
NAMIWalks
the
Brunswi
New Jersey
Mental
ck, NJ
``Building
ly Ill
08902
Better
Lives''--Ma
y 13, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
800
$3,500
8/29/2017
Project ADD
l
Transfe
Advocating
Allian
r Road
for Dual
ce for
#31 St.
Diagnosis
the
Paul,
Mental
MN
ly Ill
55114
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3440
$1,000
4/21/2017
NAMIWalks
l
Viking
Northern
Allian
Drive,
California
ce for
Suite
the
104A
Mental
Sacrame
ly Ill
nto, CA
95827
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
PO Box
$1,000
8/29/2017
NAMI
l
550039
Birmingham
Allian
Birming
2017 Walk
ce for
ham, AL
for Mental
the
35255-
Health
Mental
0039
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$50,000
10/3/2017
General
l
Fairfax
mission
Allian
Drive
support
ce for
Suite
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1801 W
$8,000
11/16/2017
Honest,
l
Warner
Open,
Allian
Ave,
Proud:
ce for
Suite
Addressing
the
202
Stigma
Mental
Chicago
Among the
ly Ill
, IL
Incarcerate
60613
d
Population
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1562,
$2,500
10/13/2017
Annual
l
Route
Conference-
Allian
130
-Honoring
ce for
North
The Past,
the
Brunswi
Embracing
Mental
ck, NJ
The
ly Ill
08902
Present,
Looking To
The Future
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3200 S.
$1,000
1/31/2017
Bronze
l
3rd
sponsor
Allian
Street,
2017 NAMI
ce for
Unit 6
Walk of
the
Milwauk
Greater
Mental
ee, WI
Milwaukee--
ly Ill
53207
May 20,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
218 West
$5,000
10/19/2017
NAMI
l
Lawrenc
Illinois--G
Allian
e
rassroots
ce for
Springf
Advocacy
the
ield,
Capacity
Mental
IL
Project
ly Ill
62704
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
P.O. Box
$1,000
10/11/2017
Mental
l
4096
Health
Allian
Alvin,
Education
ce for
TX
Conference-
the
77512
-May 2018
Mental
ly Ill
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$75,000
12/18/2017
NAMI 2018
l
Fairfax
CIT/
Allian
Drive
Criminal
ce for
Suite
Justice
the
100
Enhancement
Mental
Arlingt
Initiative
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
3803 N.
$50,000
12/18/2017
NAMI
l
Fairfax
HelpLine
Allian
Drive
2018
ce for
Suite
the
100
Mental
Arlingt
ly Ill
on, VA
22203
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
99 Pine
$5,000
10/27/2017
Intervention
l
St.
,
Allian
Suite
Engagement,
ce for
105
Implementat
the
Albany,
ion: Three
Mental
NY
Pronged
ly Ill
12207
Approach to
Sustainable
Mental
Health
Recovery
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
P.O. Box
$1,000
10/19/2017
12th Annual
l
24128
NAMI
Allian
117
Lowcountry
ce for
William
Walk
the
Hilton
Mental
Parkway
ly Ill
, Suite
K
Hilton
Head
Island,
SC
29925
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
4701 SE
$2,500
8/23/2017
NAMI Oregon
l
24th
Mental
Allian
Ave.,
Health
ce for
Suite E
Education
the
Portlan
and Support
Mental
d, OR
Programs
ly Ill
97202
for
Recovery
and
Wellness
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
10630
$1,000
5/9/2017
2017 NAMI
l
Little
Walks
Allian
Patuxen
Maryland
ce for
t
the
Parkway
Mental
Columbi
ly Ill
a, MD
21044
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2059
$2,000
5/31/2017
Dane County
l
Atwood
Crisis
Allian
Ave,
Interventio
ce for
Floor 4
n Team
the
Madison
(CIT)
Mental
, WI
Program
ly Ill
53704
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2059
$1,000
5/31/2017
NAMIWalks
l
Atwood
Dane County
Allian
Ave,
2017
ce for
Floor 4
the
Madison
Mental
, WI
ly Ill
53704
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
309 West
$1,000
5/5/2017
NAMI Walks
l
Millbro
North
Allian
ok Rd,
Carolina
ce for
Suite
the
121
Mental
Raleigh
ly Ill
, NC
27609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$5,000
8/29/2017
Mental
l
West
Illness
Allian
25th
Peer
ce for
Street,
Support and
the
#600
Education
Mental
Clevela
ly
nd, OH
Ill--G
44113
reater
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
2012
$1,000
8/29/2017
NAMIWalks
l
West
2017
Allian
25th
ce for
Street,
the
#600
Mental
Clevela
ly
nd, OH
Ill--G
44113
reater
Clevel
and
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
505 8th
$1,000
5/4/2017
NAMIWalks
l
Avenue,
NYC 2017
Allian
Ste.
Walk/Run
ce for
1103
for Mental
the
New
Health
Mental
York,
ly Ill
NY
of New
10018
York
City
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
154
$1,000
10/2/2017
NAMIWalks
l
Waterma
Rhode
Allian
n St.,
Island 2017
ce of
Suite
Mental
5B
Illnes
Provide
s
nce, RI
02906
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
5963
$1,000
8/11/2017
NAMIWalks
l
Boymel
Butler
Allian
Dr.
County
ce on
Fairfie
Mental
ld, OH
Illnes
45014
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
P.O. Box
$6,000
4/21/2017
General
l Art
350891
mission
Exhibi
Miami,
support
tions
FL
of the
33135
Mental
ly
Ill,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
8321 Old
$30,000
12/28/2017
TakeIt2Heart
l
Courtho
TM--An e-
Blood
use Rd.
Health
Clot
Suite
Anticoagula
Allian
255 110
tion
ce
N.
Management
Washing
Education
ton
Program
St.,
Focused on
Suite
AFib
255
Awareness
Rockvil
and
le, MD
Lifestyle
20850
Issues
Vienna,
Encountered
VA
by AFib
22182
Patients
and their
Non-Medical
Caregivers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1100
$10,000
10/25/2017
2017 Science
l
17th
and
Coalit
Street,
Leadership
ion
NW
Symposium
for
Suite
Women
500
with
Washing
Heart
ton, DC
Diseas
20036
e,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$85,000
12/18/2017
Medication
l
Street
Adherence
Counci
NW
Learning
l for
Washing
Community
Behavi
ton, DC
oral
20005
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
1400 K
$85,000
12/18/2017
Policy
l
Street
Action
Counci
NW
Center
l for
Washing
Behavi
ton, DC
oral
20005
Health
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
949 West
$7,500
12/4/2017
ACE and STEM
l
State
Program,
Junior
St.
plus tennis
Tennis
Trenton
and
, NJ
Learni
08618
ng of
Trento
n
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
9707 E
$25,000
12/22/2017
National
l
Easter
Stroke
Stroke
Lane,
Awareness
Associ
Suite B
Month
ation
Centenn
ial, CO
80112
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
New
275 Rt.
$4,000
5/24/2017
NJPC
Jersey
10 East
Professiona
Parent
Suite
l Parent
s
220-414
Advocacy
Caucus
Succasu
Training
nna, NJ
07876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
North
368
$10,000
12/22/2017
NATF Spring
Americ
Boylsto
Patient
an
n St.
Program
Thromb
Brookli
osis
ne, MA
Forum
02445
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
North
368
$20,000
12/22/2017
VTE Support
Americ
Boylsto
Group
an
n St.
Project
Thromb
Brookli
osis
ne, MA
Forum
02445
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Northea
2900
$2,500
4/4/2017
Day of
st
Conner
Restoration
Guidan
Avenue,
ce
Buildin
Center
g A
Detroit
, MI
48215
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Passage
P.O. Box
$7,500
12/4/2017
Support for
Theatr
967
Passage
e
Trenton
Theatre's
Compan
, NJ
Education
y,
08605
programming
Inc.
the State
Street
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Peggie
93
$75
3/9/2017
Employee
and
Patrici
directed
Paul
a Place
donation in
Shevli
Media,
lieu of
n
PA
company
Family
19063
holiday
Founda
gift
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$17,500
10/16/2017
Comprehensiv
Kids
Lawrenc
e Juvenile
e Road
Offenders
Lawrenc
Outreach
eville,
Services
NJ
(CJOOS)
08648
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PEI
231
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Kids
Lawrenc
associated
e Road
with
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares
NJ
Volunteer
08648
Activity--O
ctober 13,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
People
295
$2,500
12/5/2017
Reading
And
Eggerts
Deeply in
Storie
Crossin
Community:
s--Gen
g Road
A
te Y
Lawrenc
Literature
Cuento
eville,
Project for
s,
NJ
Mercer
Inc.
08648
County
Youth and
Seniors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PlanSma
118 West
$3,500
3/8/2017
2017
rt NJ
State
Corporate
PlanSma
membership
rt NJ
renewal
Trenton
donation to
, NJ
support
08608
efforts
around
sound land
use
planning
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
P.O. Box
$2,500
12/4/2017
Afterschool
on
134 190
Music
Girl
Nassau
Outreach
Choir
Street
Program
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
45
$4,000
12/12/2017
Supporting
on
Stockto
Family
Senior
n St
Caregivers
Resour
Princet
ce
on, NJ
Center
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
P.O. Box
$4,000
12/12/2017
PSO BRAVO!
on
250,
TRENTON
Sympho
575
Youth
ny
Ewing
Education
Orches
Street
Initiative
tra
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Princet
13
$7,500
12/5/2017
Summer
on-
Roszel
Bridge
Blairs
Road
2018--Trent
town
Suite
on
Center
C204A
, Inc.
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Printma
440
$15,000
12/18/2017
Combat Paper
king
River
NJ
Center
Road
of New
Branchb
Jersey
urg, NJ
08876
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Public
825
$7,500
7/25/2017
NJTV's In
Media
Eighth
Your
NJ,
Avenue
Neighborhoo
Inc.
New
d Trenton
York,
NY
10019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rainier
12020
$750
4/20/2017
Employee
Therap
123rd
directed
eutic
Ave. SE
donation in
Riding
Rainier
lieu of
Rainier
company
, WA
holiday
98576
gift
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
P.O. Box
$7,000
12/5/2017
WaterWays
Headwa
273
Environment
ters
Gladsto
al
Associ
ne, NJ
Education
ation
07934
Program
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Raritan
118
$20,000
10/30/2017
Nursing
Valley
Lamingt
Scholarship
Commun
on Rd.
s
ity
Branchb
($12,500);
Colleg
urg, NJ
Galileo
e
08876
Scholars
Program
($5,000);
Textbook
Scholarship
s ($2,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Regions
640
$15,000
5/24/2017
Make It OK
Hospit
Jackson
al
Street,
Founda
MS
tion
11202C
St.
Paul,
MN
55101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rescue
98
$25,000
10/16/2017
Emergency
Missio
Carroll
Services
n of
Street
Program
Trento
P.O.
n
Box 790
Trenton
, NJ
08605-
0790
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rider
2083
$19,500
10/30/2017
Summer STEM
Univer
Lawrenc
($12,000);
sity
eville
Scholarship
Rd.
Support
Lawrenc
($5,000);
eville,
Shakespeari
NJ
an at Rider
08648
($2,500)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riverbe
P.O. Box
$5,000
8/14/2017
InSHAPE
nd
2032
Program
Commun
Concord
ity
, NH
Mental
03302-
Health
2032
, Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Riversi
P.O. Box
$10,000
12/4/2017
Riverside
de
650
Symphonia
Sympho
Lambert
Senior
nia,
ville,
Outreach
Inc.
NJ
Program
08530
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Robert
One
$8,500
12/18/2017
Girls to
Wood
Hamilto
Women: Myth
Johnso
n
vs. Reality
n
Health
Hamilt
Place
on
Hamilto
Founda
n, NJ
tion
08690
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rush
2000
$2,500
10/16/2017
Fox Valley
Copley
Ogden
Heart Fund
Founda
Ave.
tion
Aurora,
IL
60504
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rutgers
7
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Univer
College
associated
sity
Avenue
with
Founda
Winants
Janssen
tion
Hall
Cares
New
Volunteer
Brunswi
Activity--S
ck, NJ
eptember
08901
20, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Rutgers
4
$8,546
12/18/2017
Corporate
Univer
Hunting
Social
sity
ton
Responsibil
School
Street
ity
of
New
Fellowship
Commun
Brunswi
icatio
ck, NJ
n,
08901-1
Inform
071
ation
and
Librar
y
Studie
s
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SAFE in
46 East
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Hunter
Main
associated
don
Street
with
Fleming
Janssen
ton, NJ
Cares
08822
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
19, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SAFE in
46 East
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Hunter
Main
associated
don
Street
with
Fleming
Janssen
ton, NJ
Cares
08822
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
18, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
P.O. Box
$5,000
8/15/2017
Behavioral
Franci
410836
Health
sco
San
Court's
Genera
Francis
Motivationa
l
co, CA
l
Hospit
94110
Incentives
al
Program
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SAVE A
900
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Friend
Herront
associated
to
own
with
Homele
Road
Janssen
ss
Princet
Cares
Animal
on NJ
Volunteer
s
08540
Activity--S
eptember
22, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Schizop
P.O. Box
$15,000
12/12/2017
HVoS
hrenia
94122
(Hearing
And
Houston
Voices of
Relate
, TX
Support)
d
77094
Perception
Disord
Changing
ers
Experientia
Allian
l
ce Of
Installatio
Americ
n and
a
Scientific
Briefing
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$5,000
10/16/2017
SERV 15th
Founda
Scotch
Annual
tion,
Road
Wellness
Inc.
Ewing,
and
NJ
Development
08628
Conference
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$7,500
10/16/2017
SERV
Founda
Scotch
Foundation
tion,
Road
Scholarship
Inc.
Ewing,
Fund
NJ
08628
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
SERV
20
$300
8/24/2017
Costs
Founda
Scotch
associated
tion,
Road
with
Inc.
Ewing,
Janssen
NJ
Cares
08628
Volunteer
Activity--A
ugust 20,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Shannon
36
$500
12/5/2017
Shannon
Daley
Indian
Daley
Memori
Run
Memorial
al
P.O.
Fund
Fund
Box
Charity
1271
Events
Whiteho
use
Station
, NJ
08889
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
1920
$2,500
8/14/2017
1920 Club
Sharin
10th
Art Program
g
Avenue
Place,
South
Inc.
P.O.
Box
59455
Birming
ham, AL
35255
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Sisters
1201
$5,000
10/30/2017
Pearl Grace
Networ
Hamilto
Memorial
k of
n
Golf
Centra
Street
Tournament
l New
Somerse
Jersey
t, NJ
08873
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Somerse
190 Lord
$300
8/24/2017
Costs
t
Stirlin
associated
County
g Road
with
Park
Basking
Janssen
Founda
Ridge,
Cares
tion
NJ
Volunteer
07920
Activity--S
eptember
15, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Special
1 Eunice
$7,500
12/12/2017
Special
Olympi
Kennedy
Olympics
cs New
Shriver
New Jersey--
Jersey
Way
Camp
Lawrenc
Shriver
e
Townshi
p, NJ
08648
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
St.
One
$20,000
12/4/2017
Providing
Mary
Summit
Food for
Medica
Square,
Underserved
l
Suite
Children in
Center
300
Bucks
Founda
1717
County: The
tion
Langhor
St. Mary
ne-
Backpacks
Newtown
for Kids
Rd.
Program
Langhor
ne, PA
19047
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Stony
31 Titus
$15,000
12/18/2017
StreamWatch:
Brook
Mill
Citizen
Millst
Road
Scientists
one
Penning
Monitoring
Waters
ton, NJ
Water
hed
08534
Quality in
Associ
Central New
ation
Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TASK,
72\1/2\
$25,000
10/30/2017
Meal Service
Inc.
Escher
Program
Street
Trenton
, NJ
08609
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The Arc
180
$5,000
12/18/2017
The Arc
Mercer
Ewingvi
Mercer and
lle
Medina
Road
Community
Ewing,
Clinic
NJ
08683
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$5,000
10/27/2017
Communiversi
Arts
Robeson
ty ArtsFest
Counci
Center
2018
l of
for the
Prince
Arts
ton
102
Withers
poon
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$10,000
10/27/2017
Arts Council
Arts
Robeson
of
Counci
Center
Princeton
l of
for the
Community
Prince
Arts
Outreach
ton
102
Programs
Withers
poon
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
Paul
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Arts
Robeson
associated
Counci
Center
with
l of
for the
Janssen
Prince
Arts
Cares
ton
102
Volunteer
Withers
Activity--S
poon
eptember
Street
11, 2017
Princet
on, NJ
08542
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
2020
$2,000
11/6/2017
Art Classes
Center
Burnt
for
for
Mills
Children
Contem
Road
with Autism
porary
Bedmins
Spectrum
Art
ter, NJ
Disorder
07882
and Other
Special
Needs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
19B
$300
8/24/2017
Costs
Center
Dellwoo
associated
For
d Lane
with
Great
Somerse
Janssen
Expect
t, NJ
Cares
ations
08873
Volunteer
Activity--S
eptember
19, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
19B
$12,000
9/15/2017
Adult
Center
Dellwoo
Women's
For
d Lane
Program
Great
Somerse
Expect
t, NJ
ations
08873
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
205
$7,500
10/30/2017
The Edinburg
Edinbu
Burling
Center Jail
rg
ton
Diversion
Center
Road
Program
Lexingt
on, MA
01730
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
401
$1,000
5/4/2017
8th Annual
Mental
Cypress
Run/Walk
Health
Street
for Mental
Center
Manches
Health
Of
ter, NH
Greate
03103
r
Manche
ster
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
400
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
Pennsb
Pennsbu
associated
ury
ry
with
Societ
Memoria
Janssen
y
l Rd.
Cares
Morrisv
Volunteer
ille,
Activity--S
PA
eptember
19067
25, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
P.O. Box
$9,000
12/5/2017
Opera for
Prince
2063
All
ton
Princet
Festiv
on, NJ
al
08543
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
243
$5,000
12/14/2017
Sensory
Roxey
North
Friendly
Ballet
Union
Performance
Compan
Street
s at
y,
Lambert
Trenton
Inc.
ville,
Psychiatric
NJ
Hospital
08530
and The
College of
New Jersey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
4101
$20,000
9/26/2017
MindStrong
Thresh
North
olds
Ravensw
ood
Avenue
Chicago
, IL
60613
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
100
$10,000
8/30/2017
Farm Based
Willia
Gould
Psychiatric
m J.
Road
Rehabilitat
Gould
P.O.
ion and
Associ
Box 157
Recovery
ates,
Montere
Inc.
y, MA
01245
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Thomas
111 West
$15,000
12/18/2017
Scholarships
Edison
State
for Nursing
State
Street
Students
Colleg
Trenton
Enrolled in
e
, NJ
the
Founda
08608
Accelerated
tion
Second
Degree BSN
Program at
the W. Cary
Edwards
School of
Nursing at
Thomas
Edison
State
University.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
TPTO
51 South
$1,500
10/30/2017
2018
Inc--T
Timberl
Timberlane
imberl
ane
Science and
ane
Drive
Engineering
Parent
Penning
Fair
Teache
ton, NJ
r
08534
Organi
zation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
471
$7,500
12/18/2017
Trenton
Childr
Parkway
Children's
en's
Avenue
Chorus
Chorus
Trenton
, Inc.
, NJ
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
P.O. Box
$8,500
11/6/2017
Second
Commun
5206
Semester
ity
Trenton
Programs,
Music
, NJ
Trenton
School
08638
Music
Makers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
635
$5,000
12/4/2017
Trenton
Educat
South
Education
ion
Clinton
Dance
Dance
Avenue
Institute
Instit
Trenton
(TEDI)
ute
, NJ
08611
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trenton
218
$19,000
10/27/2017
Wheels to
Health
North
Wellness
Team
Broad
Inc.
Street
Trenton
, NJ
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Trinity
22
$7,500
10/30/2017
TCS General
Counse
Stockto
Counseling
ling
n
and
Servic
Street
Prevention
es
Princet
Programming
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Tuscalo
P.O. Box
$1,000
5/4/2017
Hot Hundred
osa
2322
2017
Mental
Tuscalo
Health
osa, AL
Allian
35403
ce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Twiligh
P.O. Box
$7,500
10/30/2017
Simple Needs
t Wish
1042
Wish
Founda
Doylest
Granting
tion
own, PA
Program
18901
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
UIH
4 North
$10,000
12/18/2017
Healthy
Family
Broad
Relationshi
Partne
Street
ps, Healthy
rs
Suite
Choices
2R
Trenton
, NJ
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
UIH
4 North
$20,000
12/18/2017
Community of
Family
Broad
Health for
Partne
Street
Men, Year 4
rs
Suite
2R
Trenton
, NJ
08608
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
60 Park
$7,500
10/30/2017
UNCF
Negro
Place
Scholarship
Colleg
Suite
e Fund
406
Newark,
NJ
07102
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
413 Hood
$85,000
9/29/2017
Fresh
Way of
Blvd
Connect
Bucks
Fairles
program
County
s
Hills,
PA
19030
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
413 Hood
$42,500
9/29/2017
Emergency
Way of
Blvd
Needs
Bucks
Fairles
program
County
s
Hills,
PA
19030
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
3150
$85,000
10/30/2017
United Way
Way of
Brunswi
of Greater
Greate
ck Pike
Mercer
r
Suite
County
Mercer
230
Minority
County
Lawrenc
and
eville,
Multicultur
NJ
al Health
08648
Initiative
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
United
3150
$920
12/4/2017
Costs
Way of
Brunswi
associated
Greate
ck Pike
with
r
Suite
Janssen
Mercer
230
Cares
County
Lawrenc
Volunteer
eville,
Activity--S
NJ
eptember
08648
26, 2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
UrbanPr
801 West
$2,770
12/12/2017
Mindfulness
omise
State
Pilot
Intern
Street
Program
ationa
Trenton
l,
, NJ
Inc.
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Valeo
5401 SW
$3,500
9/19/2017
Vocational
Behavi
7th
Empowerment
oral
Street
Photovoice
Health
Topeka,
Care,
KS
Inc.
66606
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Visions
49
$7,500
12/12/2017
Street-Smart
and
Brahma
HIV/AIDS
Pathwa
Ave.
ys
Bridgew
ater,
NJ
08807
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Visions
49
$300
11/6/2017
Costs
and
Brahma
associated
Pathwa
Ave.
with
ys
Bridgew
Janssen
ater,
Cares
NJ
Volunteer
08807
Activity
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Volunte
12
$9,000
12/1/2017
SkillsConnec
er
Stockto
t
Connec
n
t
Street
Princet
on, NJ
08540
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Washing
P.O. Box
$750
10/16/2017
Revolutionar
ton
83
y War
Crossi
Titusvi
Weekend
ng
lle, NJ
Park
08560
Associ
ation,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
We Care
3035
$1,500
5/31/2017
ArtWORK
Arts
Wilming
ton
Pike
Ketteri
ng, OH
45429
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
West
P.O. Box
$5,000
12/5/2017
Excellence
Windso
280
in
r
West
Education,
Plains
Windsor
and
boro
, NJ
Innovation
Educat
08550
Fair 2018
ion
Founda
tion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Westmor
100
$75
3/22/2017
Employee
eland
Devonsh
directed
County
ire
donation in
Food
Drive
lieu of
Bank,
Delmont
company
Inc.
, PA
holiday
15626-
gift
1607
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Womansp
1530
$7,500
12/5/2017
Safe House
ace
Brunswi
(Emergency
ck Ave.
Shelter)
Lawrenc
and
eville,
Barbara's
NJ
House
08648
(Transition
al
Housing):
Supporting
Women and
Children
Impacted by
Domestic
Violence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Womansp
1530
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
ace
Brunswi
associated
ck Ave.
with
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares
NJ
Volunteer
08648
Activity--O
ctober 2,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Womansp
1530
$300
9/29/2017
Costs
ace
Brunswi
associated
ck Ave.
with
Lawrenc
Janssen
eville,
Cares
NJ
Volunteer
08648
Activity--O
ctober 5,
2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Woods
40
$4,000
12/12/2017
Yoga at
Servic
Martin
Woods
es
Gross
Services: A
Founda
Drive,
Recreationa
tion
P.O.
l Program
Box 36
for People
Langhor
with
ne, PA
Special
19047
Needs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Young
349 W.
$3,500
12/18/2017
Early
Schola
State
Literacy
rs'
St
Engagement
Instit
Trenton
and
ute
, NJ
Development
08618
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$493,168
1/3/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
Nicaragua,
West Bank,
and U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$145,709
1/6/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua,
Dominican
Republic,
West Bank,
and U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$257,792
1/9/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua,
Dominican
Republic,
West Bank,
and U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$100,065
2/16/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia,
Nicaragua,
Republic,
and Lebanon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,185,644
2/16/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in U.S.
clinics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$4,640
3/13/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Puerto
Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,281,296
3/20/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Tanzania,
West Bank,
Gaza, St.
Lucia,
Lebanon,
Dominican
Republic,
Colombia,
Nicaragua,
and U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$91,239
3/20/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua
and
Colombia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,077,988
4/11/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in Gaza,
West Bank,
Colombia,
and U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$181,140
4/11/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia,
Afghanistan
, and
Colombia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$191,031
5/23/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua,
Dominican
Republic,
and St.
Lucia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$72,844
5/23/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Nicaragua.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$871,110
6/22/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
St. Lucia,
and West
Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$185,347
6/22/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Dominican
Republic,
and West
Bank
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$9,583,716
7/17/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in
Kyrgyzstan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$149,758
7/19/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in St.
Lucia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$91,601
8/21/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$259,213
8/21/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$383,085
9/27/2017
Pharmaceutic
res
Hamilto
al product
Founda
n Ave.
Donation
tion
Stamfor
for
d, CT
humanitaria
06902
n aid in
Gaza, St.
Lucia, and
Peru
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$134,651
9/27/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n aid for
06902
El
Salvador,
Peru and
St. Lucia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$2,013,098
10/10/2017
Product for
res
Hamilto
humanitaria
Founda
n Ave.
n and
tion
Stamfor
disaster
d, CT
response in
06902
Houston,
Florida and
Puerto Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$65,375
10/10/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n and
06902
disaster
relief in
Houston,
Florida,
and Puerto
Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$75,473
10/20/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n aid in
06902
Nicaragua
and US
Clinics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$82,469
11/15/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n aid in US
06902
Clinic
Network
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$442,409
11/15/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n aid in
06902
Sierra
Leone
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$816,348
8/31/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
Donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
Disaster
d, CT
Response--H
06902
urricane
Harvey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$1,320,624
11/17/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in U.S
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$504,595
12/5/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in the
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$971,862
12/5/2017
Product for
res
Hamilto
humanitaria
Founda
n Ave.
n
tion
Stamfor
assistance
d, CT
in the
06902
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
AmeriCa
88
$4,298,976
12/5/2017
Product
res
Hamilto
donation
Founda
n Ave.
for
tion
Stamfor
humanitaria
d, CT
n
06902
assistance
in US
Clinic
Networks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$432,510
11/16/2017
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in:
10005
Dominican
Republic,
Haiti and
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$566,919
11/16/2017
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in:
10005
Dominican
Republic,
Haiti, and
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$68,662
10/20/2017
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in the
10005
Dominican
Republic,
Guatemala
and Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$47,020
9/27/2017
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n aid in
n
York,
the
Board
NY
Dominican
10005
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$1,626,679
7/19/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Dominican
Republic,
and
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$2,839,769
7/19/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Guatemala,
Haiti,
Dominican
Republic,
and
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$129,896
8/21/2017
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Dominican
Republic,
and
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
100 Wall
$2,091,213
8/21/2017
Product
c
Street,
donation
Medica
9th
for
l
Floor
humanitaria
Missio
New
n
n
York,
assistance
Board
NY
in
10005
Dominican
Republic,
Haiti, and
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$698,911
6/22/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Guatemala,
El
Salvador,
Nicaragua,
Haiti, and
Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$537,473
6/22/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Dominican
Republic,
Haiti,
Guatemala,
Jamaica,
and El
Salvador
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$597,003
4/10/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in El
NY
Salvador,
Haiti, and
Nicaragua
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$565,051
4/10/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in El
NY
Salvador,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Nicaragua,
and
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$610,715
5/23/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Tanzania,
Guatemala,
Jamaica,
and
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$716,298
5/23/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Dominican
Republic,
Tanzania,
and
Guatemala
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$1,336,614
3/20/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Guatemala,
El
Salvador,
and Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$102,932
3/20/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in
NY
Guatemala
and Haiti
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Catholi
33-01
$117,953
2/15/2017
Product
c
Elevent
donation
Medica
h
for
l
Street
humanitaria
Missio
Long
n
n
Island
assistance
Board
City,
in Haiti,
NY
El Salvador
and
Honduras
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,051,504
3/20/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Honduras,
Liberia,
Haiti and
El
Salvador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$91,239
3/20/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Haiti
and
Liberia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$23,107
2/16/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$378,636
2/16/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$2,390,729
4/11/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Colombia,
Sierra
Leone,
Vanuatu,
Ghana,
Malawi,
Haiti,
Nicaragua
and U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$249,548
4/11/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana,
Malawi,
Sierra
Leone,
Liberia,
Pakistan
and U.S.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$804,308
5/23/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Malawi
and Sierra
Leone
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$209,508
5/23/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Colombia,
Pakistan,
Ghana,
Malawi,
Sierra
Leone and
Liberia.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$500,169
6/22/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Jamaica,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan,
and Liberia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$710,949
6/22/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Jamaica
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,405,277
7/19/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Honduras,
Colombia,
and
Pakistan
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$1,152,189
7/19/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
Donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in
Honduras,
Colombia,
Pakistan,
and USA.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$271,063
9/27/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$61,205
9/27/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Ghana
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$373,326
8/21/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
Humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in the
United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$259,561
8/21/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
Humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in the
United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$239,304
10/23/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in US
Clinics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$571,784
12/5/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Syria
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$62,628
10/2/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Houston,
Florida,
and Puerto
Rico
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$3,961,872
11/17/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Syria
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$3,482,171
12/1/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Syria
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$82,127
9/7/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
Donation
Lane
for
Santa
Disaster
Barbara
response--H
, CA
urricane
93117
Harvey
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$494,813
11/16/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Syria
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$224,506
11/16/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Syria
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$161,977
11/16/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in Syria
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$31,448
11/16/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in US
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Direct
27 S. La
$505,634
11/16/2017
Product
Relief
Patera
donation
Lane
for
Santa
humanitaria
Barbara
n
, CA
assistance
93117
in US
Clinics
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$61,205
9/27/2017
Product
to
Pacific
donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in the
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$224,044
9/27/2017
Product
to
Pacific
donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in the
Dominican
Republic
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$979,095
6/22/2017
Product
to
Pacific
donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$126,867
6/22/2017
Product
to
Pacific
Donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in
Honduras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$436,536
4/10/2017
Product
to
Pacific
donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in
Dominican
Republic,
Honduras
and Papua
New Guinea.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Heart
1021
$62,476
4/10/2017
Product
to
Pacific
donation
Heart
Avenue
for
Intern
Kansas
humanitaria
ationa
City,
n
l
KS
assistance
66102
in Honduras
and
Dominican
Republic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$338,315,809
12/31/2017
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
Kilmer
Assist
Square,
ance
Suite
Founda
130 New
tion
Brunswi
ck, NJ
08933
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$13,197
2/15/2017
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
(Medical
Mission
Packs).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$125,592
2/14/2017
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
in Sierra
Leone
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$108,127
11/16/2017
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
in the
Eastern
Caribbean
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$19,241
7/31/2017
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for medical
l
Brunswi
mission
ck, GA
program
31525
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
MAP
4700
$868,191
6/22/2017
Product
Intern
Glynco
donation
ationa
Parkway
for
l
Brunswi
humanitaria
ck, GA
n
31525
assistance
in Haiti,
Dominican
Republic,
and
Guatemala.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Acercam
P.O. Box
$5,000
4/26/2017
ContraSIDA
iento
3820
Hispan
Columbi
o de
a, SC
Caroli
29230
na del
Sur
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ADAP
P.O. Box
$5,000
4/4/2017
ADAP
Advoca
15275
Directory
cy
Washing
ton, DC
20003
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
ADAP
P.O. Box
$5,000
10/16/2017
Improving
Advoca
15275
Access to
cy
Washing
Care Among
ton, DC
Formerly
20003
Incarcerate
d
Populations
with HIV/
AIDS under
the AIDS
Drug
Assistance
Program
(ADAP)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
African- 1833
$75,000
7/20/2017
Black
Americ
West
Treatment
an
8th
Advocates
Aids
Street
Network
Policy
Suite
(BTAN)
And
200 Los
Advanced
Traini
Angeles
Development
ng
, CA
Program
Instit
90057
ute
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
6260
$3,000
4/4/2017
Linkage to
Founda
Westpar
Care
tion
k Drive
Housto
Suite
n,
100
Inc.
Houston
, TX
77057
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
200 W.
$50,000
3/1/2017
Ensuring
Founda
Jackson
Access to
tion
Blvd.,
HIV
of
Suite
Prevention
Chicag
2100
and Care in
o
Chicago
Illinois
, IL
through
60606
Policy
Monitoring
and
Advocacy
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
400
$5,000
4/4/2017
HIV Case
Outrea
North
Management
ch
Beach
at AIDS
Center
Street
Outreach
Fort
Center
Worth,
TX
76111
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
820 N.
$5,000
8/17/2017
Driving
Resour
Plankin
Innovation
ce
ton
in HIV
Center
Ave.
Healthcare
of
Milwauk
Via ARCW
Wiscon
ee, WI
HIV Medical
sin
53203
Centers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
17982
$2,000
5/8/2017
HIV and
Servic
Sky
Hepatitis C
es
Park
Testing
Founda
Circle,
Program
tion
Suite J
Orange
Irvine,
County
CA
92614
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
AIDS
1101
$200,000
12/19/2017
Transgender
United
14th
Leadership
Street,
Initiative
NW
Suite
300
Washing
ton, DC
20005
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alexian
825 W.
$5,000
8/17/2017
Transitional
Brothe
Welling
Living
rs
ton
Program for
Bonave
Chicago
Homeless
nture
, IL
Adults with
House
60657
HIV/AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Alivene
3808
$1,000
7/31/2017
Integrative
ss
Nicolle
Therapies
Projec
t Ave
for People
t,
Minneap
Living with
Inc.
olis,
HIV
MN
55409
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Aunt
1101 N.
$2,500
7/11/2017
Project
Rita's
Central
HIVAZ
Founda
Ave.
tion
Suite
212
Phoenix
, AZ
85004
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Caring
PO Box
$40,000
3/20/2017
General
Ambass
1748
Hepatitis C
adors
Oregon
Program
Progra
City,
Support
m, Inc
OR
97045
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Catholi
119
$5,000
4/4/2017
The Home
c
Dameron
Place
Charit
Avenue
ies of
Knoxvil
East
le, TN
Tennes
37917
see,
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Center
1115 E.
$3,500
10/23/2017
HIV
For
12th
Prevention
Health
St.
Access and
Empowe
Austin,
Linkage to
rment
TX
Care
(CHE)
78702
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Central
1785
$5,000
11/13/2017
HIV Testing,
Louisi
Jackson
Counseling,
ana
Street
and
Aids
Alexand
Prevention
Suppor
ria, LA
for African
t
71301
American
Servic
Teens and
es Inc
Young
(CLASS
Adults
)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
1930
$20,000
12/18/2017
Equal Access
ty
Martin
Educat
Luther
ion
King Jr
Group
Avenue
SE
Washing
ton, DC
20020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
1930
$20,000
3/13/2017
Access Tools
ty
Martin
Linking All
Educat
Luther
to Services
ion
King Jr
(ATLAS).
Group
Avenue
SE
Washing
ton, DC
20020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Communi
575 8th
$15,000
7/20/2017
HIV Health
ty
Avenue,
Literacy
Resear
Suite
Education
ch
502 New
and
Initia
York,
Training
tive
NY
for Service
on
10018
Providers
AIDS,
Working
Inc.
with
Vulnerable
Populations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Frannie
30
$5,000
11/13/2017
Supportive
Peabod
Danfort
Pathways
y
h St.
Along the
Center
Suite
Care
Inc.
311
Continuum
Portlan
(SPACC)
d, ME
04101
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gay
446 W.
$30,000
12/19/2017
Peer
Men's
33rd
Navigation
Health
Street
for high-
Crisis
New
risk and
York,
HIV-
NY
positive
10001
transgender
people
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Gay
446 W.
$30,000
3/1/2017
Peer
Men's
33rd
Navigation
Health
Street
for high-
Crisis
New
risk and
York,
HIV-
NY
positive
10001
transgender
people
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hepatit
35 East
$20,000
2/7/2017
The
is C
38th
Hepatitis C
Mentor
Street,
Education
and
Suite
and Support
Suppor
#4G New
Group
t
York,
Assistance
Group
NY
Program
Inc.
10016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Hepatit
1261 S.
$35,000
2/8/2017
General
is
Jackson
Program
Educat
St.,
Support
ion
Suite
Projec
201
t
Seattle
, WA
98144
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Howard
4025 N.
$25,000
9/29/2017
Patient
Brown
Sherida
Assistance
Health
n
Clinic
Center
Chicago
(PAC):
, IL
Medication
60613
Therapy
Management
for
Underserved
Patients
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Interna
2200
$75,000
3/1/2017
Conversation
tional
Pennsyl
Maps:
Associ
vania
Patient
ation
Avenue,
Empowerment
of
NW 4th
through HIV
Physic
Floor
Peer
ians
East
Dialogue in
in
Washing
Five U.S.
AIDS
ton, DC
Fast-Track
Care
20037
Cities
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Legacy
4054
$5,000
4/26/2017
Grace
Counse
McKinne
Project
ling
y Ave.,
Program for
Center
Suite
Women
102
Living with
Dallas,
HIV/AIDS
TX
75204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Legal
17 N.
$5,000
8/23/2017
Communities
Counci
State
of Color
l for
Street,
Outreach
Health
Suite
Program
Justic
900
e
Chicago
, IL
60602
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Lifelon
P.O. Box
$3,000
3/20/2017
Living
g Aids
80547
Positively
Allian
Seattle
ce
, WA
98108
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Minorit
5149 W.
$7,500
4/4/2017
S.T.E.P.
y AIDS
Jeffers
Program
Projec
on Blvd
Strengtheni
t
Los
ng
Angeles
Treatment
, CA
Education
90016
for People
Living with
HIV/AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
580
$175,000
3/16/2017
NATAP HIV
l AIDS
Broadwa
and HCV
Treatm
y Suite
Information
ent
1010
and
Advoca
New
Education
cy
York,
Project
Projec
NY
t
10012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
580
$175,000
12/18/2017
NATAP HIV
l AIDS
Broadwa
and
Treatm
y Suite
Hepatitis
ent
1010
Information
Advoca
New
and
cy
York,
Education
Projec
NY
Project
t
10012
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Nationa
444
$150,000
12/19/2017
Affordable
l
North
Care Act
Allian
Capitol
(ACA), Ryan
ce of
Street
White/ADAP,
State
NW #339
Public
and
Washing
Policy and
Territ
ton, DC
Technical
orial
20001
Assistance,
AIDS
and the
Direct
Minority
ors
Leadership
Programs
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
NovaSal
2946
$2,500
11/15/2017
``Increasing
ud,
Sleepy
Testing and
Inc.
Hollow
Improving
Rd.
Retention
Falls
in Care and
Church,
Access to
VA
Treatment
22044
for People
at Risk or
Currently
Living with
HIV''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Palmett
2638 Two
$7,500
7/11/2017
HIV Care
o AIDS
Notch
Coordinatio
Life
Road,
n Program
Suppor
Suite
t
108
Servic
Columbi
es
a, SC
29204
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Positiv
785
$2,500
11/13/2017
Integrated
e
Market
Support
Resour
Street,
Services
ce
10th
Center
Floor
San
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
PowerSo
P.O. Box
$2,500
10/23/2017
Bridging the
urce
12354
Gap
Tucson
Tucson,
, Inc.
AZ
85732
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$10,000
12/18/2017
Mission
Inform
Ninth
Support
Street
San
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$10,000
6/26/2017
Mission
Inform
Ninth
Support for
Street
Project
San
Inform
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$25,000
6/26/2017
HIV Care
Inform
Ninth
Linkage,
Street
Retention
San
and Re-
Francis
engagement
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
273
$25,000
6/26/2017
Policy
Inform
Ninth
Advocacy to
Street
Protect HIV
San
Treatment
Francis
and Care
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Project
2929 NE
$5,000
10/16/2017
``Surviving
Link
6TH
and
of
Avenue
Thriving;
South
Wilton
Long-term
Florid
Manors,
Survivors
a,
FL
workshops,
Inc.
33334
for Gay Men
50 and Over
Living with
HIV,'' and
for our
``Long-term
Survivor''
support
group.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
RAIN,
601 E.
$20,000
9/29/2017
Free On-Site
Inc.
5th
Mental
Street,
Health
Suite
Services
470 PO
for People
Box
Living with
37190
HIV
Charlot
te, NC
28202
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
San
1035
$25,000
6/27/2017
TransLife
Franci
Market
HIV Care
sco
Street,
and Support
AIDS
Suite
Founda
400 San
tion
Francis
co, CA
94103
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Service
305 7th
$5,000
4/21/2017
SAGEPositive
s and
Avenue,
Advoca
15th
cy For
Floor
Gay
New
Lesbia
York,
n
NY
Bisexu
10001
al and
Transg
ender
Elders
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
17 Davis
$65,000
7/20/2017
Ensuring
AIDS
Bouleva
Adequate
Instit
rd,
Funding for
ute
Suite
Domestic
403
HIV/AIDS
Suite
Programs
403
Tampa,
FL
33606
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
17 Davis
$65,000
12/19/2017
2018 Federal
AIDS
Bouleva
and State
Instit
rd,
HIV/AIDS
ute
Suite
Policy
403
Issues
Suite
403
Tampa,
FL
33606
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
64 West
$4,000
9/18/2017
ID Inspired
Allian
35th
Challenge
ce for
Street,
Positi
3rd
ve
Floor
Change
New
York,
NY
10001
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
99
$5,000
7/11/2017
Expansion of
Next
Bishop
Next Step's
Step
Allen
Year-round
Fund,
Drive
Programming
Inc.
Cambrid
for teens
ge, MA
and young
02138
adults
living with
HIV.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The San
P.O. Box
$2,500
8/18/2017
Youth
Diego
3357
Services
LGBT
San
Commun
Diego,
ity
CA
Center
92163
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The San
P.O. Box
$5,000
7/19/2017
HIV services
Diego
3357
LGBT
San
Commun
Diego,
ity
CA
Center
92163
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
85
$30,000
12/18/2017
Building
Well
Norman
H.O.P.E.
Projec
Avenue
(Hopeful
t
P.O.
Outreach
Box
and
220410
Positive
Brookly
Engagement
n, NY
for Women
11222
Living with
HIV)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
The
85
$30,000
3/1/2017
HIV Disease
Well
Norman
Awareness/
Projec
Avenue
Information
t
P.O.
, Community
Box
Support,
220410
Advocacy
Brookly
and
n, NY
Capacity
11222
Building
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Treatme
90 Broad
$15,000
6/26/2017
Ending the
nt
Street,
Epidemic
Action
Suite
Group,
2503
Inc.
New
York,
NY
10004
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Univers
UCSF
$15,000
9/29/2017
UCSF
ity Of
Allianc
Alliance
Califo
e
Health
rnia
Health
Project
San
Project
Mission-
Franci
1855
Based
sco
Folsom
Support--Co
Street,
mmunity
Ste.
Based
670 Box
Intensive
0884
Case
San
Management
Francis
for People
co, CA
Living With
94143
HIV/AIDS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Univers
620 W.
$2,500
11/13/2017
JACQUES
ity Of
Lexingt
Initiative
Maryla
on St.
Community
nd
2nd
Outreach
Baltim
floor
Program
ore
Baltimo
Founda
re, MD
tion,
21201
Inc.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
US
1300 PA
$725,000
12/19/2017
Global
Agency
Avenue.
Public
for
, NW SA-
Health
Intern
44 Rm
Programs:
ationa
475-J
Infection
l
Washing
Control
Develo
ton, DC
($250,000),
pment
20523
Anti-
Microbial
Resistance
($300,000),
Pharmacovig
ilance
($175,000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Wellnes
2929 NE
$2,000
10/16/2017
Prevention
s
6
for HIV
Center
Avenue,
Positive
of
Suite B
Heterosexua
South
Wilton
l/Minority
Florid
Manors,
Outreach
a,
FL
Program
Inc.
33334
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monetary
Young
4164
$5,000
7/19/2017
TruEvolution
Schola
Brockto
Community
rs For
n Ave
Wellness
Academ
Riversi
Center
ic
de, CA
Empowe
92501
rment
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Johnson
One
$14,933,212
12/31/2017
Patient
&
Johnson
Assistance
Johnso
&
Product
n
Johnson
Donation
Patien
Plaza
t
Kilmer
Assist
Square,
ance
Suite
Founda
130 New
tion
Brunswi
ck, NJ
08933
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Partner
1616
$1,018,932
3/31/2017
Product
ship
Fort
Donation
for
Myer
for New
Supply
Drive,
Horizons
Chain
12th
global
Manage
Floor
public
ment
Arlingt
health
on, VA
program
22209-
3100
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
Partner
1616
$124,669
9/8/2017
Product
ship
Fort
donation
for
Myer
for New
Supply
Drive,
Horizons
Chain
12th
Global
Manage
Floor
Public
ment
Arlingt
Health
on, VA
Program
22209-
3100
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product
US
1300
$302,250,000
12/18/2017
Product
Agency
Pennsyl
donation
for
vania
for global
Intern
Avenue,
public
ationa
N.W.
health
l
Washing
programs
Develo
ton, DC
pment
20523
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Actelion Pharmaceuticals US, Inc. Contribution Payments Made in 2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Organization Information
Project Title
Paid Amount
Paid
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Westchester Medical
Girls' Night Out
$2,000.00
20180326
Center Foundation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scleroderma Research
CONQUER Registry
$500,000.00
20180125
Foundation
Project
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multiple Sclerosis
The Latest MS
$12,000.00
20180424
Association of America
Research Updates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Have a Ball Foundation
14th Annual ``Have a
$5,000.00
20180309
Ball'' Golf
Tournament
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CMDAT Research Foundation
Free seminars on
$1,400.00
20180411
pulmonary arterial
hypertension and
Gaucher disease in
the Greater Denver
area
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Echo Hill Outdoor School
Echo Hill Outdoor
$5,000.00
20180410
Heart Camp 2018
School Heart Camp
2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pulmonary Hypertension
Chicago Area Trivia
$3,200.00
20180510
Association
Night
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Lung Association
St. Louis Lung Force
$1,500.00
20180524
in Missouri
Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pulmonary Hypertension
Thirsting for a Cure
$6,000.00
20180725
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UPHill Journeys
11th Annual Northern
$2,000.00
20180710
New England PH Forum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pulmonary Hypertension
Steps for Stripes Fun
$1,500.00
20180925
Association
Walk
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Heart
Ann Arbor-Jackson
$5,000.00
20181025
Association
Heart Ball
------------------------------------------------------------------------
phaware global
PHAWARE CHARITY
$2,500.00
20181116
association
POKER TOURNAMENT
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pulmonary Hypertension
Georgia Fun Walk
$2,500.00
20181010
Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Lung Association
St. Louis Lung Force
$1,500.00
20181010
in Missouri
Expo
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Actelion has also made financial donations to independent charitable
foundations that assist patients who are underinsured and in financial
need with treatment-related expenses. In keeping with our donor
agreements and applicable regulatory guidance, we will only disclose
aggregate data on our charitable giving and do not publicize
information on donations to specific foundations and disease states.
In 2018, we contributed approximately $50.2 million in donations to
independent charitable foundations, enabling them to provide
assistance with medication-related copays to patients with pulmonary
hypertension.
______
Submitted by Hon. John Thune, a U.S. Senator From South Dakota
340B Health
1101 15th Street NW, Suite 910
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: 202-552-5850
FAX: 202-552-5868
www.340bhealth.org
340B is a Small Share of the Drug Market
and Does Not Increase Drug Prices
New data show drug manufacturers provided $6.1 billion in total drug
discounts in 2015 under the 340B Program. The 340B discount is less
than 2 percent of the total U.S. drug market and is dwarfed by other
segments of the drug industry.
340B does not increase drug prices. 340B reduces costs for safety net
providers, allowing them to provide affordable drugs and services to
low-income patients.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Compared to other segments of the market, the total 340B discount is:

Less than 2 percent of total U.S. drug spending.

3.6 percent of all discounts and rebates offered by
manufacturers.

4 percent of the specialty drug spending.

89 percent less than the rebates manufacturers provide to health
plans and PBMs.

78 percent less than what manufacturers spend on advertising.

57 percent less than what brand-name manufacturers have lost
from patent expirations.
Nearly one third of the total 340B discount is due a penalty enforced
against drug manufacturers for raising the price of drugs higher than
the rate of inflation or voluntarily providing a discount lower than
the 340B price. Manufacturers could avoid this penalty by not
increasing their drug prices at such high rates.
Total 340B Discount, $6.1 Billion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Required by 340B Statute, $4.2 Billion
Inflationary Penalty,
$1.9 Billion
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The full analysis by Dobson Davanzo is available here: http://
www.340bhealth.org/files/340B_Financial_Impact_7_17.pdf.
______
Prepared Statement of Hon. Ron Wyden,
a U.S. Senator From Oregon
Prescription drugs did not become outrageously expensive by
accident. It's not the result of a system too complicated for Americans
to comprehend. Drug prices are astronomically high because that's where
pharmaceutical companies and their investors want them. The brakes have
come off pharmaceutical pricing, and American families are hurtling
along in the passenger seat terrified of what comes next.
Today the committee will hear uplifting stories about miracle
cures, but it is morally repugnant when patients can't afford them. It
is morally repugnant when ailing patients are forced to choose between
filling that next prescription or putting food on the table, because
they can't afford both. It is morally repugnant when patients are
forced to skip doses.
You Pharma executives are here because the way you do business is
unacceptable and unsustainable. Ten companies accounted for half of all
profts in the health-care sector last fall. Nine of those ten were drug
manufacturers. All but one of today's witnesses represent companies on
that list. Drug makers behave as if patients and taxpayers are unlocked
ATMs full of cash to be extracted, and their shareholders are the
customers they value above all else.
Let's look at concrete examples, starting with AbbVie. AbbVie
manufactures the top-selling prescription drug in America, the
arthritis medication Humira. Over 6 years, the company doubled the
price of a 12-month supply from $19,000 to $38,000. Can patients opt
for a less-expensive alternative? No they cannot, because AbbVie
protects the exclusivity of Humira like Gollum with his ring: thick
cobwebs of patents, legal tricks, and shadowy deals with other drug
makers, all to keep the cash flowing.
I also want to address troubling information the committee recently
uncovered. I'm holding AbbVie's proxy statement, a document every
publicly traded company must file with the SEC. Page 37 shows that in
2017, a portion of CEO Richard Gonzalez's multi-million-dollar bonus
was directly tied to sales of Humira. It appears the same incentive was
in place in 2015 and 2016.
In fact, the committee's review shows that all of AbbVie's top
executives had the same arrangement. Mr. Gonzalez is welcome to
respond, but the implication of that incentive ought to be clear. From
top down, AbbVie's leadership had reason to keep pushing prices and
sales upward.
Now on to Pfizer. Pfizer gets first prize for emptiest gesture on
pricing in 2018. After stern Trump tweets last year, Pfizer said it
would temporarily freeze prices. But once the President got his splashy
headlines, his gaze turned elsewhere, and Pfizer's former CEO told
investors it was back to ``business as normal.'' Another round of price
hikes in 2019, including on its pain medication Lyrica. Lyrica's price
has increased 163 percent since 2012. With this one drug, Pfizer raked
in $4.5 billion in 2017.
Merck: Merck gets second prize for emptiest gesture on pricing in
2018. It made sweet-sounding promises after coming under criticism, but
it cut prices for drugs that provide essentially no revenue to the
company. Left untouched were the cash cows Keytruda and Januvia, which
account for more than a quarter of Merck's revenue. It's like promising
car shoppers a great deal, except the only discounted model on the lot
is an Edsel.
Sanofi: A company wringing more and more cash out of people with an
incurable disease. In 2010, a vial of Sanofi insulin cost less than
$100. In 2018 it cost nearly $300, and the company raised prices again
in 2019. Considering that the landmark breakthrough on insulin came
early in the roaring twenties, nothing could justify that sudden price
increase nearly a century later. Diabetics who can't afford the costs
are self-rationing and endangering their lives, but at least the
investors are happy.
AstraZeneca: A lesson in saying the quiet part out loud. In an
interview earlier this year, CEO Pascal Soriot complained that his $12-
million salary made him ``the lowest-paid CEO in the whole industry.''
He said it was ``annoying to some extent.'' His company, meanwhile,
continues to raise the price of Symbicort, its $3-billion asthma drug.
For some asthmatics, being able to breathe costs hundreds of dollars a
month.
Johnson & Johnson: A record-setting flip-flop. This January 7th, at
the JP Morgan Healthcare Conference, CEO Alex Gorsky said that the
pharmaceutical industry needed to self-police on pricing. Sounds good,
but it didn't last long. Three days later, his company hiked the prices
of hundreds of its drugs, including drugs that account for billions in
Medicare spending.
Bristol-Myers-Squibb: In 2017, the company spent roughly $11.5
billion on dividends, stock buybacks, marketing, sales, and
administrative costs. That's roughly triple the amount it spent on R&D.
This is all a stark illustration of drug makers' profiteering and
two-faced scheming. The central argument that the committee will hear
in response is that the fault is everybody else's. The health plans are
at fault. The PBMs are at fault. Regulators are at fault. They always
point the finger elsewhere.
We'll also hear that list prices don't matter; that the true costs
are complicated. But companies don't set and raise list prices for fun.
Those prices are directly tied to the amount patients pay out-of-pocket
at the pharmacy window. They are directly tied to what taxpayers spend
on health-care programs.
Next, drug makers point fingers at the middlemen, pharmacy benefit
managers. I've said for years that PBMs are wasteful and secretive,
taking their cut without proving their worth to anybody. They will have
their day before this committee. But PBMs don't set list prices;
manufacturers do. Furthermore, manufacturers don't offer rebates for
nearly 40 percent of Part D brand-name drugs. Those prices continue to
rise. That's on the drug companies, not on PBMs.
Next, drug makers say changes in the status quo will hurt R&D. A
quick look at these companies' finances, on both sides of the balance
sheet, shows that isn't the case. Revenue generated from American
patients alone dwarfs what they spend on R&D worldwide. Drug makers
also spend as much, if not more, on flashy TV ads and office-to-office
salesmen as they spend on R&D. And if lower prices would diminish R&D,
why don't costly dividends? Why don't stock buybacks? Is the stock
price more important than inventing the next miracle cure?
Even if you buy the specious argument that a drug's list price at
launch is driven by the cost of R&D, what could justify arbitrary price
increases year after year, long after the R&D spending is done?
Finally, companies say they help patients afford drugs with
``coupons`` or patient assistance programs. But if these programs are
so widely generous, why can't drug makers instead simply lower prices
across the board? Because it's just more slick branding--ploys that
allow companies to maintain the status quo.
One final point. I was there when seven Big Tobacco CEOs testifed
in a committee room like this one, and they lied. The chairman and I
expect better this morning. Your profits are outsized compared to
others in the industry, you receive a massive portion of your revenue
from American taxpayers, and you bear none of the consequences of high
drug prices. It's past time to get beyond the excuses and make
prescription drugs affordable.
______
Communications
----------
AARP
601 E Street, NW
Washington, DC 20049
202-434--2277 | 1-888-OUR-AARP | 1-888-687-2277 | TTY: 1-877-434-7598
www.aarp.org | twitter: @aarp | facebook.com/aarp | youtube.com/aarp
February 26, 2019
The Honorable Chuck Grassley
The Honorable Ron Wyden
Chairman
Ranking Member
Committee on Finance
Committee on Finance
U.S. Senate
U.S. Senate
219 Dirksen Senate Office Building
219 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510
Washington, DC 20510
Dear Chairman Grassley and Ranking Member Wyden:
AARP appreciates your focus on prescription drug prices and the
challenges that increasing drug costs pose for seniors, and we thank
you for holding the hearing on February 26, 2019, to highlight rising
prescription drug prices. AARP, with its nearly 38 million members in
all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories is a
nonpartisan, nonprofit, nationwide organization that helps people turn
their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities
and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as
healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning,
affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse.
Prescription drug prices are a high priority for AARP and all older
Americans, as older adults are particularly vulnerable to high
prescription drug prices. Medicare Part D enrollees take an average of
4.5 prescriptions per month, and over two-thirds have two or more
concurrent chronic illnesses. When older Americans talk about the
impact of high prescription drug prices, they are often talking about
costs that they will face every year for the rest of their lives.
Most Medicare beneficiaries live on modest incomes, with an annual
median of just over $26,000. One-quarter have incomes of just over
$15,000. One-quarter have less than $15,000 in savings. This is not a
population that has the resources to absorb rapidly escalating
prescription drug prices, and many are simply unable to afford the
medications they need.
Unfortunately, older Americans have seen their prescription drug prices
skyrocket in recent years. About 30 years ago, the public was outraged
over a drug that cost less than $10,000 per year. We now have drugs
with prices approaching $1 million per year.
In 2015, the average annual cost for a single specialty drug used on a
chronic basis was $52,486--which is only slightly less than the median
household income in the United States.\1\ We strongly support efforts
to bring new treatments to market, but innovation is meaningless if
patients cannot afford to use the treatment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/ppi/2017/11/full-report-
trends-in-retail-prices-of-specialty-prescription-druqs-widely-used-by-
older-americans.pdf.
AARP has been tracking the prices of widely-used prescription drugs
since 2004. Our most recent Rx Price Watch Report focused on brand-name
drugs and found that their retail prices increased by an average of
8.4% in 2017--four times the rate of inflation. AARP's report also
examined how drug companies' relentless price increases add up over
time and found that the average annual cost of one brand-name drug--now
around $6,800--would have been just under $2,200 in 2017 if retail
price changes had been limited to general inflation between 2006 and
2017.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/ppi/2018/09/trends-in-
retail-prices-of-brand-name-prescription-druqs-year-end-update.pdf
The average annual price increases for brand name drugs have exceeded
the corresponding rate of inflation every year since at least 2006.
More importantly, this problem goes beyond a few bad actors: virtually
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
all of the manufacturers we track raise their prices every single year.
As a result, it is hardly surprising that our members consistently tell
us they cannot afford the medications they need and are forced to make
difficult choices as a result. Even less surprising is that they want
this situation to change. Last year, in AARP's 2018 Mid-Term Voter
Issues Survey, 92 percent of voters age 50 and older told us that
candidates' positions on lowering drug costs was important to them,
with 74 percent saying ``very important.''
Moreover, in a Kaiser 2018 Health Tracking Poll, prescription drug
prices topped the list of the public's priorities, with 90 percent
calling it an important priority, and 52 percent listing it as a ``top
priority.'' In that poll, a large majority (80 percent) of the public
reported perceiving prescription drug costs as ``unreasonable,'' a
share that has increased since 2015.
Today it seems that prescription prices are in a never-ending race to
the top. High priced specialty drug approvals have exceeded traditional
drug approvals since 2010, and the number of people using such drugs is
growing. Meanwhile, the research pipeline is full of products like
orphan drugs, biologics, and personalized medicines that face little
competition and will undoubtedly command even higher prices.
We have also seen massive increases in Medicare spending on
prescription drugs. Between 2005 and 2016, Medicare Part B drug
spending more than doubled from $12 billion to $29 billion. Total
Medicare Part D spending is approaching $150 billion. These escalating
costs will eventually result in higher taxes, cuts to vitally important
public programs, or both.
Current prescription drug price trends are simply not sustainable. High
and growing drug prices are affecting all Americans in some way. Their
cost is passed along to everyone with health coverage through increased
health care premiums, deductibles, and other forms of cost-sharing.
They are also driving larger cost increases for a variety of taxpayer-
funded programs. Meanwhile, drug companies are working very hard to try
to shift the blame to others in the health care system, leaving them
free to set incredibly high prices and increase them with little
restraint.
It is long past time for Congress to take action to rein in high drug
prices. Thoughtful bipartisan efforts to help reduce prescription drug
prices could save tens of billions of dollars for patients, taxpayers
and the U.S. health care system. More importantly, they will help
ensure that all Americans have affordable access to the drugs that they
need to get and stay healthy.
We look forward to working with this Committee to find solutions that
will lower prescription drug prices and costs for older Americans. If
you have any additional questions, feel free to contact me or have your
staff contact Amy Kelbick on our Government Affairs staff at
[emailprotected] or 202-434-2648.
Sincerely,
Joyce A. Rogers
Senior Vice President
Government Affairs
______
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP)
4500 East West Highway, Suite 900
Bethesda, MD 20814
Email: [emailprotected]
Phone: 301-664-8692
ASHP (American Society of Health-System Pharmacists) respectfully
submits the following statement for the record to the Senate Committee
on Finance hearing on ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for
Change, Part II.''
ASHP represents pharmacists who serve as patient care providers in
acute and ambulatory settings. The organization's nearly 50,000 members
include pharmacists, student pharmacists, and pharmacy technicians. For
more than 75 years, ASHP has been at the forefront of efforts to
improve medication use and enhance patient safety.
ASHP's vision is that medication use will be optimal, safe, and
effective for all people all of the time. A primary tenet of that
vision includes access to affordable medications needed to save or
sustain lives. Addressing the issue of skyrocketing drug prices,
including excessive price increases on commonly used generic
medications, is one of ASHP's highest and longstanding public policy
priorities. According to a Kaiser Health Tracking Poll, 1 in 4
Americans cannot afford their medications.\1\ Poor access to
medications can lead to increased morbidity and mortality, and can
cause healthcare costs to increase.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ DiJulio, Bianca, et al. ``Kaiser Health Tracking Poll: August
2015.'' The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 20 Aug. 2015,
www.kff.org/health-costs/poll-finding/kaiser-health-tracking-poll-
august-2015/. Accessed February 10, 2019.
ASHP has been proactively addressing challenges related to the rapid
increase of prescription drug pricing on several fronts, including
working with like-minded stakeholders and educating members of Congress
about the unsustainable burdens faced by patients, healthcare
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
providers, and the entire healthcare system.
ASHP is a lead member of the Steering Committee of the Campaign for
Sustainable Rx Pricing (CSRxP), a coalition of prominent national
organizations representing physicians, consumers, payers, hospitals,
health systems, and patient advocacy groups. CSRxP has developed a
policy platform promoting market based solutions supported by three
pillars: competition, value, and transparency.
The goal of the campaign is to identify policy options that have
bipartisan support and, therefore, a greater likelihood of passage. To
that end, CSRxP focuses on policies to incentivize a more competitive
marketplace to help stimulate lower drug prices. The campaign has also
expressed support for efforts to loosen restrictions that prevent
generic drug companies from obtaining the samples necessary to
manufacture a competing product.
The price increases have placed enormous budgetary pressure on
healthcare organizations, including hospitals and health systems. ASHP,
along with the American Hospital Association (AHA) and the Federation
of American Hospitals (FAH), recently released a report on the impact
that the cost of and access to prescription drugs are having on
hospital budgets and operations.
Specifically, the report showed that:

Average total drug spending per hospital admission increased by
18.5% between fiscal years (FY) 2015 and FY2017.

Outpatient drug spending per admission increased by 28.7%, while
inpatient drug spending per admission increased by 9.6%, between FY2015
and FY2017.

Hospitals experienced price increases of over 80% across
different classes of drugs, including those for anesthetics, parenteral
solutions, and chemotherapy.

Over 90% of surveyed hospitals reported having to identify
alternative therapies to manage spending.

One in 4 hospitals had to cut staff to mitigate budget
pressures.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NORC at the University of Chicago. ``Recent Trends in Hospital
Drug Spending and Manufacturer Shortages'' (2019), https://www.aha.org/
system/files/2019-01/aha-drug-pricing-study-report-01152019_1.pdf.
Accessed 25 Feb. 2019.
ASHP does not collect, store, or report drug pricing information.
However, we continually hear from pharmacy leaders in hospitals and
health systems that sudden, inexplicable, and unpredictable price
increases in connection with some of the most commonly used, long
standing generic medications are becoming more prevalent--and are
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
occurring on a nationwide basis.
As there is no single solution to spikes in the prices of certain
drugs, there is no single cause either. In this statement, we address
four additional issues as they relate to drug pricing: competition,
Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS), Direct and Indirect
Remuneration (DIR Fees), and the 340B Drug Pricing Program.
COMPETITION
In particular, ASHP would like to learn more about the marketplace
dynamics that could contribute to this issue, as we have worked
diligently to address the issue of drug shortages for nearly 15 years.
Although drug shortages are caused by a number of factors, we have
observed that drugs in short supply made by only one or two
manufacturers often result in higher-than-normal prices. If, for
example, there is a lack of competition in the generic market place, we
urge the committee to look at ways to stimulate more marketplace
presence. ASHP supports bills such as S. 64, the ``Preserve Access to
Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act.'' This bipartisan bill would
potentially increase competition by prohibiting companies from engaging
in ``pay-to-delay'' tactics to stifle generic and biosimilar entry into
the market.
RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION STRATEGY (REMS)
ASHP recognizes that there may be limited circumstances in which
constraints on the traditional drug supply system may be appropriate
for reasons of patient safety, including through the use of
manufacturer-driven REMS. However, we believe that REMS should never be
used to artificially inflate drug prices, nor should REMS interfere
with the professional practice of pharmacists, physicians, nurses, and
other providers. We believe that there may be current cases in which a
manufacturer-
driven REMS using restricted distribution is causing higher prices for
those drugs, having adverse effects on patient access, and delaying
treatment. In some cases, there may be evidence to suggest that the use
of restricted or limited distribution channels has resulted in the
inability of a potential competitor to acquire enough of a drug to
conduct the required testing to bring a generic competitor to market.
For this reason, ASHP thanks Chairman Grassley for introducing S. 340,
the ``Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples
(CREATES) Act of 2019.'' The CREATES Act will help ensure that brand-
name pharmaceutical companies cannot manipulate regulatory rules to
prevent competition, which is essential for patient access to
affordable medications. Additionally, we recommend that Congress
require the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to investigate
restricted distribution under a REMS as a means to artificially
increase drug prices and limit access to critical medications.
Restricting distribution of medications is often a means to push
patients to a specific purchasing channel, which in some cases
increases not only their out-of-pocket costs, but also systemic costs.
Further, restricted distribution networks can complicate patient access
to critical medications, potentially disrupting care.
DIRECT AND INDIRECT REMUNERATION FEES (DIR FEES)
Many factors contribute to high drug product costs; addressing the
problem is made difficult by lack of transparency about the marketplace
for those products. For example, DIR fees and other rebates negotiated
by pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) make it difficult to determine the
actual cost of a drug. DIR fees are a growing nationwide concern among
pharmacies that dispense medications in a community pharmacy or
outpatient clinic setting. Created under the Medicare Part D Program,
DIR fees were originally intended as a way for CMS to account for the
true cost of the drug dispensed, including any manufacturer rebates.
Often these rebates were unknown until the drug was dispensed and the
claim adjudicated. Moreover, the fees themselves, which are often
arbitrary in nature, have mushroomed over the past decade, to the point
that pharmacies regularly see annual DIR totals in the tens of
thousands of dollars.
Recently, a concerning trend has emerged in which pharmacy benefit
managers (PBMs) have begun to charge DIR fees to their pharmacy
providers. Under this scenario, PBMs are inappropriately applying their
own plan performance measures as a way to assess fees on pharmacies.
This is problematic for the following reasons:

It is an arbitrary and unintended application of quality
measures meant for total plan performance as opposed to pharmacy-level
metrics.

The quality measures applied tend to be based on maintenance
medications such as blood pressure medications or medications used to
treat diabetes. These measures were never intended to be applied to
specialty medications or to other specialized disease states such as
oncology, yet PBMs assess DIR fees against the gross reimbursement for
all prescriptions received by pharmacy providers, not just maintenance
medication s.

Pharmacy providers are essentially being penalized with backdoor
fees without any requirement that PBMs define, justify, or explain
these charges to providers and to CMS.
DIR fees assessed on pharmacies providing specialty medications have
been especially hard-hit, due to the fee structure. Fees could be a
flat rate of per dollar per claim or a percentage (typically 3-9%) of
the total reimbursement per claim. Using the percentage-based
structure, the fees would increase markedly for specialty drugs, which
are typically much more expensive than maintenance medications,
sometimes resulting in thousands of dollars. A 9% fee on a drug costing
$100,000 is $9,000. Additionally, these fees are assessed
retroactively, sometimes months after the claim has been adjudicated,
providing no recourse for the pharmacy impacted by the assessment.
The result of imposing DIR fees has led to higher cost-sharing
responsibilities for Medicare beneficiaries, which have, in turn,
caused more of these beneficiaries to enter the Part D donut hole,
where the patient is solely responsible for the cost of the drug. Along
with the higher costs absorbed by patients, adherence rates tend to be
lower among Medicare beneficiaries who are in the donut hole and may
not have the financial resources to pay for their medications. This is
in stark contrast to the very reason DIR fees targeting manufacturer
rebates were created--so that savings could be passed on to patients.
Pharmacies are not alone in their concern. In January 2017, CMS
published a fact sheet expressing concern over DIR fees and cited those
fees as contributing to increased drug costs, which, in turn, increased
patients' out-of-pocket spending and Medicare spending overall.\3\
Additionally, questions remain as to whether Part D plan sponsors have
the authority to assess these fees on pharmacies. There are no
references to DIR fees collected on pharmacies in either the Part D
statute or corresponding CMS regulations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Fact sheet, ``Medicare Part D--Direct and Indirect Remuneration
(DIR).'' Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 19 January. 2017,
https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/medicare-part-d-direct-and-
indirect-remuneration-dir. Accessed February 10, 2019
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ASHP's professional policy on DIR fees is as follows:
To advocate that payers and pharmacy benefit managers be
prohibited from recovering direct and indirect remuneration
fees from pharmacies on adjudicated dispensing claims; further,
To oppose the application of plan-level quality measures on
specific providers, such as participating pharmacies.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ASHP Policy 1814, ``Direct and Indirect Remuneration Fees.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
For 25 years, the federal 340B program has allowed safety-net hospitals
``to stretch scarce Federal resources as far as possible, reaching more
eligible patients and providing more comprehensive services.'' This
program has been essential to expanding access to lifesaving
prescription drugs and comprehensive healthcare services to low-income
and uninsured individuals, at no cost to the federal government. The
federal 340B program is not causing high drug prices. The program
accounts for less than 5% of annual drug purchases in the United
States, while safety-net providers give 30% of the care. There are many
contributing factors to higher drug costs, but there is no objective
evidence that the program has increased overall drug pricing. In fact,
the 340B program is revenue-neutral, benefiting patients without
increasing costs for federal payors.
The federal 340B program enables these hospitals to serve their
communities by providing vital care such as:

Free or lower-cost medications to patients.

Programs to increase medication adherence, including clinical
pharmacy services to high-risk patients who are on multiple and/or
complex medications.

Increased access to primary care.

Screenings and preventive care services to detect health
problems early and decrease morbidity and mortality, as well as to
decrease healthcare costs and hospital admissions.
The federal 340B program is at risk because of a recent change in
Medicare payment policy that reduces payment from average sales price
plus 6 percent to average sales price minus 22.5 percent. Cuts of this
magnitude undermine the intent of the program, reducing resources that
hospitals use to expand access to care and services to vulnerable
communities. Given the increasingly high cost of pharmaceuticals, the
federal 340B program provides critical support to the entities eligible
to participate in the program.
CONCLUSION
ASHP thanks the Committee on Finance for holding this important
hearing. ASHP remains committed to working with Congress and industry
stakeholders to ensure that patients have affordable access to
lifesaving and life-sustaining medications.
______
Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Dirksen Senate Office Bldg.
Washington, DC 20510-6200
Tuesday, February 26, 2019
The Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs (CAPD) appreciates the
opportunity to submit the following statement for the record.
Overview
CAPD is a diverse group of employers, unions, public sector employees
and retirees and the pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) they partner with
to provide more affordable prescription drug coverage for millions of
Americans.
Today, too many patients and families are struggling to pay for the
medications they need. It's no surprise that a recent Politico/Harvard
Chan School of Public Health poll showed that 80 percent of Americans
see high prescription drug prices as a top priority for the new
Congress and the Administration.
The Role of PBMs in Lowering Costs
In the face of rising drug prices, PBMs partner with employers, unions,
public sector retirees and other organizations who purchase health care
to help manage prescription drug coverage for millions of Americans. By
negotiating with drug companies and providing patient-centered tools to
improve care and help lower out-of-pocket costs, PBMs save over $900
per person each year.
In addition, PBMs are expanding visibility into drug prices by enabling
doctors and patients to see the price of various medicines at the point
of prescribing, based on the individual's specific drug benefits. With
this information, physicians switch to a more affordable medicine
nearly 20 percent of the time when clinically equivalent alternatives
are offered through UnitedHealth Group's RTBT, PreCheck MyScript. In
another example, CVS Health's Real Time Benefits tool has saved
patients an average of $120 to $130 per fill.
Drug Company Prices Are the Problem
Although there have been many ideas proffered about how to address the
rising prices of medicines, CAPD believes that we first need to address
the root problem: prices set by drug makers. Drug companies alone set
their prices and they are rising at an unsustainable rate. In fact,
drug companies have raised prices already in 2019 on hundreds of
medicines. And, what's worse is that this is repeat behavior. Drug
companies often raise those prices multiple times a year for the exact
same product. Over the last five years, prices increased on the top 20
most prescribed brand-name drugs for seniors by an average of 12
percent each year, which is significantly above the annual rate of
inflation. The truth is simple: Drug companies hike their prices
because they can. When they do so, millions of patients pay more at the
counter.
Drug companies, hoping to avoid scrutiny and sustain high profits, are
pointing the finger at every other industry except themselves.
According to drug companies, the reason why drug prices are so high
isn't because they keep raising prices, or abuse the patent system, or
make by far the highest profits in health care--it's everyone else's
problem, not theirs.
In today's testimony, we will likely hear a common refrain from drug
companies: part of the reason that drug prices are so high are because
of the rebates that they are forced to give to PBMs. But the problem
with this argument is that, according to a recent study, there is
little correlation between prices drug companies set for their drugs
and the rebates negotiated by PBMs across 23 major drug categories.
What's more, in Medicare Part D, even after accounting for rebates, the
costs of brand name drugs still increased 62% from 2011 to 2015.
All parties need to come to the table to make prescriptions more
affordable and accessible to the patients who need them--but nothing
will be done if pharma refuses to even pull up a chair and address the
problem where it starts: their high prices. We hope Congress will use
this hearing as an opportunity to ask the pharmaceutical industry to
answer for these increases.
Pharma's Gamesmanship Reducing Competition to Keep Prices High
One way to meaningfully lower drug prices for patients is to stop the
gamesmanship of the patent and regulatory systems that drug companies
use to maintain their monopoly pricing power and keep lower-cost
generic alternatives from entering the market.
Brand drug manufacturers exploit the FDA Risk Evaluation and Mitigation
Strategies (REMS) program to prevent generic drug makers from accessing
needed samples, costing the U.S. health care system $5.4B each year.
The CREATES Act, which passed out of the Senate Judiciary Committee
last year, is a targeted, market-based, bipartisan solution to the
longstanding problem of brand name pharmaceutical companies denying
generic manufacturers access to the samples they require to conduct
necessary equivalence testing to bring their product to market.
Another way brand drug manufacturers game the patent and regulatory
system is through ``pay-for-delay'' deals, in which drug makers engage
in anticompetitive patent settlements with potential generic
competitors, resulting in $3.58 in higher drug costs each year. In the
most high-profile example of these abuses, drug maker AbbVie last year
reached agreements with Amgen, Samsung Bioepis and Mylan to delay entry
of a lower-cost biosimilar version of the drug to 2023 in the United
States.
A third example of gamesmanship by brand drug manufacturers is
evergreening, in which generic competition is delayed by additional
patents on minor variations of the original drug for the clear purpose
of extending monopoly protection. While these tweaks often do not
convey enhanced clinical benefits to the patient, they do extend the
time period during which drug manufacturers can continue to control
pricing by preventing competition. For example, best selling drug
Humira to treat rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis is protected by over
100 patents and the product may not face any competition until as late
as 2034.
We encourage Congress to explore proposals that target patent and
regulatory abuses by drug companies in order to lower drug prices for
patients.
Conclusion
Simply put, a patient cannot be helped by a drug they cannot afford. We
ask today that Congress once and for all refuse to accept drug
manufacturers' excuses for high prices and take steps to put an end to
the patent and regulatory abuses that keep prices artificially high.
We believe the time to act is now. CAPD is committed to working with
Congress and other stakeholders on this and other solutions to
meaningfully lower prescription drug prices for all Americans. We look
forward to supporting this critical effort.
Debra Barrett
Executive Director, Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs
Contact:
Meghan Scott
Spokesperson, Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs
[emailprotected]
(202) 341-2060
What They're Saying: Don't Let Pharma Off the Hook
On January 29, the Senate Finance Committee held a hearing, ``Drug
Pricing in America: A Prescription for Change.'' During the hearing,
both Senators and witnesses discussed drug companies' high prices and
their anti-competitive actions.
DRUG COMPANIES' HIGH PRICES

Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa): ``I've also heard from seniors
who have seen their prescriptions increase month after month for no
apparent reason. And I've heard stories about people reducing their
life-saving medicines...to save money. This is unacceptable. . . . But
other drugs are creating problems as well, that is why tackling high
prescription drug costs is one of Senator Wyden's and my first priority
on this committee.''

Ranking Member Ron Wyden (D-Oregon): ``So there's no shortage of
evidence about what the problems are. The companies have unchecked
powers to set prices on their own, and often it's to meet Wall Street's
expectations rather than meet demand in the market.''

Mark Miller, The Arnold Foundation: ``The revenues that come out
of the United States exceed R&D by something like 70, 75 percent. . . .
So the first point is when people say R&D is driving these prices,
there is a big disconnect in there. . . . We found many companies in
which they're spending much more on advertising, marketing and other
administrative expenses than they are on R&D.''

Peter Bach, Memorial Sloan Kettering: ``Prices for monopoly
goods such as these are determined by the market in which they are
sold, not the other way around. . . . Please realize that these drugs
do not inherently cost $1 million any more than they inherently cost
$1.''

Kathy Sego, mother of a child with diabetes: ``As a mother, I
would probably say to them--I hope you know that there are people who
are going without their medication, and because they're going without
their medication they're at risk of dying. And how can you be OK with
that? . . . That should never be a decision that a person needs to
make. And unfortunately, it is.''
GAMESMANSHIP AND ANTICOMPETITIVE PRACTICES

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, American Action Forum: ``We have some very
isolated instances of cost associated with off-patent sole-source
drugs. And in those circumstances, it appears that firms are able to
take advantage of their market power and raise the prices of drugs
sharply. This strikes me as a fundamental anti-competitive act that
ought to be investigated.''

Senator Robert Menendez (D-New Jersey): ``Manufacturer coupons,
many suggest, distort spending. . . . Who's winning with these
coupons?'' Peter Bach: ``I can assure you we know who's winning and
it's the people who are printing the coupons . . . the reality is
they're artificial price supports.''

Senator Maggie Hassan (D-New Hampshire): ``We've seen a lot of
bad actors gaming the system over the years, really to pad their
pockets. There are countless ways drug companies take advantage of
loopholes and taxpayers end up footing the bill.''

Mark Miller: ``We need to curb the anticompetitive behaviors of
manufacturers and inject competition back into the marketplace.
Manufacturers benefit from taxpayer-funded NIH research and from
government granted monopolies. And naturally, they devote resources to
protecting those monopolies.''
AffordablePrescriptionDrugs.org
______
Letter Submitted by Linda George
March 4, 2019
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Dirksen Senate Office Bldg.
Washington, DC 20510-6200
RE: ``Drug Pricing in America,'' Senate hearing held on February 26,
2019
Dear Finance Committee:
On Wednesday January 23, 2019, I gave myself my last weekly
injection of Humira, which had helped my mobility due to psoriatic
arthritis. I have done very well for the past two years with this
drug--one typically requiring a biweekly 40mg syringe injection. But I
just started a new medication, an infusion administered in my doctor's
office by an outsourced nurse who's not part of the practice.
I needed to switch to the infused medication because on March 1st--
when I became eligible for Medicare--Humira would increase from $5/
monthly under our previous private insurer, Anthem Blue Cross, to a
prohibitive $800+ per injection with Medicare Part D coverage. Bottom
line: Medicare does not cover self-injections. Because an infusion
would be administered in my rheumatologist's office, it is 100% covered
as a medical procedure through Part B via Medicare. Now, I understand
why Humira's advertisements, invading my television screen no matter
what time or what channel I watch, always feature younger people
engaged in various physical activities.
When I needed information about how to navigate this insurance
morass, I called my Humira ambassador, an AbbVie employee who serves as
a liaison between the consumer and the company. She assured me that I
may be covered if I submitted my tax returns to the company's
foundation. Evidently if I make less than $65,000, through the
company's assistance program, the parent company's foundation pays a
portion of the thousands needed to offset consumers' exorbitant cost of
this drug; however, regardless of my income, I have a huge problem
submitting my tax statements to anyone--except to my trusted accountant
and the IRS.
It seems AbbVie puts some big money into tiers of bureaucracy
through advertising, marketing, and supporting a foundation based on
employees forced to donate a percentage of their income. In addition,
whenever a consumer needs to have the simplest question answered by the
company, instead of AbbVie offering an 800 phone number, that consumer
must first enroll in the ``Ambassador Program,'' then wait for their
designated ambassador to return the call. I've had two ambassadors so
far, and each seems more than willing to keep me on the phone for an
extended time, asking all kinds of questions, as if padding their own
positions by calling consumers on a monthly basis. I'd much prefer that
these ambassadors work to figure out ways to reduce the drug's cost, so
consumers like me can afford it.
Switching to new medication certainly had caused me some angst. I
had no sense of how I will respond to the new infusion. Based on
history, I've had my share of side effects during the 38 years I've
been dealing with arthritis. I have trouble with drugs that are
ingested through the GI tract. I also have had two different cancers, a
risk accompanying many of the biologic arthritis medications. In
addition, I've had some serious adverse reactions to medications,
requiring hospitalization. Lucky for me, the new infusion, 100% covered
by Medicare Part B, seems to be working well.
Despite having this ailment, I consider myself to be healthy, doing
whatever possible to maintain whatever I can do to stay well to
overcome arthritis' swelling, fatigue, and pain that has challenged me
physically and mentally. I probably have had more knee aspirations and
steroid injections than some Olympic athletes. My Fitbit gets a daily
workout. Even after trying many alternative treatments in search of a
solution, Humira seemed to help me resume a normal life. And for that,
I was grateful.
AbbVie Chairman and CEO Richard A Gonzalez stated at the U.S.
Senate Finance Committee on February 26, 2019, ``We believe it is
important that discussions about access and affordability include a
focus on how to alleviate Medicare Part D out-of-pocket burdens above
and beyond just lowering list prices.'' I must raise the question to
AbbVie: What is the company doing internally to cut costs for
consumers?
I am hoping that you will help address the mounting bureaucratic
issues surrounding health care in America that make it challenging for
consumers to afford and navigate. Please feel free to reach out to me
if you need more information or assistance in any way.
Yours,
Linda George
cc: Senator Patrick Toomey
Senator Bob Casey
Attorney General Josh Shapiro
______
Statement of Robin K. Huszagh
February 26, 2019
After listening to the hearing today on C-SPAN, I wanted to share my
situation with you as a patient being forced to pay the full
``negotiated'' price for Humira and Enbrel. My husband and I are self-
employed and self-insured. We must purchase health insurance through
the independent ``retail'' market. I specifically renewed a
grandfathered ``retail'' PPO health insurance policy we've had since
2010 for our family of 3, now priced at $2,166.00/month, so that could
get the specialty formulary I needed to treat my Rheumatoid Arthritis
at an affordable price and continue to see my doctors. To my distress,
the Insurer (BCBS) and Pharmacy Benefit Manager (Prime Therapeutics)
altered the PPO plan's pharmacy benefits (cost sharing details) after
the plan commenced, leaving me with an expensive policy that no longer
covers my expensive specialty formulary at an affordable price. Unlike
typical commercial employer-based group policies, once I needed the
expensive specialty formulary, my independent retail PPO policy was
switched into a restricted pharmacy network with only one mail-order
supplier and an ``Accumulator Adjustment Program.'' The Insurer/PBM
also blocked the use of drug manufacturer's discount coupons and
programs completely (worth $12,000 to $16,000 per year in my case) so
that a drug that used to cost me $5.00 to $10.00 per month with a
manufacturer's coupon now costs between $5356 to $6652 per month, the
negotiated contract rate between the insurer and the drug manufacturer.
My deductible was raised from $2600 to $5200 for a 20% coinsurance
responsibility and $11,200 out-of-pocket max for full benefits. The
insurer added a second review process in 2019 for any drug with a
contract rate of $5000/month or higher, in addition to the one put in
place in 2018 as part of a ``step therapy'' restriction/review. In 2019
the price for both Humira and Enbrel jumped to over $5000 per month and
the insurer has stated their ``secondary review'' would allow them to
deny benefits for these drugs even though the policy states they are
approved formularies.
At the current premium rate, paying for insurance and an expensive
formulary has been financially challenging to say the least and has
caused us to take an early withdrawal from our IRA. I contacted the
Illinois Department of Insurance and asked why insurers can change
pharmacy benefits mid-year and weren't required to document the
specific cost-sharing and pharmacy details on all insurance policy
documents, so benefits are locked in for the year. I was told those
details are NOT a requirement for retail plans, and pharmacy benefit
changes are allowed to occur throughout the life of the contract which
also includes medication price changes. So, if a consumer buys a policy
based on access and pricing for a particular drug, there is no
guarantee the terms will remain in effect for the full contract year. I
was never notified of the changes even after contacting the insurer. I
hadn't realized any changes until I went to the pharmacy to pick up a
prescription and hit the payment ``brick wall''!
The Network Transparency Act of 2019 was passed in Illinois, however
that only set policy guidelines for ``notification requirements'' to
the policy holder if a particular provider pulls out of a network but
doesn't address the insurer's ability to change a policy's pharmacy
benefits mid-year, leaving the policy holder with a shocking bill. The
contract price for Humira went up 9% in January, the cost of my PPO
policy went up 9% in 2019, and now I'm required to pay a higher
premium, higher out-of-pocket max, and the full price for Humira
without the use of manufacturer's discount programs. Patients with
employer-based group plans who are already benefiting from employer
cost-sharing perks are allowed the use of discount programs and coupons
at the point of sale (the pharmacy) because the insurer and the
employer never know the coupon is being used as a form of payment at
the retail pharmacy location. The coupon value pays for the drug and
that hidden payment is applied to the user's deductible. Those who
benefit from these programs do not care what the list price or the
negotiated price is for a high-priced drug because they never have to
actually pay it, the insurer pays for it because deductibles and out-
of-pocket limits are met early in the year. Those with commercial group
plans obtain specialty formularies for $5 to $10 per month. I have to
pay the full price. The change in my PPO policy was intentionally made
by the insurer to ensure I personally pay the full cost of the drug for
as long as possible. They do not want me to get assistance from Pharma
to reach my deductible or maximum. There is no relief in sight for the
independently insured who have no employer or government subsidies and
actually pay the full high price for each medication and monthly
insurance premiums. With the majority of Americans getting health
insurance perks from their employer and using drug coupons, there is no
incentive for drug manufacturers to ever lower list prices.
______
Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility (ICCR)
475 Riverside Drive, Suite 1842
New York, NY 10115
(212) 870-2295
www.iccr.org
March 12, 2019
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and Members of the Committee:
ICCR is a coalition of over 300 global institutional investors
representing more than $400 billion in managed assets. Leveraging our
equity ownership in some of the world's largest and most powerful
companies, ICCR members regularly engage management to identify and
mitigate social and environmental risks resulting from corporate
operations and policies. While ICCR members never shy away from making
the moral case for action, our fundamental proposition as investors is
that responsible and sustainable business practices--and a strong
corporate culture of ethics--are in the long-term interest of
companies, investors and communities.
ICCR members have a long-standing history of engagement with
pharmaceutical companies on issues of price restraint, equitable
pricing strategies, anti-competitive practices, marketing policies and
practice, as well as disclosure of R&D expenditures (e.g., report on
the number of products in the R&D pipeline that are new versus enhanced
versions of existing products) and lobbying/political activities with
agendas that may restrict the access and affordability of medicines.
For decades, ICCR members have pressed drug companies for greater
disclosures on pricing structures as a way to promote greater access to
medicines. A lack of transparency around how drug prices are determined
has led to an industry-wide ethos of ``whatever the market will bear,''
which can lead to predatory pricing. We have asked companies to
disclose the rates of price increases year-to-year of their top selling
branded prescriptions drugs and to disclose the rationale and criteria
used for these price increases. We have also asked the companies to
assess the legislative, reputational and financial risks these
increases represent for the companies. However, that lack of
transparency still prevails.
Most recently, we have become increasingly concerned about
pharmaceutical companies' governance structures and their Boards'
ability to proactively mitigate risk related to high drug prices. A
2017 Credit Suisse analyst report stated that ``US drug price rises
contributed 100% of industry EPS growth in 2016'' and characterized
that fact as ``the most important issue for a Pharma investor today.''
In response to this, in 2018 ICCR members filed resolutions at the
companies highlighted in the 2017 Credit Suisse report asking ``the
Compensation Committee (the `Committee') to report annually to
shareholders on the extent to which risks related to public concern
over drug pricing strategies are integrated into [company's] incentive
compensation policies, plans and programs (`arrangements') for senior
executives. The report should include, but need not be limited to,
discussion of whether (i) incentive compensation arrangements reward,
or not penalize, senior executives for adopting pricing strategies, or
making and honoring commitments about pricing, that incorporate public
concern regarding prescription drug prices; and (ii) such concern is
taken into account when setting financial targets for incentive
compensation arrangements.'' In other words, are executives
incentivized to simply increase the price of drugs with no added
benefit in clinical efficacy simply to meet short-term revenue targets?
In particular, we are seeking better articulation of the goal-setting
process and the translation of those goals into incentive pay targets.
We would strongly encourage you, as members of the Senate Finance
Committee, to also seek written answers to the following questions:

How assumptions about price changes are incorporated when
revenue goals are set;

Whether any policy or guideline exists regarding the preferred
proportion of revenue growth derived from price increases;

Whether any policy exists regarding unplanned price increases
that would enable revenue goals or compensation revenue targets to be
met and whether the board has to approve such increases; and

How the compensation committee uses revenue goals or estimates
to produce the various target levels (e.g., minimum, target and
maximum) used to determine incentive payouts.
Mirroring Senator Wyden's concern that AbbVie's CEO's bonus is directly
tied to the sales of Humira, we have also been asking why Humira sales
are an appropriate measure for AbbVie's short-term incentive plan
(STIP), and whether the company considers pricing increases when
awarding STIP? AbbVie uses net revenue, income before taxes and Humira
sales as metrics for the annual bonus and earnings per share (EPS) as a
metric for certain long-term incentive awards to senior executives. For
Pfizer, it is concerning to investors that the company publicly states
that ``innovation in medicine has been and continues to be the
cornerstone of the company,'' yet no pipeline metrics are included in
the executive incentive agreements.
In addition to increased disclosure on incentive structures, we have
also asked companies to formalize board oversight of prescription drug
pricing risk. For example, what is Pfizer's board oversight of drug
pricing, or lack thereof, which may have led to the settlement of the
co-pay kickback investigation and drug shortages due to manufacturing
or market issues. A 2018 Credit Suisse report highlighted AbbVie as
among the companies most at risk from specialty pricing pressures in
commercial insurance. Humira, which accounted for 65% of AbbVie's
revenues in 2017 now faces competition in Europe from biosimilars,
which are expected to cost less. Therefore, robust board oversight of
risks related to drug pricing would provide a valuable outside
perspective and help ensure that those risks are being managed for the
long term.
Lastly, we also recognize that the strategy to expand monopolies
without any meaningful new science is an unsustainable business model
that exacts a heavy cost on patients and on the systems in which they
seek care, and therefore, encourage companies to refrain from engaging
in anti-competitive practices.
As investors, we want the companies in which we invest to be successful
in the long term, with sustainable business models that deliver value
to customers and stakeholders. Because pharmaceutical companies derive
their social license to operate from their contribution to public
health, it is critical that their businesses--including their executive
incentives structures--reinforce, not undermine, that social contract.
After many years of investor engagement in an effort to promote greater
access and affordability of medicines, today we seriously question the
value pharmaceutical companies are delivering to their shareholders and
to the greater public.
If you have any questions, please contact, Meg Jones-Monteiro, Program
Director--Health Equity, at [emailprotected] or (212) 870-2984.
APPENDIX: 2019 ICCR EXECUTIVE INCENTIVES AND
DRUG PRICING RISK RESOLUTIONS
2018 Companies: AbbVie, Amgen, Biogen, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Eli Lilly
2019 Companies: AbbVie, Biogen, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Celgene, Johnson
& Johnson, Merck & Co, Pfizer, Vertex
Example 2019 Resolutions:
AbbVie (ABBV)
_______________________________________________________________________
RESOLVED, that shareholders of AbbVie Inc. (``AbbVie'') urge the
Compensation Committee (the ``Committee'') to report annually to
shareholders on the extent to which risks related to public concern
over drug pricing strategies are integrated into AbbVie's incentive
compensation policies, plans and programs (together, ``arrangements'')
for senior executives. The report should include, but need not be
limited to, discussion of whether (i) incentive compensation
arrangements reward, or not penalize, senior executives for adopting
pricing strategies, or making and honoring commitments about pricing,
that incorporate public concern regarding the level or rate of increase
in prescription drug prices; and (ii) such concern is considered when
setting financial targets for incentive compensation arrangements.
Supporting Statement: As long-term investors, we believe that senior
executive incentive compensation arrangements should reward the
creation of sustainable long-term value. To that end, it is important
that those arrangements align with company strategy and encourage
responsible risk management.
A key risk facing pharmaceutical companies is potential backlash
against high drug prices. Societal anger over exorbitant prices and
pressure over limited patients' access due to unaffordability may force
price rollbacks and harm corporate reputation.
We applaud AbbVie for committing not to increase prices by more than
10% for 2018, yet we are unaware of a like commitment for 2019 or
beyond. Moreover, we are concerned that the incentive compensation
arrangements applicable to AbbVie's senior executives may undermine any
such commitment.
AbbVie uses net revenue, income before taxes and Humira sales as
metrics for the annual bonus and earnings per share (EPS) as a metric
for certain long-term incentive awards to senior executives (2018 Proxy
Statement, at 31). A 2017 Credit Suisse analyst report stated that ``US
drug price rises contributed 100% of industry EPS growth in 2016'' and
characterized that fact as ``the most important issue for a Pharma
investor today.'' The report identified AbbVie as a company where price
increases accounted for at least 100% of EPS growth in 2016 (Global
Pharma and Biotech Sector Review: Exploring Future US Pricing Pressure,
Apr. 18, 2017, at 1). It has been noted that the company's 2018 9.7%
price increase for Humira could add $1.2 billion to the U.S. healthcare
system (https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/drug-price-hikes-a-few-bad-
actors-or-widespread-pharma?mkt_tok=eyJpljoiWWpZeFlt
RTBOMIZoTkRJNSlslnQiOiJhckk2UONqNXBxNOx2UCtvdVdldzZVZXRIUHIrSOx
ZOVRBNXdTV1FOeVNBSDMxb3NWUGJsRWtNcFROZmlPYmM5d2hXd3VuVOkld
GICelBTYmk2).
In our view, excessive dependence on drug price increases is a risky
and unsustainable strategy, especially when price hikes drive large
senior executive payouts. We believe that the company's strategy to use
``nursing support,'' which the California Department of Insurance
claims in its suit against the company to be largely a kickback scheme
to boost Humira sales, may have been better managed by leadership if
Humira sales were not an explicit part of the payment incentive plan
(https://www.law360.com/articles/1084008).
The disclosure we request would allow shareholders to better assess the
extent to which compensation arrangements encourage senior executives
to responsibly manage risks relating to drug pricing and contribute to
long-term value creation. We urge shareholders to vote for this
Proposal.
Merck & Co. (MRK)
_______________________________________________________________________
RESOLVED, that shareholders of Merck & Co., Inc. (``Merck'') urge the
Compensation and Benefits Committee to report annually to shareholders
on the extent to which risks related to public concern over drug
pricing strategies are integrated into Merck's incentive compensation
policies, plans and programs (``arrangements'') for senior executives.
The report should include, but need not be limited to, discussion of
whether (i) incentive compensation arrangements reward, or not
penalize, senior executives for adopting pricing strategies, or making
and honoring commitments about pricing, that incorporate public concern
regarding prescription drug prices; and (ii) such concern is considered
when setting financial targets for incentive compensation arrangements.
Supporting Statement: As long-term investors, we believe that senior
executive incentive compensation arrangements should reward the
creation of sustainable value. To that end, it is important that those
arrangements align with company strategy and encourage responsible risk
management.
We are concerned that the incentive compensation arrangements
applicable to Merck's senior executives may discourage them from taking
actions that result in lower short-term financial performance even when
those actions may be in Merck's best long-term interests. Merck has
committed to limit average price increases of its drugs to no more than
the rate of inflation (https://www.marketwatch.com/story/merck-to-
lower-price-of-hep-c-treatment-zepatier-by-60-commits-to-responsible-
pricing-2018-07-19), but incentive compensation arrangements may be
inconsistent with that commitment.
Merck uses revenue and pre-tax income as metrics for the annual bonus,
and earnings per share (EPS) is a metric for performance share units
granted after January 1, 2017 (2018 Proxy Statement, at 51, 61). A 2017
Credit Suisse analyst report identified Merck as a company where U.S.
net price increases accounted for at least 100% of 2016 net income
growth (Global Pharma and Biotech Sector Review: Exploring Future US
Pricing Pressure, Apr. 18, 2017, at 22).
In our view, risks to long-term value arise when large senior executive
payouts can be driven by price hikes. Attention may focus on both high
senior executive payouts and drug pricing, fueling public outrage. Ovid
Therapeutics CEO Jeremy Levin has argued that incentives to boost
short-term performance, such as EPS, lead executives to raise prices
(and rebates to middlemen), starve research and development and buy
back shares (https://www.biocentury.com/biocentury/strategy/2016-09-19/
why-jeremy-levin-says-executive-compensation-and-drug-pricing-must-).
Incentives may have societal implications, as one critic of high pay
for healthcare executives has noted: ``[I]f the most influential
executives of these companies are being paid to keep that [cost]
trajectory up, that's money that's being taken away from education or
infrastructure or other parts of the economy that may not be growing as
quickly, and maybe that we'd want to grow more quickly'' (https://
www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2017/07/26/539518682/as-cost-of-u-s-
heaIth-care-skyrockets-so-does-pay-of-heaIth-care-ceos).
The disclosure we request would allow shareholders to better assess the
extent to which compensation arrangements encourage senior executives
to responsibly manage risks relating to drug pricing and contribute to
long-term value creation. For example, it would be useful for investors
to know whether incentive compensation target amounts reflect
consideration of pricing pressures. We urge shareholders to vote for
this Proposal.
Pfizer (PFE)
_______________________________________________________________________
RESOLVED, that shareholders of Pfizer Inc. (``Pfizer'') urge the
Compensation Committee (the ``Committee'') to report annually to
shareholders on the extent to which risks related to public concern
over drug pricing strategies are integrated into Pfizer's incentive
compensation policies, plans and programs (``arrangements'') for senior
executives. The report should include, but need not be limited to,
discussion of whether (i) incentive compensation arrangements reward,
or not penalize, senior executives for adopting pricing strategies, or
making and honoring commitments about pricing, that incorporate public
concern regarding prescription drug prices; and (ii) such concern is
considered when setting financial targets for incentive compensation
arrangements.
Supporting Statement: As long-term investors, we believe that senior
executive incentive compensation arrangements should reward the
creation of sustainable value. To that end, it is important that those
arrangements align with company strategy and encourage responsible risk
management.
A key risk facing pharmaceutical companies is potential backlash
against high drug prices. Pfizer has been criticized for repeated price
increases, and in July 2018 President Trump called out ``Pfizer and
others'' in a tweet, saying they ``should be ashamed that they have
raised drug prices for no reason''; Pfizer then postponed planned
increases.
We are concerned that the incentive compensation arrangements
applicable to Pfizer's senior executives may discourage them from
taking actions, like foregoing price increases that result in lower
short-term financial performance even when those actions may be in
Pfizer's best long-term interests.
Pfizer uses revenue and earnings per share (EPS) as metrics for the
annual bonus and operating income as a metric for performance share
awards (2018 Proxy Statement, at 66, 68). A 2017 Credit Suisse analyst
report identified Pfizer as a company where U.S. net price increases
accounted for at least 100% of 2016 net income growth (Global Pharma
and Biotech Sector Review: Exploring Future US Pricing Pressure, Apr.
18, 2017, at 22). In its 2018 report, Credit Suisse characterized
Pfizer's 2017 10% net price increase as above average for the industry
and noted that its list price increases were the second highest (Global
Pharmaceuticals: Scoring Sensitivity to Trump's Reforms, May 25, 2018,
at 15, 20).
In our view, excessive dependence on drug price increases is a risky
and unsustainable strategy, especially when price hikes appear to drive
large senior executive payouts. Highlighting this connection, a March
2018 article carried the headline, ``Pfizer CEO Gets 61% Pay Raise--to
$27.9 Million--As Drug Prices Continue to Climb'' (https://
arstechnica.com/science/2018/03/amid-drug-price-increases-pfizer-ceo-
gets-61-pay-raise-to-27-9-million/; see also https://www.usnews.com/
opinion/articles/2017-08-30/bernie-sanders-take-on-big-pharma-and-
lower-prescription-drug-prices). We are concerned that large payouts
based on financial metrics that can be affected by pricing create risks
for Pfizer.
The disclosure we request would allow shareholders to better assess the
extent to which compensation arrangements encourage senior executives
to responsibly manage risks relating to drug pricing and contribute to
long-term value creation. For example, it would be useful for investors
to know whether incentive compensation target amounts reflect
consideration of pricing pressures. We urge shareholders to vote for
this Proposal.
______
National Association of Free and Charitable Clinics
1800 Diagonal Road, Suite 600
Alexandria, VA 22314
Nicole Lamoureux, President and Chief Executive Officer
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden and Members of the Committee,
my name is Nicole Lamoureux and I am the President and Chief Executive
Officer of the National Association of Free and Charitable Clinics.
Last month, I was sitting in the hearing room as the pharma executives
testified. While I applaud Congress for finally getting these
executives to speak, I noticed some important gaps in the conversation.
During the hearing, both Congress and the pharmaceutical executives
focused on a specific group of Americans: those with health insurance.
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Grassley opened the hearing by
describing how high list prices hurt ``those with high deductibles''
and ``taxpayers,'' but did not mention the uninsured. While we
understand that the committee's focus remains largely on health
programs within your jurisdiction that require significant federal
investments, we believe that by not addressing the high cost of
medication for the uninsured as well as the insured, the overall cost
of health care will continue to increase.
When medication costs are too high, uninsured individuals must forgo
their medication or split doses, and often end up needing the emergency
department for both the repercussions of missed prescriptions and for
primary care. Research shows that 75 percent of all emergency
department visits not resulting in admission are for non-emergencies
that should be treated outside of the emergency room (Hwang et al.
2012). Patients who lack insurance and access to primary care are often
forced to use the emergency room for routine medical needs. These
emergency room visits are expensive, contribute to overcrowding, and
drive up healthcare costs for everyone.
Currently, there are 27 million Americans without insurance--about 1 in
12 people--and that number is growing. I know this group well. These
are the people who receive access to health care and medication from
the 1,400 free and charitable clinics in our country. Free and
Charitable Clinics are safety-net health care organizations that
utilize a volunteer/staff model to provide a range of medical, dental,
pharmacy, vision and/or behavioral health services to economically
disadvantaged individuals. Such clinics are 501(c)(3) tax-exempt
organizations or operate as a program component or affiliate of a
501(c)(3) organization. Free or Charitable Clinics restrict eligibility
for their services to individuals who are uninsured, underinsured and/
or have limited or no access to primary, specialty or prescription
health care. Additionally, Free and Charitable Clinics receive little
to no state funding and no federal funding, do not receive HRSA 330
funds, and are not Federally Qualified Health Centers or Rural Health
Centers. Therefore, these clinics rely heavily on the generosity of
individual donors, foundations and grants as funding sources.
Even though our organizations do not receive federal funding, we are
impacted by every decision that is made at the federal level,
especially when it comes to medication affordability. In 2018, the
1,400 free and charitable clinics served 2 million Americans, with a
total of 6.3 million patient visits. In the most recent data reported
by our members, the number one concern for both our patient population
and their providers is the high cost of medication.
I understand why Medicaid and Medicare patients were the main focus of
the testimony, but the needs of millions of uninsured Americans are
also critical to the conversation about solving the pricing issues and
inequities of the current healthcare system. When Congress asked the
seven executives, ``Who pays list price?'' Merck CEO Ken Frazier
responded by saying, ``There's a small percentage of people who have no
insurance who could actually be charged the list price.'' He also said
that in our current system, ``The poorest and the sickest are
subsidizing others.'' Senator Daines summarized the issue this way: "So
the people who can afford it the least, arguably, are paying the list
price?''
Those who are paying the list price are our patients, the uninsured and
underinsured in this country. The current minimum price of $150 for a
vial of insulin is not affordable for a mother making the choice
between putting food on her table or paying for her prescription. Our
patients have no choice but to ration medications, taking lower doses
of them or stopping them altogether. We have no shortage of these
stories, from young adults eating less than they should to reduce the
amount of insulin they need to parents starving themselves to afford
insulin for their children. In our network of clinics, this is a lived
reality.
In a time when few issues are truly bipartisan, and health care
continues to become ever more divisive, the exponential growth of drug
prices is a rare issue that crosses the aisle. Needing insulin isn't
red or blue, nor is using an EpiPen or depending on an inhaler to
breathe. We need to harness this rare moment of unity and push for true
progress.
I know that Congress realizes how important it is to have the
conversation to make medication more affordable once and for all, so we
can fix this broken system. I want to make sure we get it right this
time around. America's free and charitable clinics try to catch the
people who slip through the cracks. If we don't stop this unchecked
rise in the cost of medications, these cracks will widen until they
threaten the foundation of our health care system.
I appreciate the opportunity to submit my comments to the hearing
record on behalf of the 2 million Americans who receive care at free
and charitable clinics and look forward to answering any questions that
the committee might have.
Works Cited:
Hwang, Liao, Griffin, and Foley. ``Do Free Clinics Reduce Unnecessary
Emergency Department Visits?'' The Virginian Experience Journal of
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 23 (2012): 1189-1204.
______
National Business Group on Health
20 F Street, NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20001
202-558-3000  Fax 202-628-9244
www.businessgrouphealth.org
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden and members of the Senate
Committee on Finance, thank you for the opportunity to submit a
statement for the record on the large employers' perspective on drug
pricing.
The National Business Group on Health (NBGH or the ``Business Group''),
whose members include 437 of the nation's largest employers, commend
the Committee's effort to take a holistic look at the root causes of
high and escalating drug prices. In addition to these, we anticipate
submitting comments on subsequent hearings within the Committee's
series on drug pricing.
Along with the government, taxpayers and families, employers have a
vested interest in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of health
care delivery, which includes the delivery of pharmaceuticals.
According to NBGH's 2019 Large Employers' Health Care Strategy and Plan
Design Survey, almost half, 49% of respondents are taking an activist
role in driving delivery system change.\1\ As part of this, more
employers are scrutinizing the role of the pharmaceutical supply chain,
as specialty pharmacy costs remain one of the top drivers of overall
health care trend. Particularly as the growth of high-deductible plans
over the past decade has put a spotlight on drug prices, employers have
become increasingly frustrated by complexity within the supply chain,
which could be described as a ``rebate-driven'' contracting model.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2019 Large Employers' Health Care Strategy and Plan Design
Survey, National Business Group on Health.
Nearly all employers believe the pharmaceutical supply chain model
needs to change:

14% believe it needs to be more transparent.

35% believe rebates need to be reduced.

49% believe the model needs to be overhauled and simplified.
Regarding the use of rebates as a mechanism to control drug costs:

75% do not believe drug manufacturer rebates are an effective
tool for helping to drive down pharmaceutical costs.

91% would welcome an alternative to the rebate-driven approach
to managing drug costs.
The rapid pace at which reforms are being considered within the
marketplace and by both legislative and regulatory bodies at the
federal and state levels is encouraging. A focus of the hearing, the
Administration's proposals to implement changes to how pharmaceutical
reimbursement and contracting is administered within Medicare Part Band
Part D illuminates the need and possibility that there are likely to be
multiple solutions that improve upon the current model within the
private and public sector. NBGH supports a model marked by
transparency, and one that removes incentives to consistently increase
prescription drug prices. However, we also urge cautious, thoughtful,
and analytical approaches that comprehensively evaluate the impact to
market dynamics for all supply chain stakeholders.
Below, we highlight NBGH's perspectives on two of the widely discussed
proposals. Our full comments on the International Pricing Index (IPI)
model can be found online. Additionally, we intend to provide full
comments on the rebate proposal by the April 8th deadline.
International Pricing Index (IPI) Model \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``International Pricing Index (IPI) Model,'' Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, accessed March 11, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

We must take a broad perspective to assure that public policy
decisions contribute to overall cost control and quality improvement
for all Americans. We commend the Administration's commitment to
lowering the cost of prescription drugs and encourage it to seek
solutions. However, we strongly recommend that whatever CMS adopts,
part of the consideration and criteria for evaluating the results must
be the impact on the private market and the 170 plus million people
covered by employers and insurers and not limited to the impact on
Medicare alone. If we as a nation are to succeed in controlling health
care costs, we must ensure that public policy decisions do not merely
``squeeze the cost balloon'' in one area only for it to expand and
exacerbate the problem in another area.

Our chief concern centers on the ANPRM's proposal to link
reimbursement rates to other nations' prices. Apart from the fact that
these nations determine prices differently, have different patent and
exclusivity models, and often vastly different incentives for
biosimilar utilization, we are concerned that the impact on prices for
the same pharmaceuticals in the US may rise in the private sector and
the market for biosimilars may be adversely impacted if Medicare adopts
this approach.
Rebate Reform Proposal \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for
Rebates Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe
Harbor Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager
Service Fees'' (Federal Register, February 6, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many large employers have already begun evaluating the utility of
point-of-sale rebates as part of their benefit design and a subset (29
percent) have them in place today. Thus, HHS's proposal picks up on the
momentum from large employers and, more importantly, underscores the
inefficiency of the pharmaceutical supply chain. Given the market
momentum on this issue, to both lower out-of-pocket costs for patients
and evaluate ways to simplify a complex system, the Business Group is
in favor of market-based solutions relative to point-of-sale rebates.
NBGH has the following serious concerns about proposals around rebates.
While the stated goal of these proposals is to lower prescription drug
prices and out-of-pocket costs for consumers by encouraging PBMs to
pass discounts from drug manufacturers directly on to consumers and
bring transparency to prescription drug market, we have various
concerns with the proposals including but not limited to the following:

The proposals focus on out-of-pocket costs only. The intent of
the proposed rule and companion legislation is to lower out-of-pocket
costs at the pharmacy counter and add needed pricing transparency to
the market. While we support the proposed increased transparency and
pricing relief for patients, we urge policy makers to avoid ``quick
fixes'' that focus only on out-of-pocket costs, as opposed to total
cost to the system. Focusing on out-of-pocket costs only has the
potential to mask root causes of price increases, potentially lead to
even higher increases over time, and drive the escalating trend on drug
expenditures.

Any changes in supply-chain contracting should not result in a
net increase in drug costs to any payor, nor windfall to any supply
chain stakeholder. Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access, the
Congressional Budget Office Commission (MACPAC) staff have noted that
the CMS Office of the Actuary (OACT) estimated a net increase in
Medicaid drug spending of $200 million over 10 years if the proposed
rebate rule is finalized. A large chunk, if not the largest chunk, of
this expected increase would come from the decline in inflation-based
rebates.\4\ Further, manufacturer claim liabilities through the
coverage gap discount program (CGDP) would be lower, which would
produce an overall substantial savings for
manufacturers.\5\, \6\ While savings is expected, that
savings should be realized comprehensively across both the supply and
demand sides of the pharmaceutical supply chain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``Proposed Safe Harbor Regulation Impact'' (Office of the
Actuary, August 30, 2018).
\5\ Manufacturer payments through the CGDP are expected to be about
$2 billion per year lower on average. When POS costs are lower, it
takes longer for he costs to accumulate toward the initial coverage
limit (ICL) and the TrOOP threshold. CGDP payments would be lower as
fewer members would be calculated as a percentage of a lower POS cost,
but the impact would vary by manufacturer and by plan sponsor.
\6\ ``Impact of Potential Changes to the Treatment of Manufacturer
Rebates'' (Milliman, Inc., January 31, 2019).

The proposals do nothing to address list prices. The proposed
rule ``intends'' and speculates that manufacturers might lower list
prices, but there is little assurance that manufacturers will offset
rebates with price reductions. In fact, at the hearing, not all CEOs in
attendance would affirmatively state this would be the case at all, due
to antitrust case law.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``Foley Hoag LLP white paper, ``Antitrust Implications of a
Proposed HHS Rule to Limit Manufacturer Rebates,'' accessed March 11,
2019.

The proposed timeline within the HHS proposal is arguably too
aggressive. PBMs have largely already concluded negotiations on price
concessions for plan year 2020 and are in the middle of actuarial
analysis to prepare bids. There is no way to renegotiate in time to
know the associated costs in order to bid properly, and it would be
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
impossible to retool the supply chain in such a short period of time.

Premiums will increase. The proposals are projected to increase
the cost of healthcare for those who don't use drugs having rebates,
through premium increases, while disproportionately decreasing costs
for those who do use drugs with discounts.
Thus, while we agree that the rebate-driven model is ripe for reform
and ineffective at controlling drug prices, we are concerned about the
unintended consequences associated with the proposals as written.
In addition to contracting concerns within the rebate-driven model,
there remains substantial opportunity for policy change relative to
prescription drug prices, most of which would encourage a more
competitive and dynamic market with correspondingly more affordable
prices.
Advance Policies to Promote More Affordable, Financially Sustainable
Prescription Drug Pricing
While many of the recommendations below are directed toward various
agencies in the Administration, several of them require Congressional
action. All of these policy recommendations are highlighted in the
National Business Group on Health's Issue Brief on Policy
Recommendations to Promote Sustainable, Affordable Pricing for
Specialty Pharmaceuticals.

Remove Uncertainties Surrounding Risk-based and Value-Oriented
Contracting and Implement Indication Specific Pricing and Reference
Pricing in Public Programs:
-
Consider exemptions for value-based contracts from Medicaid
best price requirements and clarify how drug makers and payers can
conceive of value-based contracts without triggering broader Medicaid
best price program implications.
-
Allow for variable pricing, where the price better reflects
the evidence for benefit.
-
Evaluate the usefulness and application of the existing
developed value frameworks and their potential to impact drug pricing
in public programs, as well as their overall utility to the health care
system.
-
Directly link reimbursement and improved patient outcomes.
-
Consider how drug makers and payers can enter into other
types of innovative VBP arrangements, such as indication-specific
pricing.
-
Implement reference pricing policies supported by clinical
evidence consistently across public programs, where possible.

Limit Reach of Medicare Part D Protected Classes:
-
Following the MedPAC's recommendations, the Congress and CMS
should limit legislative and regulatory restrictions on formulary
design within protected classes by modifying the Medicare Part D rules
to remove those protected classes where enough generic competition
exists, a change that would give private plans more freedom to control
their formularies and negotiate for expanded manufacturer rebates.
-
Specifically, CMS should resubmit its proposal to remove
antidepressants, antipsychotics, and immunosuppressants for transplant
rejection from the list of protected classes because, in these classes,
price reductions have been more closely linked with the availability of
generics than to their status as ``protected'' and stand firm against
industry-funded campaigns that seek to undermine the agency's data-
driven proposal to increase competitive pricing.
-
At a minimum, policy makers should evaluate the potential
anticompetitive influence of protected classes on the commercial
market, and specifically, evaluate the limitations imposed on private
payers' ability to negotiate competitive prices for drugs in the
protected classes due to market spillover.

Eliminate Perverse Payment Incentives Under Medicare Part B:
-
Eliminate financial incentives for prescribing more
expensive medicines, in more expensive settings.
-
Establish direct links between reimbursement and improved
patient outcomes.
-
Encourage manufacturers to assume some financial risk for
use of high-priced drugs.

Encourage the Uptake of Biosimilars:
-
Consider the utility of having an ``interchangeability''
distinction and potential alignment with the European biosimilars
model, which has no such distinction.
-
Work with stakeholders to disseminate provider and patient
education to firmly establish the safety and efficacy of biosimilar
drugs to their reference products, recognizing that key successes to
the uptake of biosimilar medicines in other countries was predicated on
the creation of trust and confidence among all the stakeholders
involved, such as prescribers, pharmacists, and patients.
-
Maintain payer autonomy to implement utilization management
tools for specialty pharmaceuticals, including tools that pertain to
biosimilar products.

Reform Permissive Patent and Exclusivity Protocols:
-
Reduce the market exclusivity period for biologics from 12
years to 7 years.
-
Eliminate or limit additive patent extensions and
exclusivity periods that serve only to extend monopoly power,
especially where there is limited, or no additional company investment
or patient value produced.
-
Develop sound policy that would discourage patent abuses
such as ``evergreening'' and ``product hopping.'' These policies may
include financial penalties, loss of exclusivity periods and/or reduced
patent terms for other products.
-
Refine the biosimilars patent dance to effectively
incentivize the use of the section 351(1) patent dispute resolution
provisions.

Reject anticompetitive ``quick fixes'':
-
As consumers find themselves paying more of their drug
costs, it's tempting to be lured into new policies which may only
further contribute to an anticompetitive climate. These policies may
include specialty drug price caps, out-of-pocket payment caps,
limitations on utilization management tools and mandated disclosure of
propriety information.
-
Additionally, a federal law permitting importation
nationwide could lead to some price reductions for both payors and
patients in the short-term but, as markets adapt, it is unclear what
the long-term effect on prices would be. It would also likely require a
significant boost in resources for the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) to monitor imports and assure safety.
The National Business Group on Health, representing 437, primarily
large, employers (including 70 of the Fortune 100) who voluntarily
provide valued health benefits and other health programs to over 55
million American employees, retirees, and their families, looks forward
to working with you on our shared goals for health care: lower costs,
improved access, and higher quality--umbrella goals we consider
inclusive of prescription drugs. Please contact Steven Wojcik, the
National Business Group on Health's Vice President of Public Policy, at
(202) 558-3012, if you would like to discuss our comments in more
detail or if we can provide additional information as the Committee
continues its evaluation of drug pricing.
Sincerely,
Brian J. Marcotte
President and CEO
______
National Coordinating Committee for Multiemployer Plans
815 16th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 737-5315
Michael Scott, Executive Director
The National Coordinating Committee for Multiemployer Plans (the
``NCCMP'') appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the
Committee on the issue of prescription drug pricing and the challenges
that multiemployer group health plans face in today's environment. We
also appreciate the efforts of the Committee to promote discussion of
solutions to America's problem of the high cost of prescription
medications.
Background on the Multiemployer Plans and the NCCMP
Multiemployer plans are a product of the collective bargaining process,
where at least one labor organization and two or more employers provide
health, pension and a variety of other employee benefits through
negotiated contributions to trust funds that are required by law to be
maintained for the ``sole and exclusive benefit'' of plan participants.
Multiemployer plans are jointly trusted by both labor and management
and are subject to applicable provisions of the Taft-Hartley Act,
ERISA, and the Internal Revenue Code. The NCCMP is the only national
organization devoted exclusively to protecting the interests of the
over 20 million active and retired American workers and their families
who rely on multiemployer plans for retirement, health, and other
benefits. The NCCMP is a nonprofit, non-partisan organization with
members, plans, and contributing employers in a broad range of
industries, including agriculture, building and construction, bakery
and confectionary, entertainment, health care, hospitality, longshore,
maritime, mining, retail food, service, steel, and trucking. The
NCCMP's purpose is to assure an environment in which multiemployer
plans continue their vital role in providing benefits to working men
and women.
Multiemployer health plans are often self-insured and plan sponsors
contract with both medical and pharmacy benefit managers to provide
administrative services. These plans provide benefits to both active
workers and their families, and to retirees. Consequently,
multiemployer plans will often contract with a Medicare Part D
Prescription Drug Plan or Medicare Advantage plan to provide
prescription drug and other benefits to retired participants.
Prescription Drug Prices Continue to Rise
Most multiemployer health plans provide prescription drug coverage to
active employees, dependents, and retirees. Prescription drug costs are
a significant part of health plan expenses. Multiemployer plan sponsors
have looked to a variety of means to lower drug prices. Strategies
include increased use of step therapy, prior authorization, quantity
limits, formularies (which exclude certain drugs) and other utilization
management techniques. However, prescription drug cost increases are
primarily driven by price increases, not increased utilization.\1\ Drug
price inflation is a significantly greater component of projected
prescription drug price trend than utilization. In addition, specialty
drug price increases are projected to be in the double digits for 2019,
a significant and concerning pattern because specialty drugs now
account for as much as 35 percent of total pharmacy spending.\2\ New
specialty brand drugs to treat serious illnesses contribute to the cost
increase, and there are limited opportunities to substitute generic
drugs in therapeutic classes dominated by single-source specialty brand
drugs. Consequently, plan sponsors cannot effectively control prices
through utilization controls alone.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2019 Segal Health Plan Cost Trend Survey, available at http://
www2.segalco.com/me-trend-survey-20l9.pdf.
\2\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Areas for Congressional and/or Regulatory Inquiry and Action
The NCCMP recommends that the Committee take action to promote
transparency in the rebate system while ensuring that action taken on
the rebate side of the pricing equation results in lower--not higher--
drug prices paid by plan sponsors and consumers. In addition, we
emphasize the NCCMP's commitment to eliminating the tax that penalizes
plan sponsors and workers for the high costs of health care (including
drug costs) beyond their control.
Rebates and Transparency
Rebates account for a substantial portion of the drug pricing equation.
Rebate offsets that are passed through to multiemployer plan sponsors
from pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) help to lower net plan cost
trends. However, multiemployer plans must aggressively monitor PBMs to
assure that rebates are actually passed through to the plan, and in
many cases, the rebate structure is opaque and impenetrable. Pricing
structures also change frequently, as can be seen by some of the PBMs
``market pricing'' strategies, which adjust prices, rebates, and
participant cost sharing based on market price variations for certain
drugs.
State legislators are increasingly attempting to rein in drug costs by
passing laws requiring greater transparency. However, those laws may
not be effective, either because the states cannot tackle the problem
alone, or the laws will be subject to multiple challenges by
pharmaceutical manufacturers and PBMs.
As a core principle of ERISA, employee benefit plan fiduciaries need
information concerning all compensation to be received by a service
provider and any conflicts of interest that may adversely affect the
service provider's performance under the contract or arrangement. In
2014, the NCCMP provided supporting testimony to the ERISA Advisory
Council, which was studying PBM Compensation and Fee Disclosure.\3\ At
that time, we suggested that plan fiduciaries would be well served if
PBMs were required to disclose all instances in which they receive
financial remuneration from drug manufacturers, retail pharmacy
providers, and data managers. The disclosures need to be sufficient to
allow trustees to assess whether, and to what extent, the services
offered by the PBMs are in the best interest of plan participants,
rather than simply furthering the financial interests of the PBM.
Transparency continues to be a concern to plan sponsors and efforts of
the Committee to increase transparency for rebates and financial
arrangements between PBMs and pharmaceutical manufacturers would assist
multiemployer plans in efforts to control prescription drug prices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-
us/erisa-advisory-council/2014-pbm-compensation-and-fee-disclosure.pdf.
More attention is being paid of late to the rebate system and the
important role that it plays in determining the prices that plan
sponsors and consumers pay for prescription drugs. But rebates are only
part of the equation. The list price that drug manufacturers set for
their prescription drugs is the starting point for the negotiation
between manufacturers and PBMs over rebates. More transparency in the
setting of list prices could help to put some downward pressure on
those prices. But if list prices continue to go up while rebates go
down, plan sponsors and consumers will end up paying more. As a result,
it is essential that any action taken to address the rebate structure
not have the unintended consequence of actually increasing what plan
sponsors and consumers pay for prescription drugs.
Eliminating the Unfair Tax on Health Plan Coverage
For decades before the enactment of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (ACA), the majority of Americans with health
coverage received their coverage through employment. This has remained
the case well after the ACA first went into effect. Today, over 181
million Americans have employment-based health coverage, which includes
coverage under multiemployer plans. The 40 percent excise tax under
Internal Revenue Code section 49801, enacted as part of the ACA,
threatens these hard-working Americans with a steep and unfair tax on
their health coverage. Sometimes popularly (although inappropriately)
referred to as the ``Cadillac plan'' tax, the original intent of the
tax was to impact plans with ``gold-plated coverage.'' In actuality,
however, the tax will have a much broader impact on even modest plans
as a result of underlying medical inflation.
Employers understand that quality health care is an investment in
employees and not simply a monetary benefit. At the same time, both
employers and employees recognize that the cost of health care cannot
become so great that it makes employers non-competitive. This
marketplace reality is the reason that the vast majority of private
plan sponsors have utilized cost containment strategies for decades to
manage and stretch finite compensation dollars as much as possible.
Unfortunately, the high and ever-increasing health care costs faced by
the private sector are directly amplified by the U.S. Government
through its own health care programs, statutes, and regulatory
requirements. As the largest provider and purchaser of health care in
the U.S. through Medicare and Medicaid, programs that collectively
spend more than $1.2 trillion annually,\4\ the U.S. Government's
longstanding policy of significantly under-compensating health care
providers results in these providers charging more to their private
sector clients in order to recoup their uncompensated federal expenses.
In this way, the private sector subsidizes Medicare, Medicaid, and the
U.S. Government by absorbing these uncompensated expenses through
higher costs and premiums.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ In 2017, Medicare spending grew 4.2% to $705.9 billion in 2017
and Medicaid spending grew 2.9% to $581.9; https://www.cms.gov/
research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-reports/
nationalhealthexpenddata/nhe-fact-sheet.html.
The simple fact is that the high costs of employment-based health plans
and medical inflation are not driven by employment based health plans
themselves, but by other factors, including the actions (and inactions)
of the U.S. Government. Congress should continue to work to address
medical care inflation, including rising drug costs, while maintaining
good health care outcomes and quality of care. Congress should not
penalize employers, health plans, or employees and their families
through unfair taxes. If the excise tax is imposed, the end result will
not be an overall reduction in health care costs, lower medical
inflation or higher federal tax revenue; rather it will be borne by
hardworking Americans through cost-shifting and foregoing needed care.
Additionally, as employment based healthcare is penalized, it will
become increasingly unavailable to those currently covered, which will
increase federal spending on subsidies and Medicare as a significant
portion of the currently covered workforce is eligible for these
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
programs.
NCCMP appreciates the actions Congress has taken in the past to help
prevent the imposition of the 40 percent excise tax by delaying it
twice, so that the effective date is now pushed back to 2022. Delays,
however, are not sufficient to prevent the harmful impact of this tax.
In calling for repeal, NCCMP joins the voices of a large, diverse
group, as evidenced by a recent letter to Congress signed by over 550
organizations representing such interests as public and private sector
employers across a wide range of industries, non-profit organizations,
chambers of commerce, unions, and patient groups. We support the bi-
partisan Middle Class Health Benefits Tax Repeal Act of 2019, recently
introduced in the Senate by Senators Heinrich (D-NM) and Rounds (R-SD)
and co-sponsored by many others, including members of this Committee.
We also support the House version of the bill, which was introduced in
January and which as of this writing has 229 co-sponsors, with growing
numbers.
The NCCMP recommends fully and immediately repealing the 40% excise tax
on employer sponsored health coverage and also opposes any efforts to
tax employees on their health care benefits.
______
Oxfam America
1101 17th Street, NW, Suite 1300
Washington, DC 20036
Tel +1 (202) 496-1180 | Fax +1 (202) 496-1190 | www.oxfamamerica.org
February 26, 2019
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and Members of the Committee,
Oxfam appreciates the Committee's sincere intention to ensure
affordable and accessible medicines for all who need them. We would
like to take this opportunity to bring the Committee's attention to our
recent investigation, Prescription for Poverty,\1\ illustrating how
four major pharmaceutical firms (three of whom are testifying before
the Committee at this hearing) may well be underpaying their US taxes
to the tune of $2.3 billion annually by systematically stashing their
profits in overseas tax havens. On top of these tax losses from
offshore tax avoidance, these companies likely benefitted significantly
from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA).\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Oxfam, ``Prescription for Poverty: Drug companies as tax
dodgers, price gougers, and influence peddlers,'' Sept. 2018 at https:/
/www.oxfamamerica.org/explore/research-publications/prescription-for-
poverty/.
\2\ Report of the Senate Finance Committee Democratic Staff,
``Trump Tax Law and the Health Care Industry: A $100 Billion Bonanza,''
April 17, 2018.
Here in the US and around the world, in rich and poor countries alike,
high drug prices are causing too many people to sacrifice their savings
or worse--their lives--to enrich executives at highly profitable and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
influential drug companies.
As is well known, these drug companies' very business model depends to
a large degree on American taxpayer dollars: to pay for essential
front-end drug research, to protect patents and intellectual property,
and to purchase their drugs through Medicare, and the Veteran's
Administration.
Yet, these same companies are undermining public trust (and their very
own business model) by steadily under-paying their taxes, in the US and
around the world. Scouring the companies' financials, we've found that
four major pharmaceutical firms--Abbott, Johnson & Johnson (JNJ), Merck
(MRK), and Pfizer (PFE)--alone appear to have deprived rich and poor
countries alike of around $3.7 billion of vital revenue that could have
been spent on vaccines, midwives, or health clinics. Because the
companies reveal little financial information about their subsidiaries,
Oxfam's investigation barely scratches the surface. Yet even a small
sampling reveals a striking degree of tax avoidance through profit-
shifting.
As the largest market for the four pharmaceutical companies, the United
States is the biggest loser from tax avoidance by these companies, to
the tune of an estimated $2.3 billion a year: $1 billion by JNJ, $589
million by Pfizer, $533 million by Merck, and $143 million by Abbott.
Together, this is enough to pay for health insurance for nearly a
million low-income children in the US.
How are companies avoiding their tax responsibilities?
Oxfam examined publicly available data on subsidiaries of four of the
largest US drug companies and found a striking pattern. In the
countries analyzed with standard corporate tax rates, the companies
reported low pre-tax profits--7 percent profits on average in high-
income countries, and 5 percent on average in seven low- and middle-
income countries. In contrast, these corporations reported annual
global profits of up to 30 percent. So, where were these companies
reporting such sky-high profits? Tax havens. In four countries which
charge very low or no corporate tax rates, these companies posted 31
percent profit margins--suggesting that the companies are artificially
shifting their profits to avoid paying taxes in countries with higher
tax rates.
In the case of the pharmaceutical giants, the ploy may involve
``domiciling'' their patent, not in the corporation's home country
where the drug was actually developed, but in a tax haven-where a
company's presence may be as little as a mailbox. That subsidiary then
charges hefty licensing fees to subsidiaries in other countries. The
fees are a tax deductible expense in the normal jurisdictions, meaning
that they can be used to offset any earnings and thereby lower the
reported profits. At the same time, the fee income accrues to the
subsidiary in the tax haven, where it is taxed lightly or not at all.
The company's overall tax payment then is lowered, sometimes
significantly.
Another technique many companies have used is to sell their production
or services not directly to the countries where they will be consumed,
but to ``pivot'' companies in low tax jurisdictions that then resell
them at a profit to affiliated distributors. This practice creates an
artificial profit that remains in the tax haven. Most of the time,
these are only paper transactions--the goods are shipped straight from
the factory in the production country to the warehouse in the
consumption country--but the transactions allow profits to move from
one country to another almost tax-free.
Because companies refuse to release their full country-by-country
financial reports to the public, and many governments have yet to make
these reports public, the information on tax dodging is far from
complete. Yet, the pattern of Big Pharma's tax practices is consistent:
this is either an astounding coincidence or the result of using
accounting tricks to deliberately shift profits from where they are
actually earned to tax havens. Pfizer, Merck, and Abbott are among the
20 US corporations with the greatest number of subsidiaries in tax
havens; Johnson & Johnson is not far behind. While profits can vary
from country to country for any number of legitimate reasons, it is
highly unlikely that these explanations can fully account for the
consistent pattern of much higher profits being posted in countries
with very low tax rates where these corporations do not sell the
majority of their medicines.
Tax injustice and price gouging are two sides of the same coin
Tax avoidance and price gouging are not, in fact, completely
independent phenomena. Today's hearing provides a timely opportunity to
connect the dots between high drug prices and unjust tax avoidance
practices which deprive the US Treasury of precious public revenue
needed to fund essential public health programs in the US. Every tax
dollar avoided means a tax dollar less for new drug research at the
National Institutes of Health, and for essential health insurance
programs like Medicaid, Medicare and the Child's Health Insurance
Program.
What's more, as we detail in our report cited above, a cornerstone of
these companies' business model--the intellectual property rules
protecting many of these pharmaceutical companies' most profitable
products--is a central factor in allowing these companies to drive up
drug prices, while driving down their tax payments. And conversely, our
tax system at present incentivizes price hikes in a variety of ways.
While the specific solutions to drug pricing and tax avoidance are
distinct, there are some essential common approaches in our view.
Global companies should be transparent about where they earn and spend
their money, they should pay tax in alignment with actual economic
activity rather than abuse our tax system in a variety of ways, and
they should use their political influence responsibly, rather than
undermining governments' efforts to provide essential medicines and
healthcare for us all.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this context, we would encourage the Senate Committee to raise the
following questions to JNJ, PFE and MRK during the February 26th
hearing:
1. According to evidence received, your companies systematically report
low pre-tax profits in high-tax countries, and high pre-tax profits in
low-tax countries: reportedly resulting in billions of dollars of lost
revenue in the US which could have been spent on new drug research or
to fund essential healthcare. Can you explain why these aggressive tax
planning practices serve the public interest?
2. Is your company involved in offshore tax avoidance? If so, please
explain why you believe this is acceptable practice. Can you commit to
publicly releasing your company's country-by-country financial reports
to show and prove your tax practices meet social expectations?
3. How has your company invested the fresh cash resulting from the
passage of the TCJA? Very concretely, can you explain how these
expenditures are working to drive down drug prices? If they are not
doing so, why not?
------------------------------------------------------------------------
For any questions, please contact Nicholas J. Lusiani, Senior Advisor
at [emailprotected], or (202) 777-2912.
______
Patients for Affordable Drugs Now
Statement by David Mitchell, Founder
Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Wyden, and members of the Senate
Finance Committee,
Thank you for your leadership to address the problem of high drug
prices in America. U.S. patients and taxpayers spend more than $450
billion \1\ each year on prescription drugs. By some estimates, nearly
one-fifth \2\ of all health care costs go toward prescription drugs.
The main driver of prescription drug spending is patent-protected
brand-name drugs, which make up only about 10 percent \3\ of
prescriptions but account for three-quarters of drug spending.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
29JAN2019MILLERSTMNT.pdf
\2\ https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27552619.
\3\ https://docs.house.gov/meetings/GO/G000/20190129/108817/HHRG-
116-GOOO-Wstate-KesselheimA-20190129.pdf.
\4\ https://docs.house.gov/meetings/GO/G000/20190129/108817/HHRG-
116-GOOO-Wstate-KesselheimA-20190129.pdf.
That's why today's hearing is so important. You have called CEOs of
seven major drug corporations before the Senate Finance Committee to
explain their pricing practices, patent thickets and the fact that
American patients and taxpayers pay anywhere from two to six times \5\
more than the rest of the world for brand name prescription drugs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.cnn.com/2015/09/28/health/us-pays-more-for-drugs/
index.html.
We hear every day from patients suffering under the high cost of
prescription drugs--cutting pills in half, choosing between groceries
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and medication, and simply going without.
Patients have questions for the CEOs in front of you today, and we hope
Congress will ask them.
AbbVie Inc,
About AbbVie: AbbVie's anti-inflammatory drug Humira is the top-selling
\6\ drug in the world. The drug company doubled the price \7\ from
about $19,000 per year in 2012 to $38,000 per year in 2018. AbbVie
secured over 100 patents \8\ on Humira, ensuring that patent thickets
will keep competition off the U.S. market, while the company cut the
price in Europe by 80 percent \9\ for the exact same drug.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/06/business/humira-drug-
prices.html.
\7\ https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/06/business/humira-drug-
prices.html.
\8\ https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-09-07/this-shield-
of-patents-protects-the-world-s-best-selling-drug.
\9\ https://www.axios.com/abbvie-cuts-humira-price-europe-
biosimilars-cc2d3d61-5782-4042-8c24-b322ea8285b4.html.
Questions:

Is it fair that Europeans have access to a less expensive
biosimilar competitor for Humira, but your company bragged \10\ about
blocking that competition in the U.S.?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.nbcnews.com/nightly-news/video/world-s-best-
selling-drug-costs-five-times-more-in-u-s-than-europe-1445064259924.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Do you partake in pay for delay or deals for delay? Do you
support the Preserve Access to Affordable Generics and Biosimilars Act
(S. 64)?

Since Humira has already been very successful with more sales
than the revenue of eBay,\11\ will you commit to holding the price of
Humira steady until a biosimilar comes to market?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.axios.com/humira-2018-revenues-drug-prices-
eb637e1f-09ae-479a-91ca-870edf7f5b4a.htm.
Patient Stories:

James Baer from Aurora, CO: ``I have seropositive degenerative
rheumatoid arthritis, and am on a regimen of high cost drugs. Humira is
the most expensive, at $4,500-$6,500 a month. My insurance, Humana, is
refusing to pay for it starting next month. My doctor says I need it to
win my fight against this genetic defect.''

Jacquie from Iowa: ``Since my Crohn's diagnosis, I've taken
Lialda and Humira. Both drugs would have been astronomical if I hadn't
been for my good insurance and eligibility for the pharmacy savings
programs for each. I have been lucky. But I am always constantly
worried about no longer being able to work due to my health, or losing
my health insurance, making these essential drugs unaffordable.''

Sherry from North Carolina: ``I am unable to afford the biologic
Humira even on Medicare. My monthly copay went from $5/month to $1,200/
month.''
Pfizer
About Pfizer: Pfizer's history of price hikes is as staggering as it is
long. Here's a look at the last three years: In 2017,\12\ Pfizer raised
the price of 91 drugs by 20 percent--that was nearly 10 times the rate
of inflation. In mid-2018,\13\ Pfizer announced price hikes on about
100 prescription drugs. After temporary freezes, Pfizer raised the
raised the price of 40 drugs in January 2019.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.ft.com/contenUb2eOdd80-47ab-11e7-8519-
9f94ee97d996.
\13\ https://medcitynews.com/2018/07/pfizer-increases-prices-on-
100-drugs/.
\14\ https://www.cnn.com/2018/11/16/business/pfizer-drug-prices/
index.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions:

Will you commit to limiting the increase in list price of your
drugs to the rate of inflation?

Will you commit to submitting to this committee at the end of
this year (2019) a report of the ways you have utilized the $10 billion
stock buyback \15\ to serve patients?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ https://www.axios.com/pharma-share-buyback-tax-reform-
40a30b93-6149-4c67-bd6cd50-5ee814215.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Stories:

Helen Sgarlat from Kingston, PA: ``Because of the $600 price
tag, I had to switch medications. I switched from Spiriva to one that's
not working as well, Singulair. This is outrageous.''

Sharon from Iowa: ``I can't eat any more! My Keppra costs $460,
Pradaxa $400, Lyrica $360. If drug prices came down, I would be able to
eat again.''

Susan from Nevada: ``My sister has metastatic breast cancer
taking Ibrance. Her co-pay is $2,290/month! Without this [drug] her
cancer will spread! She received a short term grant to help but has to
reapply to keep receiving. This is a lifesaving drug . . . must be more
affordable!''
Sanofi
About Sanofi: Almost 30 million\16\ Americans live with diabetes and 6
million need insulin to survive. From 2010 to 2015, Sanofi raised the
price of the lifesaving diabetes drug Lantus by 168 percent.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.cbsnews.com/news/insulin-prices-rise-yet-again-
causing-diabetics-to-cry-foul/.
\17\ https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/21/opinion/sunday/break-up-
the-insulin-racket.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions:

If PBM rebates were eliminated, would you lower your list
prices?

Will you commit to undoing the dozens of times you've raised the
price of Lantus and lower the list price this year?

As the Chairman of the lobbying group, PhRMA, your organization
spent $27.5 million on lobbying in 2018.\18\ Next year, will you agree
to take half that money and use it to lower drug prices across the
board for patients?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://www.statnews.com/2019/01/22/phrma-spent-a-record-
breaking-27-5-million-on-lobbying-in-2018-new-filings-show/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Stories:

Jerraline Krawetzki from Berlin Heights, OH: ``Because of
diabetes type 2, Lantus and Humalog are required. Because of the
increased costs of these medications, after filling the first
prescriptions, already IN the donut hole. This means a one month
prescription of these 2 drugs, will cost over $600 per month. Senior
citizens on a fixed income cannot afford this.''

David from Nevada: ``I have to take Lantus and Januvia for my
Diabetes and Xeralto for my AFIB and many other medications for my
heart, blood pressure, cholesterol, and BPH. These medications are very
expensive and I can't afford them after I reach the Medicare Part D
donut hole. Medicare prohibits free medications or discounts so living
on social security means I will eventually die from lack of medicine.''

Jeannie from Kansas: ``I am a type 2 diabetic. I take Lantus
insulin. One month supply is $128 with insurance. I am single and on
Social Security of $942 a month. How am I to pay for the insulin that
keeps me alive?''
Merck & Co. Inc.
About Merck: Merck is no stranger to drug price increases. From January
2017 to mid-2018, Merck raised the price of Januvia by nearly 20
percent.\19\ In November 2018, the corporation raised the price on five
drugs,\20\ including top-selling Gardasil and Keytruda.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://www.latimes.com/business/hiltzik/la-fi-hiltzik-drug-
prices-20181206-story.html.
\20\ https://www.reuters.com/article/us-merck-co-drugprices/merck-
raised-prices-five-drugs-including-keytruda-in-november-idUSKCN1NX2ZN.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions:

Will you submit, for the record, the cost of research and
development for the drug Keytruda, which reaped \21\ a total of $1.89
billion the third quarter of 2018 alone--an increase of 80% since 2017?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-10-25/merck-
plans-10-billion-buyback-as-cancer-drug-tops-estimates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Your company recently spent $10 billion on stock buybacks.\22\
This year, will you commit to decreasing drug prices by that same
amount?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-10-25/merck-
plans-10-billion-buyback-as-cancer-drug-tops-estimates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Patient Stories:

Stephen Hadfield from Charlotte, NC: ``I am on very expensive
insulin for my diabetes. My Januvia is $400 a month and my Lantus is
$350 every three weeks. If it was not for insurance, I would not be
able to afford these drugs.''

Yvonne from Georgia: ``I can't afford the medicines I need to
treat my diabetes. Januvia costs over $200, and with my other
medications too I am in the donut hole, making it hard to manage my
disease.''

Mark from Louisiana: ``I have extremely high cholesterol and I
am allergic to statins. The only medication that I can take would be
Zetia which costs $800 for 3 month supply after insurance coverage. The
same drug is available in Canada for $150 for a 3 month supply and no
insurance coverage!''
Johnson & Johnson
About Johnson & Johnson: Since 2012, Johnson & Johnson has raised the
price of its blockbuster drug Xarelto by 87 percent.\23\ In January of
2019, the company raised the price on about two dozen drugs.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ https://www.i-mak.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/I-MAK-
Overpatented-Overpriced-Report.pdf.
\24\ https://www.reuters.com/article/us-johnson-johnson-
drugpricing/jj-raises-u-s-prices-on-around-two-dozen drugs-
idUSKCN1P42VY.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions:

Will you commit to holding your price increases to inflation
each year?

Will you commit to striking a deal with the New York Drug
Utilization Review Board if they deem it necessary to decrease the cost
of Remicade for state taxpayers?
Patient Stories:

Sarah Pekarske from Texas: ``I have Lupus and I have had 3 blood
clot episodes. I take Xarelto. In August of last year it was suddenly
$100/month. It has cost $150/month since September! This is too
expensive for me.''

Diane from Georgia: ``I have been on Remicade since 2013, but
when I retire I won't be able to take it anymore because of change in
insurance and higher co-pays. I don't know what I'll do.''

Patricia from Texas: ``I am on fixed income because I am
disabled with rheumatoid arthritis. I need infusions for Simponi Aria I
cannot afford. Even with help to pay for the infusion, my part is going
to be over $500 per month. That is half of my income every month.''
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.
About Bristol-Myers Squibb: Over the last eight years, Bristol-Myers
Squibb has spent over $25 million \25\ in lobbying expenditures and
$1.75 million \26\ in campaign contributions, according to Open
Secrets. The company raised the price of its blockbuster drug Eliquis
by 6 percent \27\ in January 2019. Last year alone, U.S. Patients' paid
Bristol-Myers Squibb $3.8 billion \28\ for Eliquis, a 30 percent \29\
year-over-year increase.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ https://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/
summary.php?id=D000000149&cycle=2018.
\26\ https://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/
summary.php?id=D000000149&cycle=2018.
\27\ https://www.foxbusiness.com/healthcare/meet-the-big-pharma-
ceos-who-will-testify-in-the-senate.
\28\ https://www.foxbusiness.com/healthcare/meet-the-big-pharma-
ceos-who-will-testify-in-the-senate.
\29\ https://www.foxbusiness.com/healthcare/meet-the-big-pharma-
ceos-who-will-testify-in-the-senate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions:

Will you commit to donating 50% less to candidates for public
office in 2020 and investing that money toward research and development
or decreasing price for patients?

With your recent acquisition of Celgene, will you commit to
ending Celgene's use of the REMS program to prevent a generic from
coming to market for its blockbuster drug, Revlimid?

Do you support the CREATES Act?
Patient Stories:

Elizabeth from New Jersey: ``The greed of Bristol-Myers-Squibb
is horrible. Now I have to decide if I should just take asprin each day
and hope I don't have a stroke or pay the high cost each month for
Eliquis for $145 per month.''

Gail from Michigan: ``I didn't have coverage for a year and the
Eliquis I need costs $400 per month. It's a crying shame that these
drugs are so expensive. I had to stretch the script out by taking them
every other day.''

Tara from Kansas: ``Drug prices are killing me faster than the
disease. When I first started taking my blood thinner a few years ago,
I thought $400 a month was terrible. Now, I wonder how I can possibly
afford the next dose of Opdivo. I can't. Without it I die. With it I go
broke. What kind of choice is that? No one should ever be put in this
position. No one should make this choice ever.''
AstraZeneca
About AstraZeneca: AstraZeneca has a history of charging cancer
patients high prices. Here are three examples: Imfinzi costs $180,000
per year \30\ for lung cancer, Lynparza costs around $15,000 for 112
pills \31\ for ovarian cancer, and Iressa costs $8,000for 30 pills \32\
lung cancer. And before AstraZeneca faced a generic competitor for its
high cholesterol drug, Crestor, the company raised prices multiple
times, including by about 15 percent \33\ right before a generic
competitor came to market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ https://professionals.optumrx.com/content/dam/optum3/
professional-optumrx/news/rxnews/drug-approvals/
drugapprovals_imfinzi_2017-0502.pdf.
\31\ https://www.goodrx.com/lynparza/medicare-coverage.
\32\ https://www.goodrx.com/iressa.
\33\ https://www.marketwatch.com/story/big-pharma-games-the-system-
to-make-generic-drugs-more-expensive-2018-07-27.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question:

Will you submit for the record the following information: the
amount you have spent on research and development vs. AstraZeneca's
yearly budget for marketing and advertising?
Patient Stories:

Teresa Bianco from Elyria, OH said: ``We have a family history
of dangerously high cholesterol levels. My sister and I have been on
every medicine out there. The only one that lowers us into the high
200's is Crestor. It is not covered by our insurances and thus is out
of our reach. Sadly, we are both RNs and see others also go through
this. We are college educated, helping people, always gainfully
employed full time, but we are apparently disposable.''

Linda Schoene from Pikesville, MD said: ``I have GERD and am
prescribed Nexium. On Medicare Part D, my copay is a little over $100
per month. I can't afford that. So I go without which causes me sharp
pains in my stomach when I have a flair. I sometimes buy the over the
counter version, but it is half the strength of what I am prescribed
and doesn't treat my symptoms.''

Silvio from Pennsylvania: ``I was taking Crestor but the prices
kept rising and because I am on Medicare I was not eligible for a
discount. So I had to stop taking it. Next time I got a blood test my
bad cholesterol skyrocketed.''
______
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association
325 7th Street, NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC, 20004
Introduction
The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA) is the national
association representing America's pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs),
which administer prescription drug plans for more than 266 million
Americans with health coverage provided through Fortune 500 employers,
health insurers, labor unions, Medicare, Medicaid, and the Federal
Employees Health Benefits Program (FEHBP).
PBMs are the primary advocate for consumers and health plans in the
fight to keep prescription drugs accessible and affordable. PBMs
negotiate on behalf of consumers, and work to keep a lid on overall
costs for prescription drugs with market-based tools that encourage
competition among drug manufacturers and pharmacies, and incentivize
consumers to take the most cost effective and clinically appropriate
medication.
By leveraging competition among manufacturers, PBMs save patients and
health plans $123 per prescription, and will negotiate prescription
drug costs down $654 billion over the ten years ending 2025.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Visante, ``Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs): Generating Savings
for Plan Sponsors and Consumers,'' February 2016, https://
www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/visante-pbm-savings-feb-
2016.pdf.
PBMs manage Medicare Part D drug benefits through insurers, either as
contractual service providers to stand-alone Prescription Drug Plans
(PDPs) or Medicare Advantage plans that offer prescription drug
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
coverage (MA-PDs).
PBMs are proud of their performance in Part D. PBMs and Part D sponsors
have kept overall program costs 30 percent below original government
projections, offered beneficiaries lower-than-expected premiums, and
generated high levels of generic utilization while providing broad
choice of drugs and access to over 60,000 pharmacies, all while
attaining a continually high rate of beneficiary satisfaction.
PBMs Negotiate to Keep Drug Spending Manageable
The most recent available data, which is for years 2016 and 2017, show
that the overall growth in spending for all prescription drugs has been
low.\2\ tallying 1.4% and -0.3% for 2016 and 2017, respectively. Drug
industry stakeholders rightly trumpet such figures to show the success
of private-sector negotiation in bringing spending discipline to the
prescription drug market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ KFF, ``What Are the Recent and Forecasted Trends in
Prescription Drug Spending?'', February 20, 2019, https://
www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/recent-forecasted-trends-
prescription-drug-spending/#item-start.
However, the totals mask the dynamics at work in different sectors of
the prescription drug market. Spending on generic drugs has actually
been declining, while spending on brands has been increasing. According
to a November 2018 analysis, for the previous year, spending on brands
increased 4% while spending on generics decreased 3%.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, ``Prescription Drug Cost
Trend Update,'' November 14, 2018, https://www.bcbs.com/the-health-of-
america/reports/prescription-drug-costs-trend-update.
Further, the report indicates that while brand drugs made up only 17%
of total prescriptions, they accounted for 79% of overall drug spending
in the previous year.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ BCBSA, Op. Cit.
Data underlying the overall spending figures shows that manufacturers
have been increasing the prices they set for their drugs rapidly.
According to IQVIA data, for the 5-year period ending 2017, brand
invoice price grew at an average annual rate of 10.5%, while overall
inflation in the economy, as measured by CPI-U, grew at an average
annual rate of 1.3%.\5\ These trends are mirrored in a study conducted
on drugs most used by the elderly. A 2018 AARP analysis found retail
prices for 113 chronic-use brand name drugs on the market since at
least 2006 increased cumulatively over 12 years by an average of 214
percent, compared with the cumulative general inflation rate of 25
percent from 2006 to 2017.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.iqvia.com/institute/reports/medicine-use-and-
spending-in-the-us-review-of-2017-outlook-to-2022.
\6\ AARP, ``No End in Sight for Skyrocketing Prescription Drug
Prices,'' September 26, 2018.
The near-flat overall trend for spending on all drugs, despite rising
prices and spending for brands, illustrates the work that PBMs do as
advocates for patients and their client health plans to hold the line
on prescription drug costs.
Drug Manufacturers Alone Set and Raise Prescription Drug Prices
As the Committee continues its work with respect to prescription drug
costs, one thing is clear: only manufacturers have the power to set or
change prices. In recent years, brand manufacturers and their allies
have attempted to deflect blame for the prices they set by blaming
other parties in the drug supply chain,\7\ including pharmacies, PBMs,
and wholesalers. While much has been said and written, research studies
show that there is no correlation between the prices manufacturers set
and the rebates PBMs negotiate with manufacturers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See, e.g., https://www.phrma.org/press-release/new-report-
shows-how-supply-chain-shapes-brand-name-medicine-prices.
A 2018 study found no correlation between the prices that brand drug
manufacturers set for individual drugs and the rebates that they
negotiate with PBMs on those products (see chart below).\8\ The data in
the scatter plot below show that increasing list prices over a 5-year
period were not correlated with changes in rebates (R\2\=0.016), as
shown with the horizontal blue line. Additionally, there are prominent
cases of higher-than-average price increases on brand drugs where
rebates stayed the same or declined (e.g., Humulin).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Visante, ``Increasing Prices Set by Drugmakers Not Correlated
With Rebates: An Analysis Prepared by Visante on Behalf of PCMA,'' June
2017.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
At the same time, separate research confirmed that negotiated rebates
are correlated with competition-that the size of drug rebates is
positively correlated with the extent to which a given brand drug faces
competition in the market.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Credit Suisse Equity Research, ``Global Pharma and Biotech,''
April 18, 2017.
Other research sponsored in part by a multinational brand drug
manufacturing firm reports that, for every $100 spent in the drug
supply chain on branded drugs, manufacturers capture $58. This
contrasts sharply with the amounts captured by pharmacies ($3), PBMs
($2), and wholesalers ($1).\10\ These results show that it is the
manufacturers who benefit far more than any other party in the drug
supply chain, and any rhetoric to the contrary is a smokescreen.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Sood, N. et al. ``The Flow of Money Through the Pharmaceutical
Distribution System,'' University of Southern California, Leonard D.
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics, June 2017, https://
healthpolicy.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/USC_Flow-of-Money
WhitePaper_Final_Spreads.pdf.
Further illustrating the lack of any connection of manufacturer list
prices to negotiated rebates is the chart below containing Part B
pricing data. Drugs under Medicare Part B typically carry no rebates.
The chart shows that several unrebated branded drugs have posted price
increases vastly outpacing the rate of inflation, as well as the rate
of price increases among most drugs. Moreover, unrebated drugs in
Medicare are not unique to Part B--HHS's Office of the Inspector
General finds a full 39% of branded drugs in Part D carry no
rebatex.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ HHS Office of the Inspector General, ``Increases in
Reimbursement for Brand-Name Drugs in Part D,'' June 2018.
Selected Part B Drugs With High Price Increases From 2017 to 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Estimated
Estimatied
2012 Price
2017 Price
% Price
2018 Price
% Price
Brand Name
per Part B
per Part B
Increase
per Part B
Increase
Prescription
Prescription*
2012-17
Prescription
2012-17
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Miacalcin
$461
$16,375
3,449%
$19,266
18%
Krystexxa
$2,717
$19,163
605%
$21,127
10%
Teflaro
$110
$399
263%
$439
10%
Bicillin
$41
$106
159%
$120
13%
Rituxan
$5,125
$6,890
34%
$7,416
8%
Orencia
$1,636
$2,849
74%
$3,020
6%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Estimated inflation adjusted price = 2012 price * weighted average manufacturer increase in list price per
unit. Not affected by changes in numbers of units per claim, or mix of doses/dosage forms. Estimated 2018
price through Q3 2018. During study years PBMs were not involved in Medicare Part B program, so no PBM rebates
were involved. Analysis included drugs with Part B spending data for full period 2012-16.
Source: Visante and PCMA analysis of data from CMS and SSR Health, 2019.
In sum, the research record is clear: drug manufacturers alone are
responsible for the prices they set and neither PBM-negotiated rebates,
nor any other party nor factor in the supply chain affects the list
price of a brand drug.
Managing Drug Cost Growth Is Challenging, but Policy Changes Could
Improve Competition
PBMs have an established record of negotiating with manufacturers and
pharmacies to reduce costs for patients, either in the form of lower
premiums for all participants in a plan, or through lower costs at the
pharmacy, and usually both.
The key to reducing prescription drug costs is increasing and
encouraging competition. PBMs are best able to negotiate when
competition exists, and PCMA's member companies support a number of
ideas for increasing competition and building upon market-based tools
to improve the Part D program. These include:

Remove Part D's protected classes. Designating ``classes of
clinical concern'' where all or substantially all drugs in a class must
be covered allows drug manufacturers to virtually name their price.
Indeed, a recent Milliman analysis showed that the average brand rebate
(for drugs that had any rebate) in Part D was 30%, while the average
rebate for brand drugs in protected classes was 14%.\12\ CMS already
applies careful plan formulary coverage checks to assure proper
coverage. A pending CMS plan only to lessen the effect of protected
classes-not eliminate them-would save $2 billion over 10 years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Milliman, ``Prescription Drug Rebates and Part D Drug Costs:
Analysis of Historical Medicare Part D Drug Prices and Manufacturer
Rebates,'' July 16, 2018, https://www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/
07/AHIP-Part-D-Rebates-20180716.pdf.

Encourage greater use of generics for Part D LIS enrollees.
MedPAC recommended allowing the Secretary to lower cost-sharing on
generics and raise it for brands that have generic competition.
Allowing plans to lower generic cost-sharing for these beneficiaries
would save money for beneficiaries, taxpayers, and the Medicare
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
program.

Modify the requirement for two drugs per class. The requirement
that Part D plans cover two drugs per class is outmoded. It has
encouraged manufacturers to argue for ever more granular classes and
reduced competition, increasing Part D costs. Modifying the requirement
by requiring plans to ensure access to therapies based on conditions or
disease states instead would reduce costs without reducing access to
needed drugs.

Build on existing efforts to apply Part D management tools to
Part B drugs. PBM tools such as value-based formularies, manufacturer
negotiation, and prior authorization have proven indispensable for
improving patient safety and lowering costs in outpatient prescription
drug plans like Part D. Adding Part D management tools to the Medicare
fee-for-service program and building on efforts in Medicare Advantage
for Part B drugs would make drugs more affordable on Medicare's medical
side.

Encourage use of mail-order pharmacy in Part D. Mail-order
pharmacy: vastly reduces errors in dispensing; increases convenience
for beneficiaries on maintenance medications; improves adherence; and
offers a lower cost-sharing option to beneficiaries in most cases. With
much of the public using home-
delivery for a wide range of goods and with many Medicare beneficiaries
home-bound, CMS should take further steps to encourage home delivery of
maintenance medications.

Repeal any willing pharmacy provisions. Requirements that all
pharmacies be included in Part D networks drives up costs and are
unnecessary, given the network adequacy requirements. Congress should
repeal the provision. One study showed that greater use of limited
network pharmacies in Part D could generate $35 billion in savings over
10 years.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Visante, ``How Pharmacy Networks Could Save Medicare,
Medicaid, and Commercial Payers $115 Billion,'' January 2013, https://
www.pcmanet.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/visante-pcma-pharmacy-
networks-study-1-13.pdf.

Give Part D plans meaningful access to Part A and B claims data.
To coordinate care and make the best coverage decisions for
beneficiaries, plans need to be able to use medical data as well as Rx
data. Existing prohibitions on using A and B data to inform coverage
design and decisions are misguided and keep plans from using claims
data to improve care coordination and coverage. Researchers suggest
combined data sets of Parts A, B, and D claims can be a ``rich
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
resource'' for comparative effectiveness data.
The following list of additional solutions would further increase
competition in the marketplace. While these proposals are outside the
Finance Committee's jurisdiction, they should help to bring balance
back to the drug marketplace and enhance competition.

Eliminate use of Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies
(REMS) to delay competition. Some manufacturers have used REMS to
prevent generic or biosimilar developers from getting sufficient
quantities of a drug or biologic to develop a competitor to the
innovator product. REMS were never intended for this purpose; this
practice should be prohibited. S. 340, ``Creating and Restoring Equal
Access to Equivalent Samples Act of 2019'' or the ``CREATES Act of
2019'' would address these abuses.

Stop anticompetitive product adjustments, i.e.,
``evergreening.'' Drug manufacturers sometimes use tactics such as
``product hopping'' or ``evergreening,'' submitting applications to the
FDA for approval of a ``new'' product that is essentially the same as
the original product. These product lifecycle management tactics
artificially extend drug exclusivity periods and delay the take-up of
lower-cost generics.

End orphan drug exclusivity abuses. Orphan drug exclusivities
are meant to encourage research on rare diseases, but manufacturers
have gamed the policy to apply it to blockbuster drugs with script
volume in the tens of millions. Orphan exclusivity periods should only
apply to those drugs originally approved by FDA under an orphan
indication and only for the orphan indication itself.

Eliminate ``pay-for-delay'' agreements. Patent settlements, or
``pay-for- delay'' agreements, allow drug patent holders to pay off
potential competitors who would otherwise produce a competing generic
or biosimilar drug. These anticompetitive agreements should be
eliminated. S. 64, The Preserve Access to Affordable Generics and
Biosimilars Act, would greatly ameliorate these concerns.

Allow for FDA accelerated approval of brand drugs based on
increasing competition. Accelerated review is granted to new drug
applications that address ``unmet need.'' The economic need for
competition to lower prices, or what some call ``financial toxicity,''
should be a criterion of unmet need.

Revisit and improve biosimilar labeling and naming.
Substitutable biosimilars should bear identical names and labels to
their innovator analogs. Use of different names will confuse patients
and providers and inhibit prescribing of biosimilars.

Reduce innovator biologic exclusivity to 7 years. Seven years of
data exclusivity would still provide a sufficient return to
manufacturers, while also speeding more affordable biosimilars to
market.
These policies and some of the specific bills that contain them can
help lower costs in Part D and the wider prescription drug market.
Part D Should Work for All Enrollees, but the Administration's Proposed
Rule Ending Drug Rebates Is Counterproductive
In addition to the suggested policy changes above, specific
interventions to help Part D beneficiaries who have high out-of-pocket
spending are needed. Fourteen years into the program, it remains a
great success with high enrollee satisfaction, however, policymakers
should consider how best to balance the needs of all Part D enrollees.
With respect to the Administration's recently proposed rule to end the
drug rebate safe harbor, there is grave concern that this proposed rule
would increase premiums for Medicare beneficiaries and costs for
taxpayers.
While the Administration's goals are well intentioned, the proposed
rule does nothing to reduce the prices drug manufacturers set. To the
contrary, it would cause substantial increases in seniors' Part D
premiums, as well as the cost to taxpayers.
The Administration's proposal also includes an unprecedented six
different cost impact estimates by three different actuarial groups,
including the independent HHS Office of the Actuary (OACT). The range
of impact for cost to the federal government across the six estimates
is an immense $300 billion. The great uncertainty surrounding the
proposal should give the Committee pause. Americans deserve clarity on
how such a proposal will affect those who rely on Medicare and
Medicaid, and commercial coverage. Given OACT's skill and institutional
independence from the agency, it is likely they have the most accurate
estimates.
Under the Administration's proposal, according to OACT, Part D premiums
could rise by as much as 25 percent for 2020 to reach $47.66, marking
the largest average premium increase in the program's history. Such a
large increase could cause many seniors and disabled Americans to drop
the prescription drug coverage they need to protect their health and
financial security, or never sign up in the first place. Healthier
beneficiaries (i.e., those who need fewer drugs) would drop coverage
first, causing premiums to increase further and potentially
destabilizing the Part D program, as increasingly those eligible for
enrollment would find Part D coverage unaffordable.
Additionally, OACT estimates that the proposal would cost the federal
government an extra $196 billion over the next 10 years. If finalized,
this could make the proposed rule among the costliest in U.S.
history.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ American Action Forum, ``Mandating Talking Cars: Costliest and
Most Beneficial?'', December 16, 2016. This article describes what were
at the time, the two costliest proposed regulations in U.S. history.
The OACT cost estimate for the Administration's proposal is in excess
of these two, https://www.americanactionforum.org/regulation-review/
mandating-talking-cars-costliest-beneficial/.
PCMA urges the Committee to encourage the Administration to withdraw,
or at the very least significantly delay the implementation of, the
proposed rule until its impact on beneficiaries and on Part D can be
better understood and managed.
Conclusion
In the search for solutions to address high drug costs, the Committee
and Congress would be best served in pursuing policies that foster and
encourage competition to keep prescription drug costs and pharmacy
benefits more affordable for employers, enrollees, taxpayers, and
government programs. Unfortunately, the rule recently proposed by the
Administration will not accomplish this goal, since it does nothing to
encourage manufacturers to bring down the drug prices they alone set.
PCMA member companies welcome continuing discussion among all
stakeholders to create a robust, sustainable market that will continue
to deliver needed cures and treatments for patients who suffer through
disease and chronic illness.
______
Letter Submitted by Debra L. Raffle
February 27, 2019
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Dirksen Senate Office Bldg.
Washington, DC 20510-6200
RE: The Escalating and Unsustainable Rising Cost of Insulin for
Insulin-Dependent Diabetics
Chairman Grassley and the Committee:
I hope I am not too late and will be read at least. I only received
this notification a few days ago from the American Diabetes
Association, but I see you continue to have hearings, so I am revising
and resending my letter.
I have type 1 diabetes. I am an insulin-dependent diabetic, which means
there's not one hour of every single day of my life that I MUST have
insulin, or I will die. It's that simple. I was diagnosed around 9-11,
sadly that it makes it easy to remember. I was an adult diagnosed with
a mostly childhood disease and had a lot to learn! The cost of insulin
that I need to stay alive 24 hours a day has escalated from $70 per
1000 ml vial to nearly $300 a bottle. The same bottle of Novolog sells
for $47.99 in Canada. I just had to pay $2300 out of pocket for 3
months of insulin (and that was with a supposed discount)! The
insurance I have through my employer has an extremely high deductible
and high copays and some items are not covered at all. If my insulin
pump supplies are not covered, I simply cannot afford them. If I can't
afford to manage my diabetes the way my doctor and I have been doing
successfully through pump therapy all these years, I will likely get
sick, get a complication or two and then die. And no one seems to care!
Certainly not the insurance companies or the pharmacies. People need to
care. It will cost far more with the complications that will arise if I
don't get my insulin and if I can't afford to pay it, other tax payers
will ultimately bear those costs when all of this can be avoided.
Again, I feel that most insurance companies and certainly the
pharmacies prefer their profits over actual health care and effective
management and if we can't afford the astronomical prices they are
putting on once affordable drugs and supplies, then they would prefer
we die and let someone else pay. This is insane to me! I should be able
to afford my insulin and pump supplies, as in the past, but due to
escalating prices of medications, insulin and insurance costs (so they
can all make their profits) it is becoming unsustainable. I can't
afford it and am very healthy and have a good paying job.
I would like to join in the battle to fight insurance companies who
seem to think we can do without these drugs--insulin is not even a
drug, it's something my body quit making almost 20 years ago and that
most of you all take for granted, but without it, I will, in fact, die
within a few days/possibly lingering a few weeks in a coma. I didn't
ask for this, however, if I am able to get what I need, what my doctor
prescribes for me and have that covered by my insurance, I remain
healthy. I am a working, productive, tax paying citizen and if you
allow me to get insulin and medical supplies at a sustainable price, I
can continue to be a productive tax paying citizen. If you don't I
become unable to work, pay taxes and get sicker and die. Diabetes is a
completely manageable disease and it's disheartening that the insurance
companies, the pharmacies and the United States Government seem to have
such low regard for those of us who were unfortunate to contract a
disease where we have NO OPTION but to buy insulin at escalating
prices. They keep raising the price of insulin higher and higher and
higher, because they have a captive audience they are holding hostage.
I really wish someone would take a stand on this and I would be willing
to help, testify, or whatever it takes to help this situation.
In addition, I also take a medication called Symlin that allows me to
utilize my insulin more efficiently. It decreases my insulin intake
about 30%. This helps me maintain a healthy weight. More insulin means
more weight and more weight means taking more insulin. It's a vicious
circle. I am a type 1 so I have never been over weight and I struggle
to maintain my weight for the reasons I have listed above. If I can
maintain my weight, not only will I be healthier, but I can take
slightly less insulin to help combat the astronomical cost of something
that I MUST HAVE EVERY SINGLE DAY OF MY LIFE. By reducing my intake by
10 units a day, I may get another day or two out each vial and that's a
lot! It certainly will NOT help my overall health to put on extra
pounds! Anyhow, my new insurance will not cover Symlin at all and they
tell me it will cost $5800 for a 3 month's supply that I used to pay
$70 co-pay when I had Premera. I have been on this drug about 10 years.
This is ridiculous and clearly, I cannot afford this, so I get to go
off it cold turkey, increase my insulin intake and pay more than I ever
have for the same insulin!
I don't think they understand how this all works nor do insurance
companies and administrators care, but if you give us the tools
(medications and supplies) to manage our diseases with, we will not
have as many costly complications. So, it is cost-effective to give us
what we need now to avoid higher costs of complications later! To date,
since I was diagnosed as a type 1 in 2001 and having been on an insulin
pump for 17-18 years, I have never had any complications due to my
diabetes and would like to keep it that way.
I am so disgusted with insurance companies and I want to know what we
can do to get things changed. Can I go up to Canada and purchase my
insulin? Can I testify and be a witness? I am willing to do whatever I
can to help! What can I do to lower my medication and durable medical
equipment costs? The insurance company cannot even tell me what things
cost until I purchase them, which is ridiculous since I don't want to
pay for things I clearly cannot afford. I'm lost and feeling desperate.
I look to your committee to make this manageable disease financially
manageable. It is manageable if we can afford what we need to survive
and there's NO reason for the price to quadruple in the last 10 years,
NONE except for greed and profits.
I spent over $6.5K last year on out pocket medical costs, mostly
insulin and pump supplies. I had no surgeries, I had no illnesses, I
had no procedures. This is becoming very difficult to afford.
I don't think I should have to struggle to afford groceries and lose my
home or just make simple choices because I can't afford my insulin and
supplies. Please do something about the escalating cost of health care,
specifically common insulin, Novolog in my case, and do what you have
promised for many years! This is unsustainable as it currently is!
Thank you for listening.
Debra L. Raffle
______
Letter Submitted by Laura T. Ricci
March 4, 2019
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510-6200
RE: February 26, 2019, ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription for
Change, Part II''
To the Senate Committee on Finance,
Thank you for beginning to tackle the outrageous prices of prescription
drugs in America. I've watched many of the meetings and also the
Congressional Oversight meeting with Congressman Cummings. I watched
this meeting again and took notes. What I find interesting is several
of the ``Magnificent Seven'' are foreigners. These are CEOs that have
come to America to use Americans and the American healthcare system as
pawns for their profits. I do think that it is a multi-layered problem
and the American healthcare system is to blame for a lot of it. The
first thing that the senate and congress need to do is regulate this
industry so these people have to abide by stricter laws. All of the
levels need to abide by stricter laws.
I come to you as a mother of a type 1 diabetic, 20 years old, who will
soon be on his own. What will happen to him if he has to enter a high
deductible healthcare plan one day? Will he be the next Alec Smith or
Antavia Worsham? I would like to see this system fixed before he has to
cross that road. I am lucky enough to live in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, where he is eligible for Masshealth benefits so I am not
taxed in my wallet for his insulin. But one day, under the current
system, he may be. What if he ever wants to move out of Massachusetts?
What kind of healthcare plan will he be forced into? The current system
is designed for failure for a T1 diabetic. The only way T1s can get
their insulin for free or cheap is to make less than $16,000 or just
work a part-time job so you will qualify financially. What kind of
contribution to society is that? Will he ever be able to use the
college degree he will earn? He might end up living at home for the
rest of his life to be able to afford insulin because he will never be
able to afford $324.00 for a bottle of insulin or the ridiculous copays
assessed and high deductibles. High deductible healthcare plans need to
be abolished. High deductible healthcare plans are only for the really
healthy, they're not for anyone who needs to use the system, the only
system in place. T1s are forced to use the system because insulin is
not available over the counter like a loaf of bread is. My son can't
buy and eat the bread if he doesn't have the insulin to go with it.
Why does America not allow insulin to be purchased over the counter
without a prescription? Why does America not trust Americans to use
insulin correctly? I want insulin to be able to be purchased over the
counter, maybe with a prescription, but no insurance attached to it.
When you look at the supply chain of food, there's a manufacturer, a
warehouse and distributor, the supermarket and then the consumer. When
you look at the supply chain of medicine, there's the manufacturer, the
warehouse and distributor, the pharmacy (supermarket), the consumer and
then the PBMS and insurance companies. If the PBMS and insurance
companies were eliminated from this chain, then the prices would come
down because there would be no clawbacks and rebates involved. Is there
a rebate for bread? No.
My son was diagnosed with T1 diabetes in 2007. I was looking at some of
my old receipts. I looked at one from 2010. The price that Blue Cross
paid was $390.13 for 6 bottles of humalog. I had a $60 copay. That was
$75.00 a bottle, but I only paid $10.00 a bottle with the copay. The
lantus insulin was $152.48 that the insurance paid, and I paid $60.00.
I got 3 bottles. So that was $212.48 divided by 3 is $70.82. I paid
$20.00 for each bottle with the $60.00 copay. Today, I see the receipt
from Walgreen's, and the cash price is $974.89 for 3 bottles of
humalog. That's $324.96 each. That is what the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts must pay because he is covered under Masshealth. Does
Massachusetts pay that much? I have a feeling they do because Medicaid
is not allowed to negotiate prices with drug companies. The budget for
Massachusetts is 40% healthcare. Former Gov. Mitt Romney put this
mandatory healthcare in place. This should have been used as the
template for the ACA. Did the ACA cause these high deductible
healthcare plans? Some people think it did. That's a question I have
for you. Did the ACA cause high deductible plans? High deductible plans
are bankrupting Americans. They're causing people to have to pay
upwards to $25,000.00 sometimes for drug coverage before insurance will
pay anything. It's unaffordable. People are selling their houses,
taking out second and third mortgages, moving back home with mom and
dad, and even living on the streets.
You've heard the stories about people rationing insulin and dying. I
don't want that to happen to my son. T1 diabetes will never go away.
There is no cure. The pharmaceutical companies know there is no cure
and know we are at their mercy. The American lawmakers allow them to
carry on. You need to regulate this industry and put the brakes on
their practices. Utilities, food, tobacco, guns, are all regulated.
It's time for pharmaceutical companies to be held accountable so they
will stop using Americans as pawns for profit. As said in the hearing,
they make money on their drugs in Germany. If they didn't, they would
say goodbye to Germany.
When people can go to Mexico and buy the insulin for $30.00 a bottle,
Canada for $35-45.00 a bottle, then that tells you that the price to
produce it is low. I read an article that showed a study that said it
only costs $3-6.00 to produce a bottle of insulin. It's just like the
EpiPen. Heather Bresch, the CEO of Mylan, she told the Senate that it
costs Mylan $1.00 to make it, they sell it for $60.00 and it retailed
for $300.00! That's nuts. A lot of EpiPens never even get used. They're
there for an emergency. Insulin is used anywhere from 4-10 times a day
because you need to take it every time you eat. You don't need an
EpiPen every time you eat. The equivalent to an EpiPen for a diabetic
is a device called a glucagon injection. It is also very expensive and
is often never used. It's an injection that will revive you from a low
blood sugar if you pass out and may have a seizure. According to GoodRX
website, the glucagon retails for $292.81 which is 19% off the retail
price of $364.50. This is another device that often goes unused, but
people pay for it because they want it in case of emergency. There are
no coupons available to get it for free. I would like to know how much
it really costs to manufacture a glucagon kit.
The other thing that people are doing to get insulin is they're taking
out gofundme accounts. They try to raise money to pay for the copays.
They don't always succeed in raising the money and still end up dead,
which is the case with a man named Shane Patrick Boyle. People then
have to take out gofundme accounts to bury their loved ones because
once you are diagnosed with T1 diabetes, you have a lot of difficulty
in getting life insurance. You're a threat to insurance companies. They
only want to bring money in, they don't want to pay it out. But they
pay it out to CEOs in the form of huge salaries.
All of the CEOs at every level of the supply chain make a lot of money.
David Ricks, CEO of Eli Lilly, he makes $40,000.00 a day in salary.
$5,000.00 an hour. Some people don't make $40K in two years. The CEOs
of CVS, Walgreen's, Rite Aid, Kroger and all the insurance companies,
like United Healthcare and Blue Cross, they also make millions. Why?
Why is that allowed? They've all created monopolies. I've watched their
stocks and they've all skyrocketed and I see a new CVS store in many
towns around where I live. They've closed the old stores and built
these fancy new buildings that are full of expensive products. I only
get my son's insulin at Walgreen's because I am forced to get it
locally, Medicaid will not allow you to use a 90 day pharmacy service.
And insulin isn't the only thing that diabetics need to use for daily
management of diabetes. They need test strips, meters, pump supplies,
Dexcom supplies, glucose tablet s, ketone test strips, alcohol wipes,
and sometimes they have to eat special food if they also end up with
Celiac Disease.
There are at least 80 autoimmune diseases. There is no cure for any of
them. Do you think the pharmaceutical companies think there is a cure
on the horizon, a vaccine? Is that why they're raping American's to get
their profits before people don't need insulin anymore?
Nicole Smith-Holt, the mother from Minnesota that lost her son Alec to
rationing insulin said this in a Minnesota Roundtable: ``Before insulin
was invented, diabetes was a death sentence. Now diabetes is a death
sentence again because insulin is no longer affordable.'' Let that sit
with you.
I have a change.org petition going around asking Congress to subpoena
the CEOs of the insulin companies. One of the signers of the petition
posted that this is the new AMERICAN GENOCIDE. Let that sit with you.
I like what Senator Wyden said about these CEOs using patients and
taxpayers as ``unlocked ATMS.'' It's the truth. I also like what he
said when he said ``drug prices are astronomically high because that's
where pharmaceutical companies and investors want them, and diabetics
who can't afford the costs self-ration and endanger their lives but the
investor s are happy.'' It's the truth.
The CEOs were asked `'What keeps you up at night?'' None of them
answered that they were concerned about anyone dying because they can't
afford their medicines. They all answered that they were more concerned
about their drugs being put on formularies. That brings me to another
problem. The formularies. The PBMS play games all the time with the
switching in and out of the type of insulin that the insurance company
will pay for. This means that people often end up getting a physician's
override to be able to continue using the insulin of their choice. The
formulary dictates to the diabetic what they can and cannot use. They
limit your choices or make you fight for the kind of insulin you want
to use. Do you have the choice to buy Pepperidge Farm bread or store
brand bread? Yes. So why doesn't the diabetic or person in need of
medication, have the ability to choose the one that works right for
them and not have to argue and fight for it? If the industry was
regulated, we may have the ability to choose what is right for us, the
patient and consumer.
Another problem I see and have stated this before, is that Congress has
to pass legislation stopping these pharmaceutical companies from
advertising on TV. They did it with tobacco. The last advertisement for
tobacco was for a Virginia Slims ad on December 31, 1970 on the Johnny
Carson show. Congress did that. So they need to do it again for
pharmaceutical. American and New Zealand are the only countries that
allow them to spend their profits on advertising. If they want to
advertise, they should only be able to advertise for medicines that
don't require a prescription. And I'm also tired of seeing
advertisements on TV for erectile dysfunction.
Doctors: Doctors need to inform patients of alternatives to getting
insulin and not having to use insurance. People are already buying
insulin from Canadian Pharmacies and going to Mexico if they can. The
State of Utah will actually pay their state employees $500.00 to cross
the Mexican border and get their medicines there instead of having to
put the burden on the state's budget to pay for expensive medicines in
the U.S. Isn't that crazy? Why should that happen? If medicines were
affordable, the drug companies wouldn't have to give so much away for
free. The burden would be shared equally and the money would stay in
America. And I don't buy the insulin companies' stories about the fact
that the insulin supply chain is not protected in Mexico like it is in
the U.S. If the insulin in Mexico were tainted, people would be dying
from it and it would be in the news that people are dying from it
there, and dying in foreign countries from it. So that is just a scare
tactic to get you to continue to pay high prices to support the high
CEO salaries.
Soriot--He said he was annoyed that he was the lowest paid CEO. Give me
a break. That is all part of the GREED before NEED and PROFITS before
PATIENTS.
The FDA--Mr. Gottlieb, the commissioner, he is a part of the problem
behind insulin as well. Insulin was classified as a DRUG. He went and
changed the classification to a BIOLOGIC. That's just a term for a
liquid medicine. So then that created the new biosimilar insulins.
After thinking about this, I figured out that the biosimilars didn't
make insulin a generic, all it did was allow these insulin companies to
take out new patents, patents that will have maybe a 20 year life span
under the Hatch-Waxman Act. So what does that do? It creates even more
of a monopoly. Why, after almost 100 years, is there no generic insulin
available? No one has an answer to that. The patent for humalog is long
since expired. All these insulin companies have to do is tweak an amino
acid in the insulin and they get a new patent. That's ridiculous to me.
Today, March 4, 2019, there was a news article issued about Eli Lilly:
https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-
introduce-lower-priced-insulin. In this article, Eli Lilly said they
were going to make a ``generic'' humalog and the list price of it would
be $137.35 for a vial and $265.20 for a box of 5 pens. That is
ridiculous to me. First, how do we know that Eli Lilly won't just use
the humalog as it is now and just put it in a new bottle with a
different color and change the name on it? Are they only doing this to
appease the senate and Ms. DeGette's investigation into these high
prices? Plus, they already have their BLINK HEALTH system, which is
like a GoodRX, that allows you to get a vial of insulin at $178.90 and
if you don't have insurance, you can get insulin from GoodRX for
$177.87. These prices are lower than the $324.00, but they still aren't
the $30.00 or $45.00 that Mexicans and Canadians reap the benefits
from. Canada would never allow insulin to be price gouged because it
was invented there by Sir Frederick Banting who has probably rolled
over in his grave a million times by now. I told my congressman, James
McGovern, that insulin wasn't supposed to be a FOR-PROFIT business. He
turned around to me, looked me in the eyes, and said: ``Well, it is''!
The other thing about the financial aid that Eli Lilly offers, is you
have to be really poor to be able to qualify for it. So only the poor,
nonworking people in America can get it for free. They wouldn't have to
give it out for free if it was affordable and accessible over the
counter at the pharmacy. They also give a lot of insulin way to camps.
Another thing that doctors don't tell people about is the 340B program.
That's like a big secret, just like the other secrets that revolve
around this industry. Many state attorney general's already have their
own investigations going on to find out what is going on behind closed
doors.
What I heard from some of these CEOs, especially Caforio, was that they
``need America's help and support'' to fix this problem. I heard that
from several of them. So they are asking YOU, the congress and the
senate, those that write the laws, to help them figure it out because
they know the system is unsustainable as it is and they will only
continue to do what they are doing because there are no laws saying
they can't do it. That's where my new hashtag comes into play--
#thepowerofthepen. Lawmakers are voted in with the power of the pen and
lawmakers can pick up the pen and write laws to protect Americans from
the greed of this industry.
I write to my congressman, James McGovern, and my senator, Elizabeth
Warren, and share with them what I am sharing with you. I share that
they need to take action and write better laws and regulate this
industry. They also have to stop taking money from the pharmaceutical
companies and lobbyists and don't fall for their antics. These people
are crooked and have the thief mentality.
Mr. Frazier stated that he couldn't walk away from the U.K. even though
they give lower prices because he believes it is immoral. But it's
okay. that he price gouges Americans and that's not immoral?
I read in a recent article about Mr. Brandicourt, that he fought to
keep any generic insulins out of the market and actually took out more
patents to prevent it. So why is that allowed? That's crookedness. That
is another case of Greed before Need. Companies like his, Sanofi, they
give out coupons for their lantus insulin. They wouldn't have to give
out coupons for people to get it for cheap or free if they just lowered
the prices and made them affordable.
NovoNordisk also gives out coupons and the same applies to them. Why
can they let you have insulin for $25.00 with the coupon, but you can't
go to the pharmacy and get the insulin for $25.00 without the coupon?
So you know the price to make insulin is cheap if they are able to give
out coupons for you to get it for free or cheap.
Senator Isakson, he had quite the story. He has Parkinson's disease and
takes 8 medicines. His story about all the ways he could get his
medicines for cheaper were right on target. The options: Don't use
insurance, use coupons, get rebates or just pay CASH. People could just
pay cash if they didn't have to pay and arm and a leg for medicines
that are supposed to keep you alive, not kill you because you can't
afford them. And his story about his staff member's 2nd child being
diagnosed with T1 diabetes was heartbreaking. T1 diabetes is an
epidemic. There is never anything shared on TV about the signs and
symptoms of T1 diabetes. Kids die from it after being misdiagnosed with
strep throat or the flu. T1 diabetes mimics the flu. My son had strep
throat when he was diagnosed. And it's not caused by vaccines. T1
diabetes has been around for over 4500 years and no vaccines were
invented then. People just died from it before insulin was invented in
1921.
My personal story is this: I have epilepsy. I take 3 medications for
it. One of them was invented in 1914. It's older than insulin. When my
husband had a great job with great insurance, I paid $3.96 for a 90 day
supply. When my husband lost his job, I was eligible to get on Medicare
because I am on disability. When I went to get my medicine at the
pharmacy, I was hit with a $114.41 bill. YIKES! This stuff is cheaper
than aspirin and here I am paying $114.41. The Medicare system, the
Part D, they put the medicine on the most expensive tier. So what am I
supposed to do? I have to pay it or my head goes nuts. Another medicine
I take, the patent doesn't expire until 2022, so there is no generic
for it. I just had to pay $1,200.00 for this medicine at the beginning
of the year. Ouch! My disability benefits are $1,600.00 a month. Do the
math. I wish I had never started to take it. The next time I get the
prescription filled, it will be $800.00 for it. I will never meet the
deductible set on my Part D plan because it is set so high that I never
reach it. So I pay over $300/year for my Part D plan, over 1,200.00/
year for my Part B, and even though the deductibles are lower than a
high deductible plan like a Blue Cross plan, it still hurts the wallet
every time I need to refill these prescriptions.
I'd like to share with you some stories of people that have children
with T1 diabetes.
1. This lady had a child die from T1 diabetes after the girl was kicked
off of BCMH at the age of 21. The girl rationed her insulin and was
found dead at home. The lady also has a second daughter that has T1
diabetes. She started a foundation and is on the warpath to make sure
people don't die from insulin rationing and get kicked off of health
plans. She just shared a story about her daughter being denied the
Dexcom continuous glucose monitor. People like her are always fighting
with insurance and distributors, especially Edgepark Medical Supply, to
get their supplies. This is a problem created by insurance companies
that ``don't want to pay.'' They will do everything in their power to
deny you and now people are turning to Costco to get this Dexcom device
and get out of the insurance loop to get it, and get it cheaper than it
costs to use their insurance. Yet, these people are still paying their
premiums and they can't use the insurance.
2. This lady and her son, they live in Tennessee. Tennessee, as I found
out, is one of the states that did not adopt the Medicaid expansion.
The son is 24 years old. He is a T1 diabetic as well. He was working at
a Hardee's burger place. He lost his job after getting sick with
diabeticketoacidosis (OKA). He was in the hospital and couldn't work so
they fired him. He had no access to insulin and started taking the
``WALMART'' insulin. This isn't the right kind of insulin for a T1
diabetic to take. He ended up with a big sore on his arm from injecting
the insulin in the same spot all the time. He ended up with a bad MRSA
infection. He went to the hospital and was not taken care of very well
and he checked himself out. He wanted something to drink and was denied
water. The mother didn't know how to navigate the politics to get help
in the state. She tried to get a social worker to get her son on
Medicaid. She was told NO, that he didn't qualify because he wasn't
pregnant, wasn't a single parent, and was over the age of 21.
So the message from the state of Tennessee is ``JUST GO DIE'' if you
can't work and get private insurance and you're over the age of 21.
``We don't want to take care of you anymore even though you have a life
threatening disease.'' So I contacted the governor there and got his
office to contact TennCare, the Medicaid office, and was able to at
least get him set up to get insulin, but he still has no doctor to
report to because he was denied care at a medical center there because
he missed three appointments and they won't take him because of a long
wait list. The option of moving out of the state is out of the question
I was told. So here is a man that will end up living with his mother
the rest of his life because he can't hold a job due to his diabetes.
3. A family from Texas. The father has a decent job but they live
paycheck to paycheck. They also have a T1 diabetic child. The father
was offered a TWENTY CENT raise. That means he would make $416.00 more
per year. Guess what? The twenty cent raise put his family over the
income qualifications to be able to continue to get CHIP benefits so
they can afford the insulin for the diabetic. The family would be
forced to take the insurance from the place of work. The insurance
would cost them $400.00 per month out of their paycheck. That means
they would lose $2.50 an hour if they took the twenty cent raise. Does
that make sense to you? The father ended up signing a waiver and not
accept the raise so he won't lose the CHIP benefits so he can keep his
child alive and not have to go get another job or try to come up with
the money for insulin one way or another? If insulin was affordable and
accessible over the counter, the $416.00 a year raise might pay for it.
But that's not the case. So much for a raise. I told the mother to tell
the company to give him a gift card for $400.00 that she can use on
groceries.
4. A United States citizen moved to the U.K. so she could get her
insulin to stay alive. What in the world? Are you kidding me? Cases
like this are what take money out of the U.S. economy.
5. A mother was on vacation, she only took one bottle of insulin with
her. The insulin got dropped on the floor. She came running to Facebook
to see if anyone could supply her with insulin because she couldn't get
a hold of her doctor to see if she could get her prescription filled
where she was. She couldn't just walk into any pharmacy and say she
wanted to buy the insulin her child used. She could do that if she
needed a bottle of water, but she can't do that with insulin. She was
frantic, thinking, how am I going to keep my child alive? The
pharmacist was not allowed to give her insulin without a prescription.
There was no emergency system in place. The pharmacist had no
authorization to give an emergency supply of insulin to this desperate
mother. In the end, she was finally able to get her doctor to call her
back and call in a prescription to the pharmacy to get a bottle of
insulin. That should never happen in America.
So I see people pay for premiums out of their paychecks, they pay for
copays at the doctor's office, they pay outrageous amounts of money in
high deductibles, and what do they end up with? They end up in debt,
end up with their own health problems because they are going crazy
wondering where in the world they are going to get this money from and
not have to lose everything they have.
Senator Stabenow was in a hearing that I watched and she actually said
she took people over the border to Canada herself to get cheaper
medicines. What does that tell you? That tells you that she's a great
person that will do whatever she has to do to make sure people don't
die at the hands of the current system. Our system is broken, it's old,
it out of date, and I am not 100% sure if this is all because of the
Affordable (Unaffordable) Care Act. I find that the people that make
these laws are not the people that actually have children with life-
threatening diseases and they have no idea what the cost of managing
the diseases consists of. If America is going to allow the
pharmaceutical industry to dictate to them how the system should be
run, then that is the wrong way of doing business.
I do think that the Senate Finance Committee and congress have to
subpoena these other pharmaceutical CEOs and get them to answer and be
transparent about how much it costs them to make their products. I have
a change.org petition going around getting signatures to ask congress
to subpoena them. You can't just invite them. An invitation can be
ignored and turned down, but not a subpoena. Heather Bresch had to come
to Washington to be transparent, so don't let the rest of them off the
hook.
Another thing about Eli Lilly: I read in the news that they were going
to buy an $8Billion oncology company. If they have $8B to buy an
oncology company, then why are they killing people with the high costs
of insulin, literally killing people because they just can't afford
their outrageous prices? They should not be able to buy a company like
that until insulin is affordable and accessible to everyone, not just
in America, but even in Africa. Why isn't insulin available in Africa?
People die from having no access to insulin there as well. Diabetes is
a global disease. You can't eradicate it. There is a genetic component
to it. People are living longer now with the invention of insulin so
they are passing the genes along to their offspring who ultimately pass
it on to the next generation.
March 5, 2019: This morning, as I continue to write and finish this, I
see a news article about Senator Durbin's response to Eli Lilly's
announcement yesterday. He acknowledges in there that insulin is as low
as $38.00 in Canada, but charging Americans four times the amount of
what Canadians pay it not an outpouring of gratitude. Canadians pay
less because their government negotiates the prices with these insulin
companies (http://www.kfvs12.com/2019/03/05/lawmaker-weighs-
annoucement-by-drug-maker-sell-lower-cost-insulin/). When will the
United States do the same thing? Why do you have to have a National
Health Care system to do it? Just regulate the industry, like gas and
electric, and start setting limits on the prices they can charge. And
the article says that Senator Durbin is urging the FDA to approve lower
cost drugs. There is no generic insulin. Why, after almost 100 years,
is there no generic insulin? Generic insulin is not the solution to
this dilemma. Just lower the cost. They've made their money over the
years, the patent for humalog is long since expired.
Like I said, Eli Lilly can just take humalog, stick it in a different
bottle, relabel it, and tell you it's a generic. The FDA can't regulate
prices. Let them be in charge of making sure drugs are safe, but don't
leave them in charge of this. Mr. Gottlieb went and changed the
category from a drug to a biologic--that didn't lower the price, it
only created new patent s. If there was a regulated industry, the price
would still be controlled on new patents.
Recap:

The drug industry needs to be regulated. These companies need to
be saved from themselves. They don't know how to do it on their own.

Insulin needs to be available over the counter without a
prescription. (Kevin's Law has been passed in many states to authorize
pharmacies to give an emergency, up to 30 day, supply of insulin and
the pharmacy and insurance can catch up with paperwork afterwards.)

The United States needs to trust citizens to use insulin
correctly. It's available over the counter in Mexico.

The United States needs to find out exactly how much it costs to
make insulin. The U.S. found out how much it costs to make an epipen.

PBMs need to be abolished.

High deductible healthcare plans need to be abolished.

If insulin is not accessible over the counter without a
prescription, then it should be exempt from any and all deductibles on
healthcare plans, as should any prescription medications.

No diabetic in America should be denied healthcare
(#medicare4all).

People shouldn't have to take out gofundme accounts to raise
money for their medicines.

People shouldn't have to take out home equity loans and second
mortgages to pay for their medicines.

People shouldn't have to turn to the black market and Facebook
to find insulin.

People shouldn't have to go out of the country to get affordable
insulin (#insulin4all).

People shouldn't have to share insulin with family members.

People shouldn't have to revert to using the ``WALMART'' insulin
which is going to kill them if not used correctly.

People shouldn't have to rely on coupons and scrounge around for
ways to get discounts on insulin and other drugs.

People shouldn't have to feel they are a burden to their family
and ration insulin.

Companies that price gouge should be held accountable, fined and
sued so they will stop being so greedy.

CEOs shouldn't be making so much money while people are dying.

Insurance companies shouldn't be able to dictate which medicines
and insulin they want us to use. We should be able to choose the one
that works for us. That's how the PBMs work. They tell us which insulin
they will pay for. If insulin was available over the counter, the PBMs
wouldn't be able to dictate which kind of insulin I want to use, just
like they can't decide what kind of bread I want to eat or if I want to
buy Mobil or Shell gasoline for my car.

The Hatch-Waxman Act is being abused.

The V.A. can negotiate prices for drugs and medical care, but
only Medicare Parts A and B can negotiate prices. Medicare part D needs
to be able to negotiate prices in an unregulated industry. You have the
power, use it.

Insulin doesn't need new R&D. Using that as a reason for high
prices is a bad excuse for high prices.

Television ads for prescription drugs has to stop, just as
tobacco ads stopped.

Politicians have to stop taking money from big pharmaceuticals.
The pharmaceutical companies are like the mafia.

If financial aid is going to remain available, the income
requirements need to be adjusted to keep up with inflation and keep up
with the times. People that make a decent, living wage, should be able
to get some relief if these high deductible plans continue to exist. If
you just got rid of high deductibles and the prices got lowered, we
wouldn't be talking about this.

Be proactive, not reactive. Right now we are in a reactive
position.

A sick person will always use the system since most want to
live. Those that don't want to live will commit suicide.

More teaching needs to take place in our country on what Type 1
Diabetes really is. It is often mixed up with Type 2 diabetes. They are
not the same disease.

The PBMs need to be hired by the U.S. government to do the
negotiating for lower prices, not be employees of the insurance
companies. That creates a racket and secrets.

Listen to more REAL stories of the burdens placed on Americans.
Let the Americans tell you what they need and want, not allow the
pharmaceutical companies to run their own agenda. Without sick people,
they wouldn't even be in business.

Put the brakes on big pharma.

List prices work against the patient. Either set lower list
prices or pass on the discounts to the patient.

Patients don't care about pharmaceutical's position on the
formularies, they care about being well.

Stop the ``Happy Talk''; get down to business and pick up the
pen (#thepowerofthepen).

Lawmakers work for the citizens of the United States and get
paid by our tax dollars. It's time for lawmakers to listen to citizens
and not big pharma.

Soriot's wise words: VBP--It used to be a system that was fit
for purpose. Now it's no longer fit for purpose. No one in the system
can fix it for themselves. The government has to step up and change the
rules.

#painpassionpurpose: Three words uttered to Nette Worsham by
Congressman Cummings on January 29, 2019.

CEOs from the two other insulin manufacturers, Eli Lilly and
NovoNordisk need to be subpoenaed. They have been invited too many
times and never accept the invite.

Don't send letters asking for CEOs to tell you how much it costs
them to make their drugs, make them come to Washington to tell you so
the public can hear their lame excuses as well.
Thank you, and I look forward to the next showdown with the PBMs and
insurance companies. They are part of the problem, not part of the
solution. The United States government is the entity that is part of
the solution.
Sincerely,
Laura T. Ricci
Statement of Rhonda Rowland
R2 Communications, LLC
Atlanta, GA
March 5, 2019
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
Dirksen Senate Office Bldg.
Washington, DC 20510-6200
To whom it may concern:
This is in reference to the ``Drug Pricing in America: A Prescription
for Change, Part II'' hearing held on February 26, 2019.
As a person living with a rare disease and an advocate, I'm submitting
the attached articles that provide background on the discovery/
development of two old, cheap drugs that pharma has raised prices on,
and the impact on patients.
Best regards,
Rhonda Rowland
R2 Communications, LLC
[emailprotected]
RhondaRowland.com
404-680-9053
High drug costs: the tale of 4 women
In 2016, Berna Heyman testified before a U.S. Senate committee about
her personal experience with sudden and dramatic increases in drug
prices. She was forced to switch drugs to treat her chronic genetic
disease, which was not the ideal option for her.
``The only reason I changed was the cost,'' Berna testified. Her health
had been stable while taking the drug Syprine, which removes excess
copper in people with Wilson disease (WD) to prevent potentially fatal
poisoning. ``My doctor and I made the change only under duress.''
Valeant Pharmaceuticals (now Bausch Health) acquired the rights to
Syprine in 2010 and began increasing the price. It's an old drug that
was developed in the 1960s by British physician Dr. John Walshe, who
made it in his laboratory and distributed it for free for many years.
``It was cheap to make,'' he told me. The generic name for it is
trientine.
As a librarian at the College of William and Mary in Virginia for 34
years, Berna had good health insurance and drug coverage. Her WD went
undiagnosed for 60 years, making her one of the oldest patients to be
diagnosed. The first sign of her disease was cirrhosis of the liver
that was picked up incidentally by a radiologist.
Upon retirement, she was insured through Medicare and supplementary
insurance.
``By 2014 my projected co-pay exceeded $10,000 per year with my
insurance paying over $260,000,'' Berna testified. ``That is untenable.
Something has to be done.''
At the hearing, Valeant executives expressed regret and admitted to
being too aggressive with their pricing strategies. When questioned by
Senators, they said they'd lower their prices.
For 3 years, Berna has waited. But Bausch Health has yet to lower
prices.
``I left the hearing feeling hopeful, and anticipated changes by
Valeant,'' Berna told me. ``It's very disappointing. It's the same old,
same old.''
Therapist kept patients out of the system, but drug company put her in
it
Rose was completing her college degree in mechanical engineering when
she noticed that she drooled while reading. Then she began forgetting
math formulas, so she'd write them on her arm. As a straight-A student,
she was bewildered that she had to re-read book chapters because she
forgot what she'd read. She was on the crew team, but her fatigue got
so bad that she couldn't keep up.
``I left college and went home,'' said Rose, who asked that her name be
changed for privacy. After seeing more than a dozen doctors in New York
and not getting a diagnosis, she went to an ophthalmologist who told
her that some diseases can be diagnosed through the eye. He was right;
an exam revealed Rose had rust-colored rings in her eyes, known as
Kayser-Fleischer rings which are commonly seen in WD patients.
Once diagnosed, Rose began taking the de-coppering drug, penicillamine.
Her condition improved and she returned to college. But her WD left her
with some memory loss and she couldn't remember her calculus formulas.
She switched majors and got a degree in occupational therapy.
Rose moved to Arizona and worked full-time as an occupational therapist
for 20 years.
``Then one day I went to the pharmacy to pick up my WD drugs and was
told my co-pay was $12,000! I was a single mom raising two kids and I
couldn't afford it,'' said Rose. ``I felt totally screwed.''
She had been prescribed Cuprimine, the brand name version of
penicillamine--also made by Bausch Health. Penicillamine was discovered
in 1955, also by Dr. John Walshe. ``It's easy to make if you're a good
chemist,'' Dr. Walshe told me.
Rose tried zinc supplements, an inexpensive, alternate treatment for
WD, but they made her violently ill. Without her daily dose of
Cuprimine, her fatigue returned and depression set in. She could only
work part-time, so she lost her health insurance. Her WD symptoms
worsened, so she could no longer work and applied for disability
benefits.
``As an occupational therapist I was contributing to the system, and
keeping others out of the system,'' said Rose. ``Then the drug company
put me into the system.''
Importing drugs from Canada and overseas
After going without medication for months, Rose's uncle found a way for
her to get affordable penicillamine through a Canadian pharmaceutical
broker. At first, her supply came from England. ``The medicine looked
and smelled like what I had taken for years, although the brands were
different,'' said Rose. ``But then a shipment came from India that
didn't smell right.''
She looked for another option and found Duane, a prescription drug
broker in the Midwest who could get her drugs shipped directly from
Australia. She needed a doctor's prescription and paid about $200 for a
3-month supply.
``We operate in a loophole,'' Duane said. ``Individuals are allowed to
bring in a three-month supply of prescription drugs from other
countries.''
What Duane told me is partly true: It's illegal for individuals to
import prescription drugs in most circumstances, because the FDA can't
ensure the drugs' safety. And anyone who facilitates the importation is
also liable. But in reality, the FDA looks the other way.
So, it's tempting to take the risk. Duane imports an AIDS medication
for a client who had a $25,000 co-pay. ``I can get it for him for
$1,200 a month.''
With exorbitant drug prices and patients' growing inability to pay
them, there's momentum to make such drug imports legal. Five bills are
before Congress that would allow prescription drug imports, primarily
from Canada.
Staying at poverty level to get prescription drugs
Ashley Williams was about to start classes at Kansas State when she was
diagnosed with WD and had to quit school to go to work instead. She was
grateful to have a diagnosis for the hospitalizations and unnecessary
surgeries she experienced the previous 2 years.
``I needed health insurance, so I took a full-time job with a
technology company,'' said Ashley. ``I worked my way up from `coffee
girl' to project manager and was working 70-80 hours a week.'' Even
though she was taking Syprine, her health deteriorated. She thinks it
was due to working too hard, to prove she wasn't sick.
For medical reasons she got laid off and applied for disability
benefits. Now with Medicare and supplemental insurance to cover her
health care, she can't afford her Syprine co-pays.
``This year, I was told that the funds for Wilson disease were already
gone!'' said Ashley. ``The $1,200 co-pay for my 30 days of trientine
took my entire Social Security check.''
``A health insurance broker advised me to look into the PAN
Foundation,'' said Ashley. ``I qualified and get $10,000 a year to
cover the cost of my co-pay.'' The Patient Access Network Foundation
relies on donations to help people who are underinsured with medication
costs.
Patients have to reapply every January for the PAN Foundation's drug
benefit. ``But this year, I was told that the funds for Wilson disease
were already gone!'' said Ashley. ``The $1,200 co-pay for my 30 days of
trientine took my entire Social Security check.''
Teva Pharmaceuticals introduced the first generic trientine in 2018 to
compete with Bausch's Syprine.
Generic competition hasn't lowered the drug cost . . . yet
Dawn, who was diagnosed with WD at age 37 after her liver failed, was
shocked when she picked up her prescription for trientine in January.
The list price was $38,365.09. Her insurance co-pay was only $15.
Still, she's not taking her good fortune for granted, and is
stockpiling her drugs.
``I'm scared to take them all,'' said Dawn, who asked that her real
name not be used. ``I went without my drugs for 3 years because we
couldn't pay for them when the costs spiked.''
Ultimately, the drug saved her life. But they went bankrupt in the
process.
Her husband had taken a new job just before she was diagnosed with WD.
And then, just as their new insurance was coming through, ``the suckers
fired him,'' Dawn says. ``They knew I needed a liver transplant and was
really sick.''
She had no choice but to take Syprine, and ultimately, the drug saved
her life. But they went bankrupt in the process.
Bausch currently offers patient assistance programs to insured and
uninsured WD patients in the US who need Syprine or Cuprimine. ``Our
first priority is that every patient has access to the medicines they
need,'' a Bausch Health spokesperson said in a statement.
Dawn tried to get help from the drug company previously, but couldn't.
The inexpensive alternative, zinc therapy, made her sick.
Her husband eventually found a job that provided health insurance--700
miles from their home, in another state. ``He works 70 hours a week
hauling chemicals in extreme weather on treacherous roads. It aged him
so much.''
Dawn's liver healed enough so she could be taken off the transplant
list. Still, she's furious with the drug company for making the drug's
cost out of reach for 3 years. And, she's fearful it could happen
again.
How does the tale end for the 4 women?
Berna Heyman is encouraged that the problem of high drugs costs is
still a major discussion. ``That's the bright side,'' she said.
However, since she was forced to switch her WD medication, tests show
copper has reaccumulated in her liver. Her doctor advised a low-copper
diet for several months, but that didn't help. ``I may have to start
taking trientine again.''
Rose credits Duane for saving her life with the drug imports. But fear
of her supply line drying up led her to enroll in a clinical trial
testing a new drug for Wilson disease so she can get her life-saving
medication at no cost for the next five years. ``I hope the new drug
works,'' she said.
Fear over the uncertainty of being able to pay for her drugs also led
Ashley Williams to enroll in the new WD drug trial. By chance, she was
put in the ``standard of care'' arm of the trial. That means she
continued on trientine for a year and paid the drug's cost. ``Starting
in April, I will be taking the new study drug,'' she said. That means
she pays the $1,200 co-pay for her trientine for another month.
``It's scary to think that I have to stay in a drug trial to get my
medication paid for,'' Ashley said.
Even though Syprine saved Dawn's life, she's fearful that the drug's
cost could make it out of reach for her again. Her solution: Rationing
her drugs.
Perhaps this will be the year that the Wilson disease drugs Dr. John
Walshe discovered and developed more than 50 years ago will be
affordable again. But, the human toll and cost to society that the
drugs' price spikes caused, remains.
______
98-year-old drug inventor chastises pharma for ``behaving badly''
I've spent my career reporting medical news. It's an important topic to
me because I live with my own health challenge: A rare, genetic
condition called Wilson disease that allows copper--an essential
dietary mineral--to build up in the liver and brain, leading to copper
poisoning that can be fatal. It caused my liver to fail when I was a
college student. But I was lucky--I was diagnosed, there was a
treatment, and it worked.
Before 1955, my disease was fatal. Then, through a series of chance
events and serendipities, an English physician, Dr. John Walshe,
discovered a drug that turned Wilson disease (WD) into one that could
be treated and managed. The drug is known by its generic name,
penicillamine, and the brand names, Cuprimine and Depen.
While doing research for a book I'm writing on WD, I discovered that
Dr. Walshe is still very much alive and well at age 98. So I traveled
to Cambridge, England to thank him for saving my life and talk to him
about his drug discovery.
He invited me to his home, which is a William and Mary style house
built in the late 1600s, in the riverside village of Hemingford Grey,
near Cambridge. Talking in Dr. Walshe's quintessential English garden,
it didn't take him long to attack the pharmaceutical industry that now
sells the drug that he discovered and tested.
``The way they're charging for it now is absolutely immoral. There is
no other word for it,'' Dr. Walshe told me. ``It is totally immoral. It
is business at its worst!''
For more than 20 years I took Cuprimine and never paid more than $60 a
month for it. Today, it costs $31,426 a month making it the 13th most
expensive prescription drug in 2018.
Discovering the first treatment for Wilson disease
Listening to the story of Dr. Walshe's drug discovery, it's easy to
understand why he's incredulous about its cost.
The story began in 1954, when Dr. Walshe traveled to the United States
for a Fulbright Fellowship in Boston. ``I was working with Charlie
Davidson who was a liver doctor, and we were asked to see a Wilson
disease patient who had gone into liver failure,'' said Dr. Walshe.
They couldn't do anything to help the patient then, but crossing the
``bridge'' from what was then Boston City Hospital where the patient
was being cared for, back to Thorndike Laboratory where he worked, Dr.
Walshe had what he calls as inspiration: ``I said to Charlie Davidson,
`You know what this chap really needs is penicillamine.' And Charlie
Davidson said `What's that?' I told him I discovered this new amino
acid that had never been seen in human urine before,'' said Dr. Walshe.
Previously, while working in London during the early 1950s, Dr. Walshe
had studied laboratory samples from people who were given the
antibiotic penicillin. He observed that penicillamine--a derivative of
penicillin--binds with copper. It's a process called chelation. His
theory was that penicillamine could search out the excess copper in
people with Wilson disease, bind with it, and then remove it from the
body through urination.
Proving his idea
To test his theory, Dr. Walshe obtained some penicillamine from a
chemist at MIT. Then, he did what would be unheard of today--he tried
it on himself first. ``It didn't do me any harm and the next day I was
alive and well,'' he said. ``I decided if it was safe for me, it was
safe for the patient.''
Dr. Walshe gave penicillamine to the WD patient--who was in liver
failure at Boston City Hospital--and as he predicted, it got copper
out. When his fellowship in Boston ended, he returned to London with a
small supply of penicillamine to continue his experiments there.
``My father was England's leading neurologist at the time, and I asked
him to find some Wilson disease patients for me to try it out on,''
said Dr. Walshe. His father came through with a handful of patients,
and in 1956 Dr. Walshe reported in the American Journal of Medicine
that his drug discovery worked.
After that, Dr. Walshe searched for chemical companies willing to make
penicillamine so the new treatment could be made available to WD
patients as soon as possible. This was years before the start of the
current FDA drug approval process that requires costly and extensive
testing before a drug can be considered for marketing.
Developing an alternative
As word spread that there was a treatment for Wilson disease, doctors
started prescribing penicillamine for their patients. However, as more
patients took it, they found that some developed severe side effects.
So, Dr. Walshe looked for a second option.
``We had run into trouble with penicillamine, and I wanted an
alternative treatment,'' said Dr. Walshe.
By this time he was working at the University of Cambridge, and one
morning he ran into a biochemist named Dr. Hal Dixon. Dr. Walshe
explained his predicament, and Dr. Dixon pulled a chemical called
triethylene tetramine off his laboratory shelf.
``He said it was non-toxic and known to bind with copper,'' said Dr.
Walshe. ``He told me to try it, and that's how we got the drug
trientine. It was Hal Dixon's idea, and my work proving that it worked
and it was safe.''
Walshe made the drug himself
For years, Dr. Walshe and his assistant made trientine in their
laboratory until they could no longer keep up with demand.Dr. Dixon had
explained how to purify the chemical so it would be safe to use in
people. So, as he had done with penicillamine, Dr. Walshe searched for
a chemical company to make and distribute trientine. In 1985, trientine
became the fifth drug approved through the Orphan Drug Act.
``The trouble now is the people who make trientine behave so badly
about pricing,'' said Dr. Walshe. ``No doubt about it, they have
behaved appallingly badly about pricing.''
Univar Europe charges the UK's National Health Service the equivalent
of $96,000 to treat a patient for a year. Because of the high cost, the
NHS debated whether or not it could continue paying for the drug in
2019. The North American company Valeant Pharmaceuticals--now Bausch
Health--charges even more for its brand-name version, Syprine.
Investigating high drug costs
In 2016, Senator Susan Collins (R-Maine) launched a bipartisan
investigation into the extreme spikes that were being seen in drugs
that were off-patent. ``For example, the price of a Valeant drug that
is used to treat Wilson disease,'' said Collins, ``increased from $652
per month to more than $21,000 per month. That's more than a 3,000
percent increase in price with no justification.''
``It's monstrous, it's iniquitous what they're charging for it,'' said
Dr. Walshe. For several years he made trientine in his laboratory. ``I
sent it out for free on my basic laboratory expense allowance without
upsetting it. It was cheap!''
In the United States, Bausch Health now markets Syprine (the brand-name
version of trientine) as well as Cuprimine.The company acquired both
drugs in 2010 and, soon after, boosted the prices astronomically.
Despite extensive adverse publicity, a Congressional hearing, and the
addition of generic equivalents the company has yet to lower the drugs'
unjustified cost.
Walshe never profited from his drug discoveries
It's been almost 65 years since Dr. John Walshe had his ``inspiration''
while walking across the bridge at Harvard. I asked him where the idea
came from. He simply pointed to the sky and posed the rhetorical
question: ``Where do ideas come from?''
Dr. Walshe's discovery of penicillamine and the development of
trientine turned Wilson disease from a death sentence into a treatable
disease. Today, the challenge for patients is not finding treatment,
but being able to pay for it. Dr. Walshe says he never made any money
from the two drugs, instead devoting his medical career to helping
people with WD.
His idea saved my life. Now with the prices being charged for his
discoveries, will others be so lucky?