- INSULIN ACCESS AND AFFORDABILITY: THE RISING COST OF TREATMENT
[Senate Hearing 115-673]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-673
INSULIN ACCESS AND AFFORDABILITY: THE RISING COST OF TREATMENT
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON AGING
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
WASHINGTON, DC
__________
MAY 8, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-17
Printed for the use of the Special Committee on Aging
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-281 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON AGING
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine, Chairman
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah
ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
JEFF FLAKE, Arizona
BILL NELSON, Florida
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
BOB CORKER, Tennessee
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
DOUG JONES, Alabama
----------
Kevin Kelley, Majority Staff Director
Kate Mevis, Minority Staff Director
CONTENTS
----------
Page
Opening Statement of Senator Susan M. Collins, Chairman..........
1
Statement of Senator Robert P. Casey, Jr., Ranking Member........
3
PANEL OF WITNESSES
William T. Cefalu, M.D., Chief Scientific, Medical and Mission
Officer, American Diabetes Association.........................
5
Paul Grant, Father of Son With Type 1 Diabetes, New Gloucester,
Maine..........................................................
6
Lois Ondik, Retiree, Blandon, Pennsylvania.......................
9
Jeremy A. Greene, M.D., Ph.D, Professor of Medicine and the
History of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University..................
10
APPENDIX
Prepared Witness Statements
William T. Cefalu, M.D., Chief Scientific, Medical and Mission
Officer, American Diabetes Association.........................
34
Chart submitted by Dr. Cefalu................................
41
Paul Grant, Father of Son With Type 1 Diabetes, New Gloucester,
Maine..........................................................
42
Lois Ondik, Retiree, Blandon, Pennsylvania.......................
43
Jeremy A. Greene, M.D., Ph.D, Professor of Medicine and the
History of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University..................
45
Additional Statements for the Record
Closing Statement, Senator Robert P. Casey, Jr., Ranking Member..
58
Closing Statement, Senator Richard Blumenthal....................
58
Chart submitted by Senator Susan M. Collins, Chairman............
59
Sabrina Burbeck, Family with Type 1 Diabetes, Old Town, Maine....
60
Gail DeVore, Type 1 Diabetic, Denver, Colorado...................
60
Clayton McCook, Daughter with Type 1 Diabetes, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma.......................................................
60
Patients for Affordable Drugs (P4AD).............................
61
Endocrine Society................................................
62
T1International..................................................
67
American's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP).........................
70
INSULIN ACCESS AND AFFORDABILITY: THE RISING COST OF TREATMENT
----------
TUESDAY, MAY 8, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Special Committee on Aging,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room SD-562, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Susan M.
Collins (Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Collins, Tillis, Fischer, Casey,
Gillibrand, Blumenthal, Donnelly, Warren, Cortez Masto, and
Jones.
Also present: Senator Shaheen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SUSAN M. COLLINS, CHAIRMAN
The Chairman. The hearing will come to order.
Good morning. When a team of three scientists at the
University of Toronto discovered insulin in 1921, they
revolutionized the treatment for diabetes, transforming it from
a debilitating and ultimately fatal disease, to a manageable
chronic condition. The scientists sold the patent for $1 each
to the university, a move intended to ensure that those in need
would always have affordable access. They explicitly stated
that profit was not their goal.
Yet the cost of insulin has soared in recent years. In
2013, more was spent on insulin than on all other diabetes
medications combined. In a new report to be released today, the
American Diabetes Association notes that between 2002 and 2013,
the average price of insulin nearly tripled.
More than 30 million Americans live with diabetes,
including one out of four seniors. In Maine, there are more
than 137,000 people living with this condition--roughly 11
percent of our population.
Untreated, diabetes can lead to vision problems, nerve
damage, kidney failure, heart disease, stroke, and ultimately
death. Since 2015, diabetes has remained the seventh leading
cause of death in the United States, claiming nearly 80,000
lives last year.
Fortunately, diabetes is treatable. Improving diabetes
treatment has long been one of my top priorities since I
founded the Senate Diabetes Caucus in 1997, and I have invited
my co-Chair, Senator Jeanne Shaheen, to join us here today, and
she will be here shortly.
For those living with type 1 diabetes, in which the body
loses its ability to produce insulin, treatment requires life-
long insulin administration. Five percent of adults diagnosed
with diabetes have type 1, and in children and youth with
diabetes, this type accounts for the majority of cases. Those
with type 1 diabetes depend on insulin to survive and manage
their disease. Insulin is also critical for many older
Americans with type 2 diabetes.
For some people with type 2, lifestyle changes and non-
insulin medications can allow them to manage their diabetes;
however, approximately a third of those with type 2 require
insulin.
Medical costs for Americans with diabetes are more than
double those incurred by individuals without diabetes. The
disease costs our Nation a total of $327 billion per year; one
out of three Medicare dollars goes to treating people with
diabetes.
Insulin is one of the most expensive categories of drugs
purchased by private payers and government health care payers.
People with diabetes who use insulin, particularly those with
type 1, need this medication every day in order to live. It is
a matter of life or death.
The rising cost of insulin presents a barrier to care for a
growing number of Americans with diabetes. We have heard
stories from people across the country who have had to ration
or skip doses altogether to make their insulin supply last
longer. Some have sought medication from other countries, while
others have turned to the black market. Still others have
raised funds for their insulin using the Internet. These
measures can result in major risks that can compromise health
and even life.
While the prescription drug market, and the insulin market
specifically, is opaque to virtually everyone involved, one
fact is clear: The patients are not getting the best deal. The
price for a vial of Humalog increased from $21 in 1996, to $35
in 2001, to $234 in 2015, to $275 in 2017. Today we will hear
testimony from one of my constituents who paid more than $320,
out-of-pocket, for the same product last year. And that was
even after using a coupon. This chart, which my staff compiled
using publicly available price data, illustrates this
disturbing trend.
[The chart can be found in the Additional Statements for
the Record, page 59.]
As list prices have increased, so too have out-of-pocket
costs. For Medicare Part D beneficiaries, out-of-pocket costs
increased by 10 percent per year between 2006 and 2013,
outpacing overall inflation, medical care service costs, and
spending on prescription drugs in general. For those without
insurance, the costs are untenable. The cost of a single vial
can be more than $300, and some patients need more than one
vial per month to effectively manage their disease.
Insulin products have changed since 1921. Early versions of
insulin were produced from purified animal extracts, and
scientists worked to improve duration and purity. In the late
1970's, the discovery of recombinant technology led to the
approval of the first synthetic human insulin in 1982, which
better mimicked human insulin and reduced allergic reactions.
Continued improvements through the use of recombinant
technology resulted in the development of insulin analogues
with modified chemical structures and improved physiological
effects.
Insulin analogues have provided greater flexibility in
administration and have allowed many patients to better manage
their conditions, especially those with type 1 diabetes and
those prone to having low blood sugar. However, as more
products entered the market, prices began to increase
significantly, even for the older versions of the insulin. The
use of higher-priced analogues has grown, while the use of
lower-priced human insulins has declined, even though for many
patients, clinical efficacy among the various products is not
markedly different.
I have previously expressed my concern with a practice
called ``evergreening.'' This means when pharmaceutical
companies obtain patents based on small innovations to extend
the exclusivity of a product after its initial patent expires.
For insulin, a careful look is warranted to determine if minor
modifications were used to just extend the patent protections
and discourage competitors.
In the face of skyrocketing costs of newer versions of a
time-tested therapy, too many consumers find themselves without
affordable alternatives and find that they are paying more each
year.
Last Congress, this Committee conducted a bipartisan
investigation into the sudden, dramatic price increases of
certain decades-old prescription drugs. At the end of our
investigation, we published a report documenting cases in which
companies that had not invested a dollar in the research and
development of a drug nevertheless hiked its price to
unconscionable levels.
In February, this Committee examined why prices have soared
for drugs used to treat rheumatoid arthritis. Today we continue
our study of drug pricing as we examine why the price continues
to climb for insulin, a life-saving drug for so many Americans.
Far too many individuals and families are familiar with the
devastating toll diabetes has taken on people of every age,
race, and nationality. The cost of a drug that is approaching
its 100th birthday should not add to that burden.
I now would like to turn to our Ranking Member, Senator
Casey, for his opening statement and express my appreciation to
the members who have joined us today.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., RANKING
MEMBER
Senator Casey. Chairman Collins, thank you very much for
holding this hearing today. I am pleased that we were able to
invite your co-Chair of the Diabetes Caucus, Senator Shaheen,
to participate in our hearing. And we are grateful to be
examining this subject today.
An estimated 30.3 million Americans are living with
diabetes. Also, eighty-six million Americans have prediabetes,
and that number that have that circumstance do not even know
they have it in many instances.
In my home State of Pennsylvania, 12.8 percent, or 1.4
million people, just in Pennsylvania--and that is of the adult
population--have a diagnosis of diabetes as of 2014.
We know there are many complications associated with it,
including heart disease, stroke, kidney disease, blindness, and
even death.
In Pennsylvania alone, diabetes and prediabetes cost an
estimated $13.4 billion a year. One state, $13.4 billion. That
includes the cost of physician visits, hospital care, and, yes,
the cost of prescription medication like insulin.
Indeed, even with advancements in medication and
technology, treatments can oftentimes be out of reach for our
loved ones. That is unacceptable. No senior should have to go
without life-saving medication.
I am pleased to say that Congress did take steps to make
coverage more affordable through the Affordable Care Act--by
expanding Medicaid, by closing the Medicare prescription drug
coverage gap--known as the ``donut hole''--and by providing
preventative care at no cost. We must continue to protect and
strengthen the Affordable Care Act. And we must keep the
promise that Congress made to the American people that Medicare
and Medicaid will be there, always will be there, when they
need it.
But our work is not done. As we hear from our witnesses
today, there is not one policy that will address the rising
cost of prescription drugs, especially in the context of
seniors. The price of insulin has tripled between 2002 and
2013, just 11 years. There is more we can and should be doing
to shield patients from sky-high costs.
It is for this reason that I am so pleased that we are
having this hearing today and that Chairman Collins and I had
the chance to participate in hearings in the Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions Committee. We have aired issues and policy
recommendations, but now we must act to address the cost of
prescription drugs.
The President will soon speak on this topic. He has
indicated that he, too, recognizes that more needs to be done.
The time is now for both bold leadership and bipartisanship.
Access to affordable prescriptions, like insulin, is a matter
for so many Americans of literally life and death.
I look forward to our discussion today. Thank you, Chairman
Collins.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Senator Casey. We will
now turn to our panel of witnesses.
First we will hear from Dr. William Cefalu, the chief
scientific, medical, and mission officer of the American
Diabetes Association. Dr. Cefalu served as the chair of the
working group convened by the ADA to conduct a comprehensive
study of the insulin affordability problem and to provide the
ADA and policymakers with advice and guidance. Today he will
announce the release of that report.
Next we will hear from Paul Grant, a father from New
Gloucester, Maine, whose son Solomon was diagnosed with type 1
diabetes at the age of 9. Paul will discuss his experience
caring for a son with diabetes and the challenges that he faces
affording the insulin that his son requires.
I will now turn to our Ranking Member to introduce our
witness from Pennsylvania.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Chairman Collins. We are grateful
to all of our witnesses. I have the pleasure to introduce Lois
Ondik from Blandon, Pennsylvania. Ms. Ondik is a grandmother, a
mother, and has a foster dog named ``Murfee.'' I have not seen
Murfee yet, but I am sure we will have a chance to meet.
Five years after a diagnosis of diabetes, Lois found
herself struggling to manage her condition. By happenstance,
she saw an advertisement for a diabetes self-management program
at her local grocery store. The rest is history. She will tell
us about the class she took through her local Area Agency on
Aging. Lois is joined today by Martha Sitler, one of the
instructors from her diabetes self-management class. That class
has saved her thousands of dollars in medication costs. Not
only that, I understand that Lois and Murfee are now exercising
every day and walking two and a half miles every single day. By
all accounts, her class has been life-changing, as Lois will
share.
So, Lois, we are grateful you are here. Thanks for making
the trip from Pennsylvania.
The Chairman. And, finally, I am pleased to introduce Dr.
Jeremy Greene. Dr. Greene is a professor of medicine and the
history of medicine at Johns Hopkins University. He treats
patients at a community health center in Baltimore as well. Dr.
Greene will discuss his experience treating patients with
diabetes as well as his research on the history of insulin and
competition in the market.
We welcome all of you for joining us, and we are going to
start with Dr. Cefalu.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM T. CEFALU, M.D., CHIEF SCIENTIFIC, MEDICAL
AND MISSION OFFICER, AMERICAN DIABETES ASSOCIATION
Dr. Cefalu. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Collins,
Ranking Member Casey, and distinguished members of the Senate
Special Committee on Aging for the opportunity to discuss
insulin affordability. As you know, more than 30 million
Americans have diabetes, and approximately 7.4 million of them
rely on insulin. For millions of people with diabetes--
including everyone with type 1 diabetes--access to insulin is a
matter of life and death. There is no medication that can be
substituted for insulin. As the leading organization whose
mission is to prevent and cure diabetes and improve the lives
of all of those affected by diabetes, the American Diabetes
Association believes that no individual in need of insulin
should ever go without it due to prohibitive costs.
In 1921, Canadian scientists Frederick Banting and Charles
Best discovered insulin, revolutionizing diabetes care and
making it possible for patients to live with the disease. Along
with their partner, James Collip, Banting and Best sold the
patent to the University of Toronto for $3 to ensure affordable
insulin for all who needed it. Further discoveries have
resulted in new formulations of insulin, advancing from the
animal insulin to the human insulin, and in the 1990's to the
human analogues. In recent years there have been fewer
advancements in insulin formulations, yet the prices continue
to rise, even for the off-patent insulins.
Between 2002 and 2013, the average price of insulin nearly
tripled, causing patients' out-of-pocket costs to rise and
creating a tremendous financial burden for many with diabetes
who need insulin.
In November 2016, the ADA Board of Directors unanimously
passed a resolution calling on all entities in the insulin
supply chain, including manufacturers, wholesalers, PBMs,
insurers, and pharmacies, to substantially increase
transparency in pricing associated with the delivery of insulin
and ensure that no person with diabetes is denied affordable
access to insulin. The resolution also called upon Congress to
hold hearings with all entities in the supply chain to identify
the reasons for the dramatic increases in insulin prices and
ensure that all people who use insulin have affordable access
to the insulin they need.
In concert with the board resolution, the ADA initiated a
grassroots petition calling for the same actions. Over 311,000
people have signed this petition, making it the largest
collection of signatures on an ADA petition to date. The ADA
has also collected 800 stories of people with diabetes,
caregivers, and health care providers who are directly burdened
by the increasing costs of insulin.
For example, we heard from Michael, who reported paying
over $700 a month for the insulin he needs to stay alive. That
cost is 59 percent above his monthly mortgage payment and 143
percent above his monthly insurance premium, a substantial
financial burden for him or, for that matter, for many
Americans.
As a physician and a clinician scientist, I have witnessed
firsthand how the incredible research advances and the
innovative therapies resulting from investment in biomedical
research have dramatically improved the lives of those with
diabetes. However, I have also observed that the incredible
innovation may not benefit those who are not able to access and
afford such treatments. This became even more apparent to me
when I joined the ADA as the chief scientific, medical, and
mission officer in February of last year, where I have had the
vantage point to appreciate more fully the daily struggles of
individuals with diabetes through their stories.
In the spring of 2017, the ADA Board of Directors
established an Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group
to ascertain the full scope of the problem and to advise the
ADA on the execution of strategies to lower the cost of
insulin. Throughout 2017 and into 2018, the working group held
discussions with over 20 stakeholders throughout the supply
chain to discuss how this complex and complicated system
impacts the out-of-pocket costs for individuals with diabetes.
The final product is a white paper which will be released
online today outlining what we have learned from existing
public information and our interview process.
The conclusions and recommendations of the working group,
to be released today, are only a starting point. Beginning with
increased transparency within the supply chain, every
stakeholder must work toward a common goal, and that goal is to
ensure affordable insulin is within reach for all who need it.
Again, thank you, Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey,
and all the members of the Committee for convening such a
hearing on this critical issue today. The ADA looks forward to
working with you and every stakeholder in the insulin supply
chain on strategies to lower the rising costs of insulin.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Doctor.
Mr. Grant, welcome.
STATEMENT OF PAUL GRANT, FATHER OF SON WITH TYPE 1 DIABETES,
NEW GLOUCESTER, MAINE
Mr. Grant. Good morning. Thank you, Senator Collins,
Ranking Member Casey, and members of the Senate Aging
Committee. It is a privilege and an honor to be here to testify
today.
My name is Paul Grant. I am a father of four children:
Oliver, 18 years old; Jordan, 16; Solomon, 13; and Levi, 11. We
live in the small community of Gray-New Gloucester, Maine, and
I would describe us as an active family. We play a lot of
sports: basketball, baseball, soccer, football, lacrosse,
softball. We are usually on a field or in a gymnasium most
days. My children mean the world to me, and I love coaching
them and watching them play.
At the end of January in 2014, my son Solomon became very
ill. For at least a week, he laid on the couch with flu-like
symptoms. He was very lethargic, had stomach pain, grayish pale
color, noticeably thinner, and he had glossed-over eyes. His
mother had taken him to the doctor's, but we were told he had
the flu and it would just run its course. We treated him with
ibuprofen and Tylenol and made sure he drank lots of fluids.
But Sol's condition did not improve. In fact, it only appeared
to only get worse.
I was coaching youth basketball the day I got a call from
Solomon's mother, and she was sad and upset. Sol was still very
ill, and she decided that she would take him to the ER at St.
Mary's Hospital in Lewiston, Maine.
My other three kids and I left basketball. We met her at
the ER. And when I arrived, Sol was on a gurney, hooked up to
an IV, surrounded by nurses. And the on-call doctor eventually
came in and looked at us and said, ``Your son has type 1
diabetes.'' His blood sugar that day was over 800. This was
more than 4 years ago now, but I can remember this day like it
was yesterday. You can imagine the feelings his mother and I
experienced when we heard the words, ``Your son has type 1
diabetes.''
Our son has a disease. We experienced feelings of sadness,
confusion, fear, astonishment, and bewilderment, just to name a
few. The three of us spent that weekend in the ICU, and our
lives were forever changed.
Today Sol is 13 years old and a seventh grade student at
Gray-New Gloucester Middle School. At his school there are
several students that share that same disease of diabetes, and
the school system does really a pretty good job at helping
these students manage their disease. Besides going to the
nurse's office several times a day to check his blood sugar and
carrying around a diabetes bag, things are pretty normal for my
13-year-old boy. He has a good group of friends, he has great
teachers, and he loves playing basketball. As long as he has
insulin and checks his blood sugar regularly, he manages it
pretty well.
I work for a small general contracting company, Wally J.
Staples Builders, Incorporated, in Brunswick, Maine. and we
build new homes, additions, and garages. And we complete many
interior and exterior renovations, anything to do with
construction. My job is I am a project estimator. I absolutely
love my job, and I have had the opportunity to work on
thousands of construction projects over the years.
Unfortunately, like many small businesses, my employer does not
provide health insurance, so I purchase it for myself and my
children through the marketplace, which is very expensive and
very complicated. I pay a high deductible to keep my monthly
premium lower. So, consequently, I end up paying a lot out-of-
pocket for necessary supplies for Solomon, approximately
$2,500.00 last year just on insulin supplies and diabetic
supplies, and I will have spent close to $15,000 for health
care for 2017.
Solomon needs two types of insulin: Humalog and Lantus. In
2017, I would typically pay $300 for a 90-day supply of Humalog
through Express Scripts and $150 for a 90-day supply of Lantus.
This seemed like a lot--until this past January when I called
to refill Solomon's Humalog prescription, and it was going to
be $900 for a 90-day supply. Nearly $1,000 for medicine that
Solomon absolutely needs to be alive and about three times more
than what I had been paying. So I kind of went into panic mode
as I was low on Humalog, and I needed to get it as soon as
possible. I tried to get answers from my insurance company, and
it was difficult, hard to get any help with that. I do not
think they understand our health plan. I know I do not.
I ended up purchasing a 30-day supply at Walmart to get me
by until I could figure things out. That 30-day supply cost me
$322, and that included a coupon. But I had no choice. I had to
have insulin for my son.
No father ever wants to see what would happen if you run
out of insulin for your child with type 1. I remember Sol's
state in the week that he was first diagnosed, when his body
first stopped producing insulin on its own, and I know I have
to do whatever to make sure he has insulin. I have purchased it
on a credit card. I have borrowed insulin from friends.
So when I saw that the price had hiked to nearly $1,000 for
a 90-day supply, I knew it was something I could not afford.
And I spent several hours and days reaching out to friends in
the diabetic community looking for an affordable option.
Ultimately, I found a pharmacy in Canada where I could purchase
a 90-day supply of Humalog for $294, and that included a $50
shipping fee. And this is with no contribution from my
insurance company. That was January 22d, and I just refilled
that prescription the beginning of April with the same pharmacy
in Canada. Last week, I checked with Express Scripts to see how
much a 90-day prescription would be for Solomon's Humalog, and
it would cost me $1,489, and that is with my insurance.
As I mentioned, I help people build houses for a living. I
am good at my job. I can tell you very accurately how much it
would cost to build a new home or put an addition on your home.
But I cannot tell you how much it is going to cost from month
to month to buy insulin, which I need to keep my son healthy.
I just do not understand why insulin for children with type
1 diabetes is so expensive and why I can purchase it in Canada
for so much less. We are just talking about the cost of insulin
today, but there are many other things like insulin pumps and
glucose monitors out there that would make children's lives and
parents' lives so much easier if they were more affordable.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today to share our story. I would be happy to answer questions.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Grant, for sharing
your experience.
Ms. Ondik
STATEMENT OF LOIS ONDIK, RETIREE,
BLANDON, PENNSYLVANIA
Ms. Ondik. Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and
members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me here today.
It is an honor to be here.
My name is Lois Ondik. I am 73 years old and a resident of
Blandon, Pennsylvania. I have three children and two
grandchildren. I am a retired school bus driver for the Berks
County Intermediate Unit.
Five years ago, my doctor diagnosed me with type 2
diabetes. At that time my doctor wanted me to start on
medication to help manage my blood sugar and A1C. A1C measures
the amount of hemoglobin in the blood that has glucose attached
to it, and an A1C level of 5.7 percent is considered normal. An
A1C of 5.7 to 6.4 is pre-diabetes and 6.5 and over is type 2
diabetes. Five generations of my family have been diagnosed
with diabetes, myself being the fifth generation, and now my
daughter has just been diagnosed with pre-diabetes, making her
the sixth generation. I understand the toll that it can take on
both your body and finances, and I was concerned about the side
effects of medications, and I knew that the cost of medication
would likely eat into my budget and my savings. So I insisted
on trying to manage my condition on my own, without medication.
And for a while, I was able to do so.
During a recent visit with my doctor, I was again told that
my blood sugar and A1C levels would soon require me to begin
taking medication. And so, again, I thought to myself that
there had to be another option.
Then I saw an advertisement for a diabetes self-management
program through Berks Encore, my local Area Agency on Aging,
hanging on the bulletin board at my local grocery store. I
ended up registering for the diabetes self-management class. I
did not know what the class would be about when I signed up,
but knew that I needed to manage my diabetes better or face the
bills and side effects associated with medication.
The class was a blessing. We met once a week for two and a
half hours for 6 weeks, and it was run by two trained leaders,
and one of my leaders, Martha Sitler, joins me here today.
My classmates were at different levels in their disease,
including those with a new diagnosis, people managing with
metformin medication, and people on insulin. I met a woman who
used an insulin pump and another who was struggling to manage
her blood sugar, even with insulin. Meeting them, learning
about the side effects, and knowing how costly the medications
can be affirmed my resolve to manage my diabetes on my own for
as long as possible.
The class is evidence-based, so I know that I learned about
techniques to deal with the symptoms of diabetes that really
work. We discussed how to deal with emotions and stress
management and also talked about foot care, exercise, healthy
eating, and many other topics, especially how to talk to our
doctors.
Before these classes, I did not regularly test my blood
sugar, but I started to once I joined the diabetes self-
management program. I also tracked everything I ate and learned
how food and exercise affected my blood sugar. The class helped
me understand the amount of food I need per day, including how
to balance protein, carbohydrates, and fats to better control
my blood sugar.
At the end of every session, each individual created an
action plan, something they wanted to accomplish before the
next class. For example, I wanted to start exercising. My plan
was to start low and slow, to exercise 15 minutes per day, 3
days a week. The following week we were accountable to our
classmates and had to report on how we did. Sometimes it is
hard to accomplish every goal you set, but being accountable to
my classmates helped me reach my goal. I found the peer-to-peer
support to be very important. The class was eye-opening, to say
the least.
After my diabetes self-management program ended, I joined a
free walking class entitled ``Walk with Ease,'' sponsored by
the Arthritis Foundation of Berks County. The program is
presented by Martha Sitler and Kathy Roberts of Berks Encore,
my local Area Agency on Aging. Today my foster dog, Murfee, and
I walk every day, and I use two pedometers to track my
activity. I went from zero exercise to more than 2.5 miles per
day. I think of the walking class as an extension of the
diabetes self-management program because of how important
exercise is in managing my disease.
I am pleased to say that since starting my class, I lost 13
pounds and lowered my A1C two-tenths of a point. In fact, the
doctor told me that had my A1C moved two-tenths of a point in
the opposite direction, she would have insisted I start taking
medication. That is when it all fell into perspective. I knew I
had the ability to manage my diabetes on my own; I just needed
the right tools.
The diabetes self-management program did just that. It gave
me the tools I need to manage my diabetes, and now I use those
tools to live a healthy life. I even told my doctor about the
course and recommended that she tell her patients about it. I
am now able to manage my disease through lifestyle changes
instead of having to purchase expensive medications and
supplies like insulin.
I believe it is important for people to have access to
supports to prevent or better manage their diabetes, and that
can help them avoid paying for high-cost medications. I am
concerned about the rising cost of medications across the board
because it puts treatment out of the reach of some people.
Again, thank you for the invitation to testify before the
Committee, and I look forward to answering your questions.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I congratulate you for
what you have been able to do. Your situation is, of course,
different from someone who has type 1 diabetes who has no
choice but to use insulin, no matter how healthy a lifestyle
they may have, or that one-third of adults with type 2 are
insulin-dependent. But I certainly congratulate you for the
steps you have taken.
Ms. Ondik. Thank you.
The Chairman. Dr. Greene.
STATEMENT OF JEREMY A. GREENE, M.D., PH.D., PROFESSOR OF
MEDICINE AND THE HISTORY OF MEDICINE, JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY
Dr. Greene. Thank you. Chairman Collins and Ranking Member
Casey, thank you so much for calling attention to this vital
matter. And if I may for a moment, I would also like to thank
Mr. Grant and Ms. Ondik for being willing to share your
personal testimonies as both patients and caregivers.
I speak as an individual and not on behalf of Johns Hopkins
University, but the affordability of life-saving medicines has
been a subject of central concern to my own career, both as a
historian of the pharmaceutical industry and an internist in an
inner-city community health center in East Baltimore. No single
issue exposes the tragedy and absurdity of our inability to
provide 20th century cures to patients in the 21st century as
does the increasing unaffordability of insulin for Americans
living with diabetes today.
As you know, diabetes affects more than 9 percent of the
U.S. population, more than 30 million Americans as of 2015. For
the million or so Americans with type 1 diabetes, insulin is an
absolute requirement for survival. Since their bodies no longer
produce this vital hormone, without access to a pharmaceutical
version they die preventable deaths. Of the larger proportion
of Americans living with type 2 diabetes whose bodies are no
longer responsive to the insulin they do produce, some can
manage their illness with lifestyle measures such as dietary
change, exercise, and weight loss. Most, however, require
treatment with one or more oral medications in order to prevent
the many serious long-term complications that type 2 diabetes
brings: blindness, stroke, heart disease, kidney failure, loss
of limbs, coma, and death. For many of these patients, oral
medications are not enough. Roughly one out of every four
patients with type 2 diabetes--and, Madam Chairman, the new
statistic of one out of every three will require insulin. For
more than 7 million Americans, this drug is a necessary tool to
avoid preventable loss of life and limb.
Controlling diabetes with insulin is not easy. There are a
number of social, biological, economic, psychological, and
structural factors that complicate the ability of individual
patients to manage their diabetes. Yet until recently, the cost
of insulin--a drug first patented in 1923--was not considered
to be part of that problem. But over the past decade in my
clinic, when I have asked my patients why they are not taking
their insulin as prescribed, I increasingly heard the cost of
medicine itself was becoming prohibitive. I thought perhaps the
problem was that I was prescribing the wrong insulin, the
expensive newer versions, when really I should prescribe the
cheaper older generic versions. And I was surprised to learn
that this thing, ``generic insulin,'' simply did not exist. All
insulin for sale in the United States in 2015 came from one of
three brand-name manufacturers--Eli Lilly, Sanofi-Aventis, and
Novo Nordisk--who control 99 percent of the nearly $27 billion
global insulin market by volume, even though none of the main
agents used are protected by patents anymore.
In a recent survey, more than one out of four type 1
diabetics admitted to rationing insulin at least once due to
cost in the past year. More than half of them had rationed
insulin monthly, weekly, or even daily. A colleague of mine
found the same proportion for her type 2 diabetes clinic. One
in four rationed or withheld insulin the past year due to cost.
By some reports, the price of insulin products have
increased more than 270 percent in the past decade. Eli Lilly's
Humalog was $21 a vial when first introduced in 1996, but by
2017 cost $275 for a month's supply. And these dramatic
increases, as we have heard, have real consequences for
Americans living with diabetes who face increasingly untenable
choices between insulin and other necessary expenses of daily
life.
Now, I do not mean to suggest that the short-acting agent
Humalog or the long-acting agent Lantus do not represent true
innovations compared to the original pork or beef insulins of
the 1920's. No doubt for many patients these innovations are
worth the added price. What is surprising, however, is that the
trailing edge of old insulin products has not become a market
for generic competition, instead becoming a set of obsolete
products that have been removed from the market.
On the whole, it is hard to say that a patient in 2018 who
cannot afford their insulin, let alone the array of patent-
protected glucometers and test strips or pumps used to titrate
it, is better served by having the option--only having the
option of marginally more effective agents compared to the
quite effective versions that could have been generically
available as of 1968 or 1988 or 2008 had a cheaper generic
competitive market appeared when patents expired.
Preserving access to insulin is not a Democratic or a
Republican issue. But we will make no progress unless we can
understand why the insulin market is still limited to only
three players, how insulin prices are actually determined.
Congress alone holds the power to illuminate how the hidden
pieces in the puzzle of drug pricing actually fit together.
Only Congress has the power to follow the molecule through all
the steps from production to consumption and understand where
exactly this market is being distorted to provide evidence that
will lead to a true and lasting solution.
As this Special Committee did just a few years ago when
confronted with the problem of rising prices of off-patent
drugs, I urge you to find continued space for bipartisan
investigation into this issue affecting millions of Americas.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Dr. Greene.
Mr. Grant, I want to start with you. I was really struck by
your comparison of the fact that when you are on a job, you
give a concrete estimate to your customers of how much the cost
is going to be of the project. But when you go to fill a
prescription for insulin for your son, you have no idea what it
is going to be. It just keeps going up and up and up.
You testified that ultimately you switched to an
alternative method of obtaining Humalog because you just could
not afford to pay nearly $1,000 every 90 days for a therapy
that your son is going to need for the rest of his life. And
you are now purchasing it from Canada. Could you tell us what
the cost comparison is between the same insulin that you are
getting from Canada versus what you were paying in this
country?
Mr. Grant. Yes, so to get the same exact medicine, the
Humalog in a KwikPen form, a 90-day supply, in January it was
$294. That was still true at the beginning of April when I
ordered my second--when I refilled the prescription. And so the
crazy thing was in January, when I tried to get it through
Express Scripts through my insurance company, it was $900. And
then just as a little test, last week I called Express Scripts
just to check again, you know, what this would be if I was to
buy it today. And so even from January to last week, it had
gone up from $900 to $1,489. We are talking about the same
medicine. As Dr. Greene mentioned, there are only three people
that make insulin. So it would be great if there was something,
you know, more available right here in our own country.
The Chairman. And when you buy it from Canada, does it
count toward your deductible for your insurance?
Mr. Grant. No.
The Chairman. So that is another problem for you, too,
isn't it?
Mr. Grant. Right. So not being able to pay down my
deductible, it kind of hurts there as well.
The Chairman. Dr. Cefalu, I want to put up a chart that was
in your report that looks at the supply chain. And if it looks
complicated and obtuse, it is because it is. It just seems
unacceptable that a drug first discovered in 1921, despite the
improvements in duration and purity, has increased in price so
significantly in recent years and that the price continues to
climb.
[The chart can be found in the Additional Statements for
the Record, page 41.]
But when we look at the insulin supply chain--and, Dr.
Greene, I am going to ask you to comment on this as well--we
see this intricate web of transactions that move medicines and
money from manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, pharmacy
benefit managers, insurance providers, private payers,
government payers, finally to the consumer. And when we wrote
to the three manufacturers, they all claim that they are not
really benefiting from the increase in price, that their net
price is approximately the same. Yet we see this enormous
tripling, on average, according to the ADA, increase in the
cost of this essential insulin.
So what is going on here? Who is making the money that is
causing these enormous price increases? And are the
manufacturers correct when they say, ``We are not the ones. Our
net price is relatively stable over time''? Dr. Cefalu first
and then Dr. Greene.
Dr. Cefalu. Thank you, Senator. You are absolutely correct.
When we went into this exercise, we wanted to get clarity on
the situation. What we found, when you look at the chart, it is
complex and complicated. What we are finding is a system of
opaque negotiations where there is a flow of money that we do
not quite understand. We really do not understand where the
profits lie. We think there are incentives at every level of
the supply chain that facilitate or even encourage a high list
price from the manufacturers to the wholesalers to the PBMs to
the health plans.
The problem is that none of these savings and profits are
flowing back to the vulnerable patient, and particularly when
you talk about the list price going up, the person who is
really exposed is the uninsured patient. He has to pay the list
price. But our understanding, or lack of understanding, of the
system is that negotiations are private. We do not understand
what goes on between a manufacturer and a PBM. We do not
understand the level of the rebate. We do not understand from
the PBM to the health plan where this rebate goes. And for that
matter, again, at the point of sale, this is the problem, that
the patient, particularly the underinsured and the most
vulnerable patient are the ones that are subsidizing this
system.
The Chairman. I would say the uninsured plus those with
high deductibles.
Dr. Cefalu. Absolutely.
The Chairman. Dr. Greene, I know my time has expired, but
if you could quickly comment on that as well.
Dr. Greene. Certainly. Thank you for this question,
Senator. I think there are two ways of approaching this
question, and one has to do with why did the chart get to be as
complex as it is. As a historian, I can tell you that the chart
did not get so complex in countries in Europe, for example,
that had national health services as single payers that
negotiated with the companies that produced insulin to actually
produce more affordable products.
The reason that the chart got so complex is the way that we
have chosen to keep prices down involved the genesis of the PBM
industry comes as an attempt to find a different solution to
keeping drug prices down, and yet the product over time has
been an involuted system in which attempts to look under the
hood and figure out what part needs to be replaced or changed
or tweaked leads to a form of stasis.
The second part of the answer is to say in the present day
actors, it is to everyone's advantage, to the pharmaceutical
manufacturers, to the PBMs, to the insurers, to actually point
at each other while list prices remain high. It is ultimately
the patient, certainly the uninsured patient, many of whom I
see in my clinic, and the taxpayer who ultimately is harmed by
such a system. Actually exposing where the prices are
increased, none of these individual actors are going to
willingly actually provide this transparency.
The Chairman. It is so opaque. It really is. Thank you.
Senator Casey?
Senator Casey. Thank you, Chairman Collins.
I will start with Ms. Ondik and then go to Dr. Greene. Ms.
Ondik, you mentioned in your testimony that after your diabetes
diagnosis, type 2 diabetes, you wanted to manage your condition
on your own because you were concerned both about cost and side
effects, and we are, of course, pleased that you had success
with that self-management.
The Diabetes Association estimates that health care costs
for Americans with diabetes are 2.3 times greater than those
without, and from what you have heard today, what we have all
heard, we know that insulin is very expensive for those, as Dr.
Greene testified, 1.25 million Americans with type 1 diabetes.
What would it mean to you if you had to pay anywhere
between 150 to 250 bucks extra per month for medication like
insulin?
Ms. Ondik. Well, I am a single person, and I receive Social
Security and a pension. If I had to pay the high price for
insulin, I could not do it. I would have to work with my doctor
to try to find another way to help me out.
But I would say that Medicare, right now the price--I did
look up one of them. I think it was NovoLog. And I think the
retail price would have been $125 under the Medicare program,
but my out-of-pocket cost would have been $95. And no offense
to the two doctors that we have here today, but when you go to
them and they write a prescription for you for the pharmacy,
they have no idea how much you are going to actually pay when
you get there. They know the product or the drug is going to
help you in managing your disease, but they really do not have
any idea, because everybody's insurance is different.
Like I said, Medicare would be $95, and then Mr. Grant,
what he is paying for the insulin for his son, even under his
insurance, which is different than what I have, that is
exorbitant. You know, it is really tough for those that have to
put that out.
But I would do like many other ones do. I would cheat. But,
of course, on insulin you cannot do that. But I did have some
medications already that were high-priced, and I cheated. I
took them every other day.
Senator Casey. Thank you.
Dr. Greene, the American Diabetes Association report
indicates that people on Medicaid, those who are lower-income,
can access insulin with a cost of $1 to $5 out-of-pocket. I
live in a state where the Governor signed legislation to expand
Medicaid, thankfully. Seven hundred thousand people, more than
700,000, have affordable coverage because of that act.
This population, lower-income folks, is at greater risk for
developing diabetes. We also know that 18 states have not
expanded Medicaid. I imagine in your practice you have seen
patients that have many barriers to accessing affordable health
coverage and medications.
Can you speak to how Medicaid specifically can take the
cost out of the equation and remove barriers to receiving
affordable and appropriate treatment?
Dr. Greene. Thank you, Senator, for this question. It is
extremely important to attend to this question of Medicaid
expansion and also disparities in increased risk of diabetes
and its complications in lower-income populations.
I have certainly seen this firsthand in my clinic. The
expansion of coverage has greatly potentiated the ability of
practitioners like me who often treat underinsured patients,
patients at or around the margin of the poverty line, the
ability to reduce the out-of-pocket costs--and it is hard to
overemphasize how a seemingly trivial cost, like a $20 cost a
month or even a $5 cost a month for a prescription, can be an
extraordinary barrier for someone living at the edge of
poverty. But when we have conversations about insulin
affordability, it is important for us not to assume a middle-
class insured norm for the American population.
And, conversely, reducing the amount of those who are
insured through expanded forms of coverage will have disastrous
effects in the ability of practitioners like myself to help
manage populations of patients with diabetes. The sensitivity
to that out-of-pocket cost for the insulin-depending patient is
extraordinarily important.
So I think moving in both ways, the public health benefit
of Medicaid expansion and the real risks of reduced coverage
and increasing amounts of uninsured Americans, is something
that I view with significant concern.
Senator Casey. Thank you, Doctor.
The Chairman. Senator Tillis.
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I thank you all
for being here.
One question that I have really relates to state Medicaid
programs. In your view, is there any view about states that are
doing it particularly well in terms of treating the diabetes
population that we can learn from? I am a management
consultant. I am always looking for best practices. So one
thing I am looking for is programs out there that we should be
learning more about and trying to promote as part of a national
sort of de facto standard.
Dr. Cefalu. Senator, I do not know of any specific
programs, but from the association we could look into that. We
do know that Medicaid in general, just the access and
affordability of insulin, has made a huge change, a huge
improvement. So the Medicaid expansion as far as just access
for those with diabetes has made a huge change. We would be
happy after the hearing to look specifically into those state
programs from the association to see which ones we could
recommend.
Senator Tillis. I think it would be helpful. I am also
curious about--you know, I had a father-in-law who died
ultimately from complications related to diabetes, and he was
in a position to where he had the resources. He had a health
care plan, but he just had chronic compliance issues, whether
it was diet or any number of other things.
What is the data on the base of people who have diabetes
where the challenges are really related to just a personal
choice or some other factor that is not letting them take
advantage of the resources they have available?
Dr. Cefalu. So when we talk about adherence and compliance,
it is a very complicated issue. Most individuals who start on a
medication, be it a hypertension medication or cholesterol
medication, generally across the disease state, you may find
that as much as fifty percent may quit taking that medication
or reduce the medication within 6 to 12 months. Again, there
are a number of factors, socioeconomic factors, and other
determinants for that type behavior.
For insulin, it is different. We are also seeing that cost
sharing, the amount of money a person puts out for the insulin,
will actually affect adherence. For a person with type 1,
adherence is a real issue. Adherence is--they cannot go without
the insulin. So what they do is they start rationing the
insulin, or they will skip a few doses, and that will cause
them acute complications--again, acute complications of blood
sugar elevation, they may get dehydrated, if it is severe
enough, a condition referred to as ``diabetic ketoacidosis,''
which requires hospitalization.
If they do this over the chronic period and they do not
maintain their A1C, as Lois has done, then in that situation it
may lead to an increased chance of blindness and amputations
and heart disease.
So the adherence and compliance issue from cost sharing is
a huge problem. But adherence and compliance issues in
medication in general is an issue. It is just that there are
unique needs of those with type 1 and for those with insulin,
and that adherence is based on financial considerations, which
is important and not a trivial matter.
Senator Tillis. In terms of the future of treatment, are
there any particularly expensive treatments, expensive at least
on the face, that the science would suggest if you took a look
at the fully burdened cost, it actually would save money over
time because it is more likely to improve compliance or
adherence? I am asking this question because I was with doctors
on a completely different subject matter earlier this year, and
there are very clearly treatments where either because the time
between administrations of the drug are longer, so you improve
compliance, is there anything on the horizon for the diabetes
population that we should be aware of?
Dr. Cefalu. We have a number--it is an exciting time for
diabetes. We have a number of injectable medications that can
be taken per week or longer, and this certainly improves
adherence. But to improve adherence and reduce complications
for an individual with diabetes, you have to give them the
tools. And the tools are high-quality, low-cost insulin. They
have to have access to technology to get the job done. And that
would reduce the long-term complications. We know how to reduce
complications. We have unbelievable medications. We have
unbelievable technology that can get the job done.
As I said in my opening statement, that technology, we have
seen the recent advances and what it has done to morbidity and
mortality to a lot of individuals in this country. But if you
cannot access the innovation, then that population does not
really benefit, and that is really the situation we talk about
today. All the wonderful advances are fantastic, but if they
are not in the hands of the person who can implement that
technology or that medication, it is an issue.
Again, Senator, we know what it takes to reduce the
complications. We know what it takes. But not all individuals
are at that point where financially they are able to access
those medications.
Senator Tillis. Thank you all.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Cortez Masto?
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Ranking Member, for this important hearing. And thank you all
for being here today.
Dr. Cefalu, I could not agree with you more, your last
statement. I never understood why we work so hard, we spend a
lot of money to create a cure for acute diseases for
individuals to save lives and then we price it out of their
hands. The very people that we are creating the cure for, they
cannot get the drug. That makes no sense to me. And so that is
why my fight has been to address the high cost of prescription
drugs in general and how we put them in the hands of
individuals who actually need them and can afford them.
In Nevada, we recently passed a diabetes drug transparency
bill. It was passed last year, and it requires drug
manufacturers to explain each factor that contributed to
increases in the price of diabetes drugs, the percentage of the
total increase attributed to each factor, and an explanation of
the role of each factor in the increase. The bill would also
require PBMs to disclose rebates negotiated with drug
manufacturers and what rebates are distributed to insurers.
Dr. Greene, I am curious what your reaction is to this
transparency law, and Dr. Cefalu as well. And do you think that
a national drug price transparency law similar to the one that
Nevada has would help us understand why drug prices have become
so high?
Dr. Greene. Thank you for that question, Senator. I have
been following with great interest the activity in the Nevada
Legislature and also states across the country that have tried
to understand where the state government can take up the cause
of off-patent drug affordability and prescription drug
affordability in general.
In the State of Maryland, the Attorney General proposed a
bill that became law last year making price gouging,
unconscionable price hikes in off-patent prescription drugs,
illegal and actionable. This was the law in the State of
Maryland until just a few weeks ago when an appellate court in
the Fourth Circuit ruled under the dormant commerce clause that
it was unconstitutional, which is to say that the extent to
which the state can successfully act to defend the interest of
its consumers in not paying unconscionably high prices for
prescription drugs, was limited to the scope of Federal
activity.
Now, that is being appealed by the Attorney General, and
personally--it was a 2-to-1 vote. I actually think there is a
really credible legal argument for that ruling to be overturned
and for the law to be reinstated. But I am not a lawyer. I am a
physician, and I think that right now it is the law of the land
suggesting that this is an arena in which only the Federal
Government--only Congress, really, can take the proper actions
to help ensure a more transparent system and understanding why
prices are increasing.
I had high hopes for State initiatives, and I still do for
the Nevada initiative. But the finding of this recent Fourth
Circuit ruling has caused me to consider even more the
importance of Congress taking up this issue.
Senator Cortez Masto. I agree, and let me just say that the
Nevada law as well is being challenged by the pharmaceutical
industry, and it will go through the courts right now, and it
will be in the Ninth Circuit. But it is a clear example of
where the states are taking action to protect their residents
and their individuals, because there is an issue that I think
we all hear every time we go to our state, high-cost
prescription drugs. Something has to be done to address this.
I think that transparency in general, to shine a light on
what is happening and why the costs are there and what is
causing these high costs is so important to address the issue.
So I appreciate your comments.
Yes, Dr. Cefalu?
Dr. Cefalu. So I appreciate that. We also believe, again,
from this exercise, that it is transparency throughout the
supply chain, not just one or two stakeholders. The entire
stakeholder issue is opaque. It is complicated. And so we would
support transparency throughout the chain, first and foremost.
Transparency is not going to get the job done. That will
shed a light on what the problems are, and then we can address
long-term solutions.
So, again, transparency all the way through the supply
chain so we understand the flow of money, who is profiting, who
is not profiting. But once again, at the end of the day, it is
the patient at the point of sale who is not benefiting. I think
that is the important thing to consider here.
Senator Cortez Masto. I agree with you. Thank you.
I notice my time is almost up. Thank you all again for this
important discussion today. I appreciate it.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. The law in your state
sounds very interesting and worth pursuing.
Senator Jones?
Senator Jones. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing, and to all the witnesses who came here. I
come from a state where diabetes is especially acute in
Alabama--9.4 percent of the population have that--but in
Alabama it is over 15 percent, with another 37 percent with
pre-diabetes.
Unfortunately, I also come from a state that did not expand
Medicaid, you know, which to me has always been penny-wise and
extremely pound-foolish. But it is what it is down there.
I was struck by a couple things. I want to go back to that
chart that we showed a few minutes ago with that complicated
web. There are a lot of drugs that people take on a daily
basis. Do any of you know if there are any drugs--statins, beta
blockers, or whatever--in which a similar chart would be done?
Is this unique to insulin and diabetes drugs? Or is that common
in the industry?
Dr. Cefalu. Senator, I think we can say that this exercise
and complicated pattern may apply across the drug-pricing
industry. Specifically, we related it to insulin because of
some of the aspects of the transactions that are unique to
insulin which we wanted to focus on. But I could say in general
some of the principles or many of the principles can be applied
to drug pricing in general. It is many of the same players and
mostly the opaque negotiations are still going on, but I still
think it is acutely insulin, given the life-sustaining nature
of the drug and the fact that we have heard stories at the
American Diabetes Association that we had to focus specifically
on insulin for this exercise. But you are absolutely right. A
lot of the transactions could be applicable to other drugs.
Dr. Greene. And, Senator, I would add that while this is
the first time I am seeing this chart, and it is slightly
behind me and to the left and so I cannot verify exactly, I
could say you can draw almost exactly the same chart for most
classes of pharmaceuticals. The recent report of the National
Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine titled ``Making
Medicines Affordable,'' draws a very similar chart generalized
across fields of pharmaceuticals on patent and off patent in
trying to understand all the many places in which the real
problems of where drug price increases are happening remain
obscure to the American taxpayer and to actually anyone.
Pharmaco-economists, my colleagues who are trying to study drug
prices, are really limited in their ability to do scientific
analyses of what is happening in drug prices by the inability
to see the true discounts and net prices that occur in these
arrows.
Senator Jones. All right. Well, thank you for that.
I want to follow-up, again, Dr. Greene, with something that
you testified to about in your practice that you would
prescribe drugs and they were sometimes the higher-priced
drugs. Is that an education--and the reason I say that is
because having been a lawyer and I have seen in private
practice somehow pharmaceutical reps are all the time calling
on doctors, and rightly so--I am not criticizing them for doing
that. But there is only a limited amount of education that a
doctor can do in a practice.
So how much of that is pharmaceutical marketing that is
keeping--because I am really struck by the fact that there is
no generic market for these drugs. And how much of that is
based on the marketing that the pharmaceutical companies are
doing? Or what are other causes for the lack of generic markets
that have not developed with regard to diabetes drugs?
Dr. Greene. Thank you for those questions, Senator. They
are all worth attending to. And I do not take it personally.
Certainly, my profession is making substantial efforts, the
medical profession in America, to increase the vetting of the
ways in which continuing medical education happens free of
specific bias. That was not true for a substantial chunk of the
20th century. And if you look historically, the role that the
pharmaceutical industry took, pharmaceutical marketers, sales
representatives in particular, in the job of educating
physicians about the practice of medicine really became
striking. Certainly in the 1980's, when these recombinant
insulins were first introduced, I could show you historical
advertisements that show children, and it is aiming to
physicians, saying, ``He is 5 years old and already he is
living in the past.'' In other words, convincing physicians
without particular data that switching wholesale on to the
newer products was necessary, even though the older products
credibly could work just as well.
So I think that is part of why generic markets have not
formed for insulin in the way that they have in other drugs,
that what has happened is, unlike penicillin, where I will
still prescribe penicillin for strep throat or for syphilis,
but there still is generic penicillin in the market. Doctors
and patients still feel it is valuable. The insulins that were
available in the 1960's are simply not being prescribed at all
today.
Senator Jones. All right. Thank you all. My time is up, but
thank you all for coming, and particularly, Ms. Ondik, I would
like to invite you to come down to be a life coach down in
Alabama for our citizens. They could use a lot of coaching from
someone like you. So thank you, and Mr. Grant also, for your
stories. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Donnelly?
Senator Donnelly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just want to start by mentioning I have a family member
who deals with diabetes, and they came out to visit and left
one of their nonprescription components home. And when I went
to the local retail pharmacy to pick it up, it was multiples
higher than the very same product online. Multiples higher. And
you look and you go this is the same box, same product, but you
have to have it now, and so that is--this is a chart that is
extraordinarily important because I think, Madam Chair, our
Committee can help unwind that chart, because one of the other
things--and I want to ask you about this--is we have set up a
perverse system where the higher the retail price, the higher
the rebate is for the people who determine what product it is;
that when they determine this, their rebate is a percentage of
whatever that price is.
And so if you have one of the low--and I am going to ask
you, Dr. Cefalu, about this, and anybody else. So if a
manufacturer has a much lower price, then when it is
prescribed, whoever does the prescribing in that process that
gets a rebate gets a much lower rebate than they would have if
they had prescribed the higher-cost medicine. And we have set
up a completely reverse incentive system as to what product
gets prescribed. Dr. Cefalu?
Dr. Cefalu. Senator, you are absolutely correct, and,
again, as we mentioned, there are incentives throughout the
supply chain that facilitate or encourage. Again, the
manufacturers set the list price, and from some of the data we
had in the working group, it is the rebate that seems to be the
key. The list price is going up, the greater the rebate. Well,
where is that rebate going? Some of the evidence we got from
the public information----
Senator Donnelly. And if that price is lower and you have
two competitive, then whoever gets the rebate gets a lower
amount of funds.
Dr. Cefalu. So the question would be--so we look at the net
prices, and the argument would be that the list price is
increasing. But what is coming to the manufacturer. Maybe it is
much less. We know that. But we also know that they give a
rebate to a physician for formulary at the PBM level. So that
is one of the incentives to provide a higher rebate for
formulary so that the drug is even used at the PBM level. The
rebate at the wholesale level, you are absolutely right, the
higher the list price, the greater the percentage, and there is
an incentive for higher list price based on the processing at
the wholesaler. PBM, the same thing, higher fees. Even if they
retain 4 to 10 percent, as we were told, that is 4 to 10
percent on a higher list price, and then that rebate to the
health plan supposedly most of that is going to reduce
premiums. But, again, a reduced premium is not going to help a
person with diabetes with a high-deductible plan.
So those incentives need to be understood throughout the
supply chain, and, once again, it is not one stakeholders. It
is the stakeholder throughout this opaque system. And I am
glad, Senator Collins, you like this complicated chart. We did
not put it up there as a Snellen chart for eye vision, but it
is quite complicated.
Senator Donnelly. Dr. Greene, how important is transparency
in unwinding this?
Dr. Greene. Senator, thank you for that question. I think
transparency is crucial and you are hitting the nail on the
head in terms of why this issue has not made any progress.
Because on the one hand, as many pharmaceutical manufacturers
have stated, they are not making an increased profit off of
these increased prices because the net remains the same. You
would think it would be an incentive to actually favor a
program that explains their contributions and the fairness of
their pricing to the American people. Conversely, if the
pharmacy benefit managers were actually helping save money for
American consumers, you would think they would also like to
open this up and show what is happening.
So both parties insisting that this remains a trade secret
suggests that this discounting and this elevated list price
actually is a system which benefits both of those parties and
hurts taxpayers and hurts patients.
Senator Donnelly. Well, I think that we have a terrific
team on this Committee, and I think we can really be part of
unlocking what is causing this, because at the end of the day,
you have people who struggle with diabetes and wonder how they
are going to make ends meet, how they are going to--and you
cannot miss your medicine.
And so I really appreciate you having this hearing, Madam
Chair, and I am very hopeful that with folks like these, and
then we have the manufacturers and others come in, that we can
unlock this for the American people so that they are the
winners at the end of the day. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Warren?
Senator Warren. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, I am glad we are taking a look at the rising cost
of insulin. It is a problem that affects millions of people
with diabetes who have seen the cost of their life-saving
medication rise. And I am grateful to you and to the Ranking
Member for holding this hearing today.
So my view on this is that when it comes to keeping prices
low for consumers, nothing beats a competitive market. In the
prescription drug market, the Government hands drug companies a
monopoly on their product that lasts a certain number of years,
depending on the type of drug. But when that monopoly runs out,
market forces are supposed to kick in. Other companies are free
to produce generic versions, lowering the cost for patients.
On the surface, insulin seems like an obvious candidate for
exactly this kind of healthy competition. It has been around
for almost a hundred years, it is in high demand by millions of
patients, and there are multiple companies that make it. So I
want to dig into why are prices going up instead of down.
Dr. Greene, you have studied the insulin market. How many
generic insulin products are available on the market today?
Dr. Greene. I would say there are no true generic insulins
in America today.
Senator Warren. The answer is, after a hundred years, zero.
Dr. Greene. Yes.
Senator Warren. Right? That is amazing. So I note
biosimilars are more complex to produce than traditional
generics, but that cannot be the whole story. The drug
companies that make insulin have also kept releasing new
versions of their product that make small improvements over the
old versions. And these incremental changes deliver benefits to
patients that can afford brand-name drugs, but also allow
companies to extend their monopolies and keep competitors out
of the market.
So just let me ask you, Dr. Greene, are patients being well
served by an insulin market with a product that is only
marginally more effective than a few decades ago, but at a
significantly higher and higher price?
Dr. Greene. So thank you for that question, Senator. I
would say that for many patients who benefit from insulin
analogues that can point to the specific benefits they have
received in their own management, their ability to titrate on a
finer or closer basis their insulins, and yet for the patient
who cannot afford their insulin, these advances provide no
benefit.
Senator Warren. Yes. Look, I am all for more innovative
products that help people. I think that is great. But we cannot
mistake this market for a competitive market. What the drug
companies are doing has effects that are similar to a practice
called ``evergreening,'' strategies to help keep a monopoly
nice and fresh year after year, long after it otherwise would
have expired. And it is not the only thing that is driving down
competition. Today three of the largest insulin producers in
the country are under investigation for price fixing, raising
their prices by similar amounts at the same point in time. It
is not just anticompetitive. It is against the law.
Now, Mr. Grant, the U.S. market for insulin is so broken
that you actually turned to a pharmacy in Canada to get insulin
for your son. Is that right, sir?
Mr. Grant. That is correct.
Senator Warren. You know, I appreciate your sharing this
with the Committee and coming here to testify about this. Drug
companies talk a lot about market-based solutions to tackle the
drug-pricing problem. But I do not think the drug companies
actually want to see these markets work. I see an industry that
is doing everything it can to throw sand in the gears of the
insulin market so they can keep their monopolies and keep
raking in the cash on the backs of patients.
Drug companies do not like proposals like requiring them to
negotiate prices with the Federal Government or importing drugs
from Canada. But I think it is time we look into policy
solutions that would actually make a difference for patients,
whether the drug companies like it or not.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Grant. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Shaheen, I want to welcome you today. I mentioned
you in my opening statement. You have been the Chair of the
Diabetes Caucus, and I really appreciate all the work we have
done together.
Senator Shaheen. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair,
and I especially appreciate your and Senator Casey's inviting
me today to crash this hearing.
As I am sure Senator Collins said, I have had the honor of
serving as co-Chair of the Diabetes Caucus, and she is really
the one who has provided leadership for so many years here in
the Senate. But I am pleased to be able to join her and very
much appreciate the willingness of each of you to testify today
about what is happening.
Like she may have said, I actually have a granddaughter who
has type 1 diabetes, so, Mr. Grant, I have seen very directly
the impact on a family of what that diagnosis does to a child
and what that means for the entire family. And to have added to
that the fact that the cost of insulin is now becoming
prohibitive for so many families who need that to stay alive is
hard to justify in any way.
So I want to ask each of you, several of us on this
Committee serve on the Appropriations Committee, and we are
going to have the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Alex
Azar, before us this week testifying. What would you like us to
ask him about what Health and Human Services should be doing to
address the high costs of insulin? I will start with you, Dr.
Cefalu.
Dr. Cefalu. Well, we have heard Secretary Azar's statement,
and it acknowledged that he wants to drive down the price of
drugs. Hopefully, he is serious about that. He is certainly in
the position to do so, and he certainly has a past history to
understand the complexity of the system.
So, once again, for our purposes, wanting to make sure that
he understands--and I am sure he does--the complexity and the
position of every stakeholder in this convoluted system. We
have heard a lot today pointing at one stakeholder, and I just
want to reiterate to him that it is the system that needs to be
fixed.
So, again, fix the rebate. Where does this rebate go? Who
is benefiting? Who is profiting? That is where transparency is
going to come in. Once it gets down to a level, the patient is
certainly not getting the rebate at the point of sale.
Recently, we have heard that some of the health plans are
passing along a portion of the rebate to the patient. That is
fantastic. We encourage that. But then it gets back to why
there are rebates at all.
The other thing--and I wanted to just make one statement
about the advances in insulin--the newer formulations, these
are an advance to the point where they give a long-acting
profile, they are more physiologic. One can argue that over
time in many patients the glycemic control may be the same, but
they often increase advantages to hypoglycemia, which is going
to prevent a person from getting tight glycemic control and
improving quality of life.
So these incremental changes have made a difference. The
question is the cost of these insulins and why the increase in
cost throughout the supply chain.
So I think he would have a unique perspective on the
situation and probably have a unique perspective on the supply
chain and where things can be fixed.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. Yes, as you point out,
Secretary Azar was an executive at Eli Lilly, so he certainly
understands the pharmaceutical industry.
Mr. Grant, what would you suggest that we ask the Secretary
about this?
Mr. Grant. I guess, you know, I live my life kind of, you
know, what is fair. You know, we look at folks like you to kind
of guide us and give us some direction in what is fair. So I
would ask him, you know, what is fair? You know, what is
expected, what someone should have to pay for these
medications? And, you know, the other question I would ask--you
know, for a type 1 diabetic, this is not anything that they
brought upon themselves. It is, you know, that one of their
major organs stopped working properly. You know, whether it is
a baby--I mean, there are babies born with type 1 diabetes. You
know, I am thankful that my son got it at 9 and so he could
help with the treatment. But kind of, you know, what is fair?
Again, it was not like I was looking to go outside of our
country to purchase medicine for my son, but, you know, what I
found last week was, you know, it is almost five times what I
could get it for. I mean, you kind of have to do what you have
to do. But, you know, what is fair? What can we expect people
to really be able to afford and to be able to pay?
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Ms. Ondik?
Ms. Ondik. I am not really familiar on how the drug
companies operate. Right now I do not take anything for the
diabetes because it is not necessary. But I would definitely
appreciate if the cost would come down. I am currently on a
Medicare Advantage plan, and the medications that I do take are
within my reach. And if I do happen to get a prescription that
is out of my reach, I will immediately call my doctor and say
to her, ``I cannot afford this.'' And then we work together to
find something, a drug that will do the same identical thing at
a cheaper price for me.
So I would really like to see the medications stay down
where those that really cannot afford them have access to them.
Senator Shaheen. Well, and your experience certainly speaks
to the importance of taking every step you can. As we look at
the cost, the increasing cost of diabetes, making sure that we
can manage without having people go into diabetic episodes that
require hospitalization and other more severe treatments is in
the economic interest of the country, never mind the benefits
that individuals receive from having that kind of management of
their illness.
If I can, Madam Chair, can I just ask Dr. Greene to answer
that?
Dr. Greene. Thank you, Senator. My principal question would
be: Why is there no competitive market for insulin in this day
and age? We have three manufacturers, and we know from
pharmaco-economic analysis that you do not really see true
competition driving down drug prices in a significant way until
you have four or more manufacturers in the market. So when I
answered Senator Warren earlier in terms of was there a generic
insulin, now there are two new follow-on biological versions.
There is Basaglar, which is Eli Lilly's follow-on copy of
Sanofi-Aventis' long-acting insulin. And then there is Admelog,
which is Sanofi-Aventis' follow-on copy of Eli Lilly's short-
acting insulin. Both of them are priced slightly under the
brand-name competitor, but a savings of maybe $50 max out of a
drug that costs $300, it does not bring it down to a reasonable
rate. And one of the reasons is neither of these moves actually
brings the competition of insulin products outside of a three-
player market.
So that is the real question I would have: Is there
something fundamentally about the nature of insulin as a drug
in which there will never be more than three manufacturers?
Because if so, thinking about generic competition is never
going to work, and we are going to need to think of an entirely
different method of thinking about this essential commodity
which is a key part of our biomedical infrastructure. If it
truly cannot become competitive, we need to think about
different ways of acting. If it can become competitive, we have
to become much more serious about how to make that happen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you all very much, and it certainly
speaks to the importance of transparency to make it more
competitive.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Blumenthal?
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Dr. Greene, you have just summarized very well a dilemma
that I see not only as a member of this Committee, but as a
member of the Antitrust Subcommittee of Judiciary and the
Commerce, Science, and Technology Committee where antitrust
also is of interest. I have studied this issue of insulin for
years. I want to thank our Chair and Ranking Member for having
this hearing because it is a real enigma to me. We love to talk
about free enterprise and free markets, and yet the price of
insulin and many other generics has risen astronomically
without adequate explanation, without any credible explanation.
And I have talked to the doctors and the hospital
administrators throughout Connecticut who have complained to me
almost since the day that I was elected a United States Senator
about shortages and rising prices of insulin and other
generics, critical medicines, workhorse treatments. They are
not some esoteric drug that is used to treat a small number of
people. They are workhorse medicines, anesthetics and other
treatments that are vital to American medicine.
In Connecticut, there are 355,000 adults with diabetes,
costing the state $3.7 billion a year. And this problem will
get worse before it gets better with over a third of adults in
Connecticut suffering from pre-diabetes without intervention on
the road to their own diagnosis of diabetes. And yet despite
this spreading epidemic of diabetes, the prices of insulin
continue to rise, and patients who need this drug struggle to
afford it.
I am going to ask permission that my full statement be
entered in the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Senator Blumenthal. I think this issue is so widespread, it
does not admit of rhetorical solutions. There have to be real
interventions in the marketplace somehow, perhaps by the
government, where essential medicines become out of reach for
people. And maybe it is like a utility that has to be better
controlled, because your stories are so powerful in human
terms, and they are no different than the ones I have seen in
my own travels around the State of Connecticut.
So I just would like to know from you, Dr. Cefalu, what
specific information in terms of increasing transparency--
because you have talked about that issue. What would you like
to see from those companies that make insulin?
Dr. Cefalu. So, Senator, let me also again state it has to
be throughout the chain. We talk about lack of competition from
insulin manufacturers, but we also talk about increased
consolidation with the pharmacy benefit managers, which is a
concern.
So when we talk about solutions, we want to talk about
solutions across the entire chain and not pick out one
stakeholder. Isolating one stakeholder is not going to get the
job done unless there is a down throughout the supply chain
effect.
So, again, it is important to realize throughout the chain
there are issues that I would like this Committee--you need to
address.
So what are the things that need to happen? Well, some of
the things discussed here, factors that influence the list
price of insulin, understanding the negotiations with the
manufacturer and the PBM, understanding the negotiation between
the PBM and the health plan. What exactly--what is that rebate?
It is a different negotiation with the health plan and the
pharmacy, and in those situations, what you pay in the pharmacy
and what the health plans pay, it is the same product, but yet
no one is fully aware. That is the transparency we are looking
for.
What we also know is--you mentioned earlier about knowing
the price when you build a house and know the price. Well, a
patient may go to a pharmacy, and they may be on a high-
deductible health plan, and they may pay $400 for insulin when,
in fact, that insulin may have received a 50-percent rebate to
intermediaries in the supply chain. So is that fair that
someone in a deductible has to pay for a rebate that stays in
the supply chain?
So this just reiterates the complexity of the situation and
that you have to look at it globally rather than isolating a
single partner. And that is the complex issue.
But, once again, transparency in the negotiations, what the
PBMs--rebates they are paying, how much the health plan is
paying on insulin, how much are you applying for the rebate on
the premiums? Again, the rebate should go back to the patient,
and it does not help a person who is underinsured or high-
deductible health plan to have an acceptable premium when they
are paying $7,500 a year for a deductible for life-saving
medications. And that is what needs to be balanced.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. My time has expired, but I
may have some more questions for the record. Again, I want to
thank the Chair and Ranking Member.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for testifying today
and really helping us as we grapple with this issue. I first
founded the Senate Diabetes Caucus some 21 years ago after
meeting in Maine with a family whose 10-year-old son had type 1
diabetes, and I will never forget his looking up at me and
saying that he wished he could just take 1 day off from having
diabetes. But as Mr. Grant well knows from his experience,
those children cannot ever take a day off. And they are insulin
dependent, as are about a third of adults with type 2 diabetes.
So at that time I vowed to form the Caucus, and working
with great co-Chairs like Jeanne Shaheen, we have made real
progress in more than tripling the Federal funding for research
into diabetes. And it has led to cutting-edge technology like
the development of better pumps and continuous glucose monitors
and, indeed, most recently an artificial pancreas, which I am
very excited about and we would only have dreamed of 20 years
ago.
However, I will tell you that when I founded the Caucus, I
never dreamed that we would have a problem with the cost of
insulin given how long insulin has been around, almost a
hundred years. And it is becoming a barrier to treatment for so
many Americans with diabetes who are unable to control their
diabetes without insulin.
It is puzzling, to say the least, to me that even older
versions of insulin are increasing in price at rates that are
untenable for too many Americans with diabetes. Last year and
again this year, I received a petition that was signed by
thousands of Americans asking what can Congress do to bring
down the cost of insulin, and this hearing represents only the
first step. I want to deconstruct that complicated web of
transactions to figure out who is making how much money and why
aren't discounts that are negotiated with manufacturers
reaching the patient, particularly the uninsured patient, but
also the insured patient who has a high deductible, which is so
common, particularly for those who do not have employer-
provided insurance and are purchasing on the Affordable Care
Act marketplaces.
It is astonishing that for a drug approaching 100 years old
and that is serving millions of Americans that we do not see a
proliferation of manufacturers but, rather, just three major
manufacturers. I do not understand that as well.
So I am committed to continuing to dig into this issue, but
I will tell you, it is the most complex web that I have ever
seen, and we are going to need the help of many of the experts
that are represented in this room and at our witness table as
we seek to unravel the web and figure out exactly what is going
on.
But I want to thank you for laying the baseline. Mr. Grant,
in particular I want to thank you for putting a human face on
this problem and telling us what this has meant as you have
worked so hard to keep your son healthy, to make sure that that
original initial incident when he was just 9 years old and was
misdiagnosed as just having the flu when he had a life-
threatening disease with his blood sugar over 800 does not
happen again. I just cannot imagine how frightening that must
have been. We want to keep him healthy, but we also do not want
you to go broke in doing so.
So I am committed to trying to get to the bottom of this,
and I want to thank you for coming down from Maine. I want to
thank all of our witnesses for being here today with us.
Did you want to add something?
Mr. Grant. I was just going to say thank you for the
opportunity to come down here and just share. I really can
tell, you know, everybody here is on the same page in wanting
to make this better for everybody. So to be a part of it is
just an honor, and thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Again, thank you to all of our witnesses. You were an
excellent panel today. I want to thank the Committee members
and Senator Shaheen for coming today as well.
I would note that Senator Fischer and Senator Gillibrand
were also here but had to leave for other obligations.
I will turn to Senator Casey for any closing remarks that
he might have.
Senator Casey. Madam Chair, thank you very much. I want to
thank our witnesses for giving us the kind of information we
are going to need to take action on this issue or range of
issues. Ms. Ondik, thank you for coming from Pennsylvania. Mr.
Grant, thank you for bringing your personal story here. And, of
course, Dr. Cefalu and Dr. Greene, for your own expertise and
background.
I will submit a statement for the record, but thank you,
Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Senator Casey.
Committee members will have until Friday, May 18th, to
submit questions for the record, so you may be receiving some
additional questions. Again, my thanks to our witnesses, to our
Ranking Member, to our staff, and to all the Committee members
and Senator Shaheen who participated in today's hearing.
This concludes our hearing.
[Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
APPENDIX
=======================================================================
Prepared Witness Statements
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Prepared Statement of Paul Grant, Father of Son With Type 1 Diabetes,
New Gloucester, Maine
Good morning. Thank you Senator Collins, Ranking Member
Casey, and members of the Senate Aging Committee. It is a
privilege and an honor to be here to testify today.
My name is Paul Grant. I am a father of 4 children, Oliver,
age 18, Jordan, age 16, Solomon, age 13, and Levi, age 11. We
live in the small community of Gray-New Gloucester, Maine. I
would describe us as an active family. We play a lot of sports,
basketball, baseball, soccer, football, lacrosse, and softball.
We are usually on a field or in a gymnasium most days. My
children mean the world to me, and I love coaching and watching
them play.
At the end of January in 2014, my son, Solomon, became very
ill. For at least a week, he laid on the couch with flu like
symptoms. He was very lethargic, had stomach pain, grayish pale
color, was noticeably thinner, and he had glossy eyes. His
mother had taken him to the doctors, but we were told he had
the flu and it would just run its course. We treated him with
ibuprofen and Tylenol, and made sure he drank lots of fluids.
But Sol's condition did not improve. In fact, it only appeared
to get worse. I was coaching youth basketball the day that I
got a call from my wife. She was sad and upset because Sol was
still very ill. She decided to take him to the ER at St. Mary's
Hospital in Lewiston. My other three kids and I left basketball
and met her at the ER. When I arrived, Sol was in a gurney,
hooked up to an IV, surrounded by nurses. The on call doctor
eventually came into the room and told us Sol had type 1
diabetes. His blood sugar was over 800. This was more than four
years ago now, but I can remember this day as if it were
yesterday. You can imagine the feelings his mother and I
experienced when we heard the words ``Your son has type 1
diabetes.'' Our son has a disease. We experienced feelings of
sadness, confusion, fear, astonishment and bewilderment just to
name a few. The three of us spent that weekend in the ICU, and
our lives were forever changed.
Today, Sol is 13 years old and a 7th grade student at Gray-
New Gloucester Middle School. Several students in the middle
and high school also have diabetes. The school system does a
good job helping the students manage their disease. Besides
going to the nurses' office several times a day to check his
blood sugar and carrying around a diabetes bag, things are
pretty normal for my 13-year old boy. He has a good group of
friends, good teachers, and loves playing basketball. As long
as he has insulin and checks his blood sugar regularly, he
manages pretty well.
I work for a small general contracting company, Wally J.
Staples Builders Inc. We build new homes, additions, and
garages. We also complete many interior and exterior
renovations and pretty much anything to do with construction. I
am a Project Estimator. I absolutely love my job, and have had
the opportunity to be part of thousands of construction
projects over the years. Unfortunately, like many small
businesses, my employer does not provide health insurance. I
purchase it for my children and myself through the marketplace,
which is very expensive and very complicated. I have to pay a
high deductible to keep my monthly premium lower. Consequently,
I end up paying a lot out of pocket for necessary supplies for
Solomon, approximately $2,500 plus. Last year, I will have
spent close to $15,000 for health care.
Solomon needs two types of insulin: Humalog and Lantus. In
2017, I would typically pay $300 for a 90-day supply of Humalog
through Express Scripts and around $150 for a 90-day supply of
Lantus. This seemed like a lot until this past January when I
called to refill Solomon's Humalog prescription. I was shocked
to learn it was now going to cost more than $900 for a 90-day
supply. That is nearly $1,000 for a treatment that Solomon
absolutely needs, and about three times more than I had been
paying. I immediately went into panic mode as I was low on
Humalog and I had to get it as soon as possible. I tried to get
answers from my insurance company but received little help or
explanation. I do not think they even understand our health
plan--I know I don't. I ended up purchasing a 30-day supply at
Wal-Mart to get me by until I could figure things out. The 30-
day supply cost me $322.64 (with a coupon). I had no choice--
Sol had to have insulin.
No father wants to see what would happen if you run out of
insulin for your child with type 1. I remember Sol's state in
the week that he was first diagnosed, when his body first
stopped producing its own insulin. I know that I must do
whatever I can to make sure that he never has to go without it.
I have purchased it on my credit card and I have had to borrow
insulin from friends.
When I saw that the price had hiked to nearly $1,000, I
knew it was something I could not afford. I spent several hours
and days reaching out to friends in the diabetic community
looking for an affordable option. Ultimately, I found a
pharmacy in Canada where I could purchase a 90-day supply of
Humalog for $294.97 that included a $50 shipping fee. This is
with no contribution from my insurance company. That was
January 22 and I just refilled that prescription the beginning
of April with the same pharmacy in Canada. Last week, I checked
with Express Scripts to see how much a 90-day prescription
would be for Solomon's Humalog and it would cost me $1,489.46
with my insurance.
As I mentioned, I help people build houses for a living. I
am good at my job and can tell you very accurately how much it
would cost you to build a new house or put an addition on your
home--but I can't tell you how much it's going to cost from
month to month to buy the insulin I need to help keep my son
healthy.
I do not understand why insulin for children with type 1
diabetes is so expensive and why I can purchase it in Canada
for so much less. We are just talking about the cost of insulin
today, but there are many other things like insulin pumps and
glucose monitors out there that would make children's lives and
parents' lives so much easier if they were more affordable.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today to share our story. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
----------
Prepared Statement of Lois Ondik, Retiree, Blandon, Pennsylvania
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the
Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. It is an
honor to be here.
My name is Lois Ondik. I am 73 years old and a resident of
Blandon, Pennsylvania. I have three children and two
grandchildren. I am a retired school bus driver for the Berks
County Intermediate Unit.
Five years ago, my doctor diagnosed me with type 2
diabetes. At that time, my doctor wanted me to start on
medication to help manage my blood sugar and A1C. A1C measures
the amount of hemoglobin in the blood that has glucose attached
to it. An A1C level of 5.7 percent is considered normal. An A1C
of 5.7 to 6.4 is pre-diabetes and 6.5 and over is type 2
diabetes. Five generations of my family have been diagnosed
with diabetes, myself being the fifth generation and now my
daughter has just been diagnosed with pre-diabetes, making her
the sixth. I understand the toll that it can take on both your
body and finances. I was concerned about the side effects of
medications and I knew that the cost of medication would likely
eat into my budget and my savings. So, I insisted on trying to
manage my condition on my own, without medication. For a while,
I was able to do so.
During a recent visit with my doctor, I was again told that
my blood sugar and A1C levels would soon require me to begin
taking medication. And, so again, I thought to myself that
there had to be another option.
Then, I saw an advertisement for a diabetes self-management
program through Berks Encore, my local Area Agency on Aging,
hanging on the bulletin board at my local grocery store. I
ended up registering for the diabetes self-management class. I
did not know what the class would be about when I signed up,
but knew that I needed to manage my diabetes better or face the
bills and side effects associated with medication.
The class has been a blessing. We met once a week for two
and half hours for six weeks and it was run by two trained
leaders. One of my leaders, Martha Sitler, joins me here today.
My classmates were at different levels in their disease,
including those with a new diagnosis, people managing with
Metformin medication, and people on insulin. I met a woman who
used an insulin pump and another who was struggling to manage
her blood sugar, even with insulin. Meeting them, learning
about the side effects, and knowing how costly the medications
can be affirmed my resolve to manage my diabetes on my own for
as long as possible.
The class is evidence-based, so I know that I learned about
techniques to deal with the symptoms of diabetes that really
work. We discussed how to deal with emotions and stress
management and talked about foot care, exercise, healthy
eating, and many other topics, but especially how to talk to
our doctors.
Before these classes, I did not regularly test my blood
sugar, but I started to once I joined the diabetes self-
management program. I also tracked everything I ate and learned
how food and exercise affected my blood sugar. The class helped
me understand the amount of food I need per day, including how
to balance protein, carbohydrates, and fats to better control
my blood sugar.
At the end of every session, each individual created an
action plan, something they wanted to accomplish before our
next class. For example, I wanted to start exercising. My plan
was to start low and slow, to exercise 15 minutes per day, 3
days per week. The following week we were accountable to our
classmates and had to report on how we did. Sometimes it is
hard to accomplish every goal you set, but being accountable to
my classmates helped me reach my goals. I found the peer-to-
peer support to be very important. The class was eye opening to
say the least.
After my diabetes self-management program ended, I joined a
free walking class entitled ``Walk with Ease'', sponsored by
the Arthritis Foundation of Berks County. The program is
presented by Martha Sitler and Kathy Roberts of Berks Encore,
my local Area Agency on Aging. Today, my foster dog, Murfee,
and I walk every day, and I use two pedometers to track my
activity. I went from zero exercise to more than 2.5 miles per
day. I think of the walking class as an extension of the
diabetes self-management program because of how important
exercise is in managing my disease.
I am pleased to say that since starting my class, I lost 13
pounds and lowered my A1C two tenths of a point. In fact, the
doctor told me that had my A1C moved two tenths of a point in
the opposite direction, she would have insisted I start taking
medication. That is where it all fell into perspective, I knew
I had the ability to manage my diabetes on my own; I just
needed the right tools.
The diabetes self-management program did just that, it gave
me the tools I need to manage my diabetes and now I use those
tools to live a healthy life. I even told my doctor about the
course and recommend that she tell her patients about it. I am
now able to manage my disease through lifestyle changes,
instead of having to purchase expensive medications and
supplies, like insulin.
I believe it is important for people to have access to
supports to prevent or better manage their diabetes and that
can help them avoid paying for high-cost medications. I am
concerned about the rising cost of medications across the
board, because it puts treatment out of reach for some people.
Again, thank you for the invitation to testify before the
Committee. I look forward to answering your questions.
Thank you.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
Additional Statements for the Record
=======================================================================
Closing Statement, Senator Robert P. Casey, Jr., Ranking Member
Thank you, Madam Chairman, for holding this hearing today. I would
also like to thank our witnesses for their testimony, particularly Lois
for her compelling personal story. As we have learned today, living
with diabetes is a far too common experience. To quote Lois, ``the
rising cost of medication across the board can put treatment out of
reach for some people.'' I couldn't have said it better myself. No
senior should have to ration their insulin or choose between medication
and food, simply because of the price of their medications. And, as
Lois shows us, it is essential for Americans to have access to programs
that provide the tools to better manage diabetes. I applaud our local
Area Agencies on Aging for their leadership and dedication to helping
seniors live full and healthy lives, all while saving on their health
care costs. It is imperative that we work together and I look forward
to continuing this important dialog.
__________
Closing Statement, Senator Richard Blumenthal
I want to start by thanking Senators Collins and Casey for holding
a hearing on the increasingly high cost of insulin, and the higher cost
of individuals struggling to gain access to it. There are 355,000
adults in Connecticut with diabetes, costing the state $3.7 billion per
year. This problem will get worse before it gets better, with over a
third of adults in Connecticut suffering from prediabetes and, without
intervention, on the road to their own diabetes diagnosis.
Yet, unfortunately, despite the diabetes epidemic that has
enveloped our country, insulin prices continue to rise and patients who
need this drug struggle to afford it. One doctor from Yale-New Haven
Hospital described a 78-year old patient who refused to increase her
dose of insulin, despite it being absolutely necessary, because she
couldn't afford to do so.
Another doctor at Hartford Hospital said that patients forgoing
necessary treatments ultimately end in the emergency room there. This
problem is widespread in Connecticut, particularly amongst low-income
individuals, and begs the question that I believe brings us all here
today: how can a one hundred year old drug suddenly cost so much that
our most vulnerable citizens cannot afford to access it?
I believe this is the question we are all seeking to find answers
to, not only for insulin, but countless other drugs that have seen
astronomical and unjustified price spikes over the years. I will
continue to push for policies that increase transparency, lower drug
prices, and eventually, improve care, but that cannot be done without a
strong commitment to everyone here in Congress.
I want to thank each of you for contributing your stories and
information to this important discussion and look forward to finding a
way to implementing the suggestions you've given us today at this
hearing.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Statement of Sabrina Burbeck, Family With Type 1 Diabetes
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the
committee: My name is Sabrina Burbeck, and I am from Old Town, Maine. I
am writing to tell you about my family's experience with diabetes and
insulin. When my brother was thirteen, he was diagnosed with type 1
diabetes. Since then it has been a struggle for my family to afford his
insulin as the prices have risen so much over the years. In 2012, I
gave birth to my second son, Dakota, who was diagnosed at 18 months
with type 1 diabetes. He is now five and has relied on insulin to
survive since his diagnosis. Right now we are lucky because he has
state provided healthcare that helps to cover some of his drug costs.
My brother is not so lucky. He must pay for his insulin out of pocket,
even with a discount card he spends $150 per vial. He should be using
two vials a month, but instead he stretches out his doses for as long
as he can in order to afford it. I am a single mom on a fixed income,
and I live in fear of not being able to afford the insulin my son needs
to survive. If my son loses his healthcare, he will be fighting that
much harder for his life. No one should live in fear of having to make
the choice to eat that month or pay for meds. I thank the committee for
taking the time to address this issue, and I hope, for the sake of my
brother and my son, that you can change our system to ensure insulin is
affordable for all Americans.
__________
Statement of Gail DeVore, Type 1 Diabetic
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the
committee: My name is Gail DeVore, and I am from Denver, Colorado. I
have had type 1 diabetes since Valentine's Day, 1972. For the last 46
years, I have seen the invention of home glucose meters, insulin pumps,
new forms of insulin, continuous glucose monitors (CGM), and many other
advancing treatment options for type 1 diabetics. I have also had the
privilege of using all these options, which allow me to be
complication-free and in good health. These are not ``special devices''
or extraordinary treatment options. These devices allow a type 1
diabetic to live without as much fear of complications and an early
death due to diabetes. The ability to constantly monitor the status of
our blood sugars is critical in saving our lives. However, it all comes
with a very high price. At my pharmacy, one bottle of the insulin I use
is $330. My prescription is for four bottles. At other pharmacies, this
same single bottle of insulin can cost as much as $600. Supplies can
also cost about $1,000 per month on top of that, despite insurance
coverage and prescription benefits. These costs are exorbitant.
Considering the risks type 1 diabetics like myself face, the costs are
unacceptable. I thank the committee for taking the time to address this
issue, and I implore you to work on implementing policies that ensure
type 1 and other types of diabetics have access to affordable insulin.
__________
Statement of Clayton McCook, Daughter With Type 1 Diabetes
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Casey, and members of the
committee: My name is Clayton McCook, and I am from Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma. I write to you today on behalf of my nine-year-old daughter,
Lily, who lives with type 1 diabetes. The day she was diagnosed six
years ago, our lives changed forever. We went from being a young family
full of blissful innocence to one living with chronic illness. Each
month Lily goes through about one and a half vials of insulin, but as
she grows, she will need two. Each vial costs $325. That comes out to
nearly $500 a month now and eventually will be over $600. This only
accounts for her insulin and not for her diabetes supplies, which are
also very expensive. I am lucky; I work as a veterinarian and make good
money, but even with that, my wife works multiple jobs to supplement
our income and ensure we can afford Lily's insulin. My daughter is one
of the strongest people I know, and I never worry about her ability to
care for herself as time goes on. However, I worry every day about the
direction that insulin prices are headed. The cost of insulin is always
increasing, even though the drug was brought to market nearly 100 years
ago. We pay hundreds of dollars for a decades-old medication that costs
a fraction of the list price to produce. What will happen if Lily
cannot afford her medication? She needs her insulin to survive and will
continue to need it for the rest of her life. I want my daughter to
grow up to live the life she wants, but with the burden of the cost of
insulin, I worry that could be impossible. We need insulin to be
affordable in this country. Thank you for taking the time to look into
the problem for my family and others throughout the United States. I
look forward to the action you take to ensure all diabetes patients,
including Lily, are able to access the insulin they need to survive.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]