- OPEN HEARING: SECURITY CLEARANCE REFORM
[Senate Hearing 115-394]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-394
OPEN HEARING: SECURITY CLEARANCE REFORM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE
OF THE
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 7, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Select Committee on Intelligence
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-948 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE
[Established by S. Res. 400, 94th Cong., 2d Sess.]
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina, Chairman
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia, Vice Chairman
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California
MARCO RUBIO, Florida
RON WYDEN, Oregon
SUSAN COLLINS, Maine
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
ROY BLUNT, Missouri
ANGUS KING, Maine
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KAMALA HARRIS, California
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky, Ex Officio
CHUCK SCHUMER, New York, Ex Officio
JOHN McCAIN, Arizona, Ex Officio
JACK REED, Rhode Island, Ex Officio
----------
Chris Joyner, Staff Director
Michael Casey, Minority Staff Director
Kelsey Stroud Bailey, Chief Clerk
CONTENTS
----------
MARCH 7, 2018
OPENING STATEMENTS
Burr, Hon. Richard, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from North Carolina.
1
Warner, Hon. Mark R., Vice Chairman, a U.S. Senator from Virginia
2
WITNESSES
Panel 1
Farrell, Brenda, Director, DOD Strategic Human Capital
Management, Government Accountability Office...................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
6
Phillips, Kevin, President and Chief Executive Officer, Mantech
International Corporation......................................
23
Prepared statement...........................................
25
Chappell, Jane, Vice President for Global Intelligence Solutions,
Raytheon Corporation...........................................
32
Prepared statement...........................................
34
Berteau, David, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Professional Services Council..................................
44
Prepared statement...........................................
46
Panel 2
Dunbar, Brian, Assistant Director, Special Security Directorate,
National Counter-Intelligence and Security Center, Office of
the Director of National Intelligence..........................
76
Prepared statement...........................................
79
Phalen, Jr., Charles S., Director, National Background
Investigations Bureau, U.S. Office of Personnel Management.....
83
Prepared statement...........................................
85
Reid, Garry P., Director for Defense Intelligence (Intelligence
and Security), Department of Defense...........................
90
Prepared statement...........................................
93
Payne, Daniel E., Director, Defense Security Service, Department
of Defense.....................................................
97
Prepared statement...........................................
99
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Responses to Questions for the Record by:
Ms. Farrell..................................................
118
Mr. Phillips.................................................
121
Mr. Phalen...................................................
124
Mr. Dunbar...................................................
131
Mr. Reid and Mr. Payne.......................................
142
OPEN HEARING: SECURITY CLEARANCE REFORM
----------
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 7, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Select Committee on Intelligence,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:35 a.m. in Room
SD-106, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Richard Burr
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Senators Burr, Warner, Risch, Rubio, Collins,
Blunt, Lankford, Cotton, Cornyn, Feinstein, Wyden, Heinrich,
King, Manchin, Harris, and Reed.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD BURR, CHAIRMAN, A U.S.
SENATOR FROM NORTH CAROLINA
Chairman Burr. Good morning. I'd like to thank our
witnesses for appearing today to discuss our government's
security clearance process and potential areas of reform. The
intelligence community, Department of Defense, and defense
industrial base trust cleared personnel with our Nation's most
sensitive projects and most important secrets. Ensuring a
modern, efficient, and secure clearance process is paramount
and necessary to maintain our national security.
The committee will first hear from industry representatives
on their perspective on the process and how it affects their
ability to support the U.S. Government. Our first panel
includes: Mr. Kevin Phillips, President and CEO of ManTech; Ms.
Jane Chappell, Vice President of Intelligence, Information, and
Services at Raytheon; Mr. David Berteau, President of the
Professional Services Council; and Ms. Brenda Farrell from the
Government Accountability Office. Welcome to all of you. We
appreciate your willingness to appear and, more importantly,
thank you for the thousands of employees you represent, who
work every day to support the whole of the U.S. Government.
Many of our Nation's most sensitive programs and operations
would not be possible without your work.
I look forward to hearing from you on how your respective
companies view the security clearance process and how it
affects your operations, your hiring, your retention, and your
competitiveness. I also hope you've come today prepared with
ideas for reform where necessary.
Our second panel will include representatives from the
Executive Branch: Mr. Charlie Phalen, the Director of the
National Background Investigation Bureau; Mr. Brian Dunbar,
Assistant Director of National Counterintelligence and Security
Center at the ODNI; Mr. Garry Reid, Director for Security and
Intelligence at the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence; and Mr. Dan Payne, Director of Defense
Security Service at the Department of Defense. They'll provide
the government's perspective on this issue and will update us
on their efforts to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
the current system.
The purpose of this hearing is to explore the process for
granting Secret and Top Secret clearances to both government
and industry personnel, and to consider potential better ways
forward. The government's approach to issuing national security
clearances is largely unchanged since it was established in
1947, and the net result is a growing backlog of
investigations, which now reaches 547,000, and inefficiencies
that could result in our missing information necessary to
thwart insider threats or workplace violence.
We should also consider new technologies that could
increase the efficiency and effectiveness of our vetting
process while also providing greater real-time situational
awareness of potential threats to sensitive information.
Furthermore, the system of reciprocity, whereby a clearance
granted by one agency is also recognized by another, simply
does not work.
We would all agree that the clearance process should be
demanding on candidates and should effectively uncover
potential issues before one is granted access to sensitive
information. But clearly, the current system is not optimal and
we must do better. I'm hopeful that today's discussion will
have some good ideas and strategies that we can put into action
to reform the process.
Again, I want to thank each of our witnesses for your
testimony today, and I will now turn to the Vice Chairman for
any comments he might have.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARK R. WARNER, VICE CHAIRMAN, A U.S.
SENATOR FROM VIRGINIA
Vice Chairman Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome
to our witnesses. I want to first thank the Chairman for
holding this hearing, particularly in an unclassified setting.
I believe that the way our government protects our secrets
is a critical area for oversight of this committee. As the
Chairman has already mentioned, in many ways the system that is
in place, which was born in 1947--and I remind everybody,
that's when classified cables were sent by typewriter and
telex--really hasn't changed very much.
I believe that the clearance process today is a
duplicative, manually intensive process. It relies on shoe
leather field investigations that would be familiar to fans of
spy films. It was built for a time when there was a small
industry component and government workers stayed in their
agency for their entire career. The principal risk was that
someone would share pages from classified reports with an
identifiable foreign adversary.
Today in many ways we worry more about insider threats,
someone who can remove an external hard drive and provide
petabytes of data online to an adversary or, for that matter,
to a global audience. And industry--and much of that industry
I'm proud to have in my State. And industry is a much larger
partner. Workers are highly mobile across careers, sectors, and
location. Technologies such as big data and AI can help assess
people's trustworthiness in a far more efficient and dynamic
way. But we've not taken advantage of these advances.
Just last month, at an open hearing the Director of
National intelligence, Director Coats, said that our security
clearance process is, in his words, ``broken and needs to be
reformed.'' In January of this year--and I again appreciate the
GAO witness today--placed the security clearance process on
its, quote, ``high-risk list'' of areas that the government
needs broad-based transformation or reforms.
The problems with our security clearance process are clear.
The investigation inventory has more than doubled in the last
three years, with, as the Chairman has mentioned, 700,000
people currently waiting on a background check. Despite recent
headlines, the overwhelming majority of those waiting don't
have unusually complex backgrounds or finances to untangle.
Nevertheless, the cost to run a background check have nearly
doubled. Timelines to process clearance are far in excess of
standards set in law.
These failures in our security clearance process impact
individual individuals, companies, government agencies, and
even our own military's readiness. Again, as I mentioned, in
the Commonwealth of Virginia I hear again and again from
contractors, particularly from cutting-edge technology
companies, and government agencies that they cannot hire the
people they need in a timely manner. I hear from individuals
who must wait for months and sometimes even a year to start
jobs that they were hired for. And I've heard from a lot of
folks who ultimately had to take other jobs because the process
took too long and they couldn't afford to wait.
To compete globally, economically, and militarily, the
status quo of continued delays and convoluted systems cannot
continue. No doubt we face real threats to our security that we
have to address. Insider threats like Ed Snowden and Harold
Martin compromised vast amounts of sensitive data. And
obviously the tragedy of the shootings at Washington Naval Yard
and Fort Hood took innocent lives. The impacts of these lapses
on national security are too big to think that incremental
reforms will suffice.
Again referring back to Dan Coats's testimony, we need a
revolution to our system. I believe we can assess the
trustworthiness of our cleared workforce in a dramatically
faster and more effective manner than we do today.
We have two great panels here that will help us, both from
the government's perspective and from our national security
partners in the private sector. I'd like again to thank you all
for appearing. I hope that at our next meeting--and I hope some
are listening downtown--that the OMB, which chairs the inter-
agency efforts to address clearances, which declined to appear
before us today, will actually participate in this process.
I want to be a partner in rethinking our entire security
clearance architecture. I want to work with you to devise a
model that reflects a dynamic workforce and embraces the needs
of both our government and industry partners.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to this hearing.
Chairman Burr. I thank the Vice Chairman.
To members, when we have finished receiving testimony I'll
recognize members based upon seniority for up to five minutes.
With that, Ms. Farrell, I understand you're going to go
first, and then we'll work right down to your left, my right,
all the way down the line. The floor is yours.
STATEMENT OF BRENDA FARRELL, DIRECTOR, DOD STRATEGIC HUMAN
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Ms. Farrell. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Chairman
Burr, Vice Chairman Warner, and members of the committee: Thank
you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss our recent
work on the serious challenges associated with the personnel
security clearance process. We designated the government-wide
security clearance process as a high-risk area in January 2018
because it represents a significant management risk. A high-
quality security clearance process is necessary to minimize the
risk of unauthorized disclosures of classified information and
to help ensure that information about individuals with criminal
histories or other questionable behavior is identified and
assessed.
My written statement today summarizes some of the findings
in our reports issued in November and December 2017 on this
topic. Now I will briefly discuss my written statement that is
provided in three parts.
First, we found that the Executive Branch agencies have
made progress reforming the clearance process, but key
longstanding initiatives remain incomplete. For example,
agencies still face challenges in implementing aspects of the
2012 Federal Investigative Standards that are criteria for
conducting background investigations and in fully implementing
a continuous evaluation program for clearance holders. Efforts
to implement such a program go back ten years.
We found that, while the ODNI has taken an initial step to
implement continuous evaluation in a phased approach, it had
not determined what the future phases will consist of or occur.
We recommended that the DNI develop an implementation plan.
Also, while agencies have taken steps to establish
government-wide performance measures for the quality of
investigations, the original milestone for completion was
missed in fiscal year 2010. No revised milestone currently has
been set for their completion. We recommended that the DNI
establish a milestone for completion of such measures.
Second, we found that the number of agencies meeting
timeliness objectives for initial Secret and Top Secret
clearances, as well as periodic reinvestigations, decreased
from fiscal years 2012 through 2016. For example, while 73
percent of agencies did not meet timeliness objectives for
initial clearances for most of fiscal year 2012, 98 percent of
agencies did not meet these objectives in fiscal year 2016.
Lack of timely processing for clearances has contributed to a
significant backlog of background investigations at the agency
that is currently responsible for conducting most of the
government's background investigations, that is the National
Background Investigations Bureau. The Bureau's documentation
shows that the backlog of pending investigations increased from
about 190,000 in August 2014 to more than 710,000 as of
February 2018. We found that the Bureau did not have a plan for
reducing the backlog.
Finally, we found that potential effects of continuous
evaluation on agencies are unknown because the future phases of
the program and the effect on agency resources have not yet
been determined. Agencies have identified increased resources
as a risk to the program. For example, DOD officials told us
that, with workload and funding issues, they see no alternative
but to replace periodic reinvestigations for certain clearance
holders with continuous evaluation. DOD believes that more
frequent reinvestigations for certain clearance holders could
cost $1.8 billion for fiscal year 2018 through 2022. However,
the DNI's recently issued directive for continuous evaluation
clarified that continuous evaluation is intended to supplement,
but not replace, periodic reinvestigations.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, several agencies have key roles
and responsibilities in the multi-phase clearance process,
including ODNI, OMB, DOD, and OPM. Also, the top leadership
from these agencies comprises the Performance Accountability
Council that is responsible for driving implementation of and
overseeing the reform efforts government-wide.
We look forward to working with them to discuss our plans
for assessing their progress in addressing this high-risk area.
Now is the time for strong top leadership to focus on
implementing GAO's recommended actions to complete the reform
efforts, improve timeliness, and reduce the backlog. Failure to
do so increases the risk of damaging unauthorized disclosures
of classified information.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my remarks.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Farrell follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Ms. Farrell.
Mr. Phillips, the floor is yours.
STATEMENT OF KEVIN PHILLIPS, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, MANTECH INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Mr. Phillips. Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman, and members of
the committee: My name is Kevin Phillips. I'm the President and
CEO of ManTech International. ManTech has 7,800 employees who
support national security and homeland security. I appreciate
the opportunity to participate in this industry panel and ask
that my written statement be entered as part of the hearing
record.
Senator Warner, including our initial outreach through
NVTC, 15 companies and 6 industry associations have worked
collectively over the last 6 to 9 months to increase the
visibility and importance of this matter and to propose
solutions to help improve the process. Put simply, the backlog
of 700,000 security clearance cases is our industry's number
one priority. Given the increasing challenges that we face in
providing qualified, cleared talent to meet the mission
demands, we consider it a national security issue and an all-
of-government issue because it impacts every agency we support.
Some quick facts. Since 2014, the time it takes to obtain a
clearance has more than doubled in our industry. The average
time it takes to get a TS-SCI clearance, a Top Secret
clearance, is over a year. The time it takes to get a Secret
clearance is eight months. Top professionals are in high demand
across the Nation. They do not have time to wait over a year to
get a job. And increasingly, they are unwilling to deal with
the uncertainty associated with this process.
As a result of this issue, the key support for weapons
development, cyber security, analytics, maintenance and
sustainment, space resilience support, as well as the use of
transformational technologies across all of government, is
being underserved. Since the end of 2014, we estimate that
approximately 10,000 positions required from the contractor
community in support of the intelligence community have gone
unfilled due to these delays.
We offer the following recommendations to help improve the
backlog: first, enable reciprocity; allow for crossover
clearances to be done routinely and automatically. Today 23
different agencies provide different processes and standards in
order to determine who is trustworthy and suitable to be
employed within their agency. One universally accepted and
enforced standard across all of government is needed.
Second, increase funding. The current backlog shows no
signs of improvement. We need funding to increase processing
capacity, to reduce the backlog we have today, while our
government partners, who are working diligently to develop and
implement a new system, work to develop the system of tomorrow.
Third, prioritize existing cases. The amount of backlog of
700,000 cases has not gone down. The timelines have not
improved, and we may be at a point where we have to prioritize
within that backlog the cases that have the greatest mission
impact or that may have the highest or pose the highest risks
to national security based on the access to data.
Fourth, adopt continuous evaluation, adopt new systems that
can be used across all of government, and establish a framework
for which government and industry can better share information
about individuals holding positions of public trust that is
derogatory, so that we can better protect the Nation against
threats from insiders.
Fifth, from a legislative standpoint we consider this a
whole-of-government issue. Accordingly, we believe that a
concerted focus from Congress is required and the oversight is
needed. We support the reinstatement of the IRTPA timelines
with incremental milestones. ``IRTPA'' is the Intelligence
Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act.
Finally, we offer that mobility and portability for
clearances among the contractor community are needed. We in
industry fully understand the importance of a strong security
clearance process. That said, slow security does not constitute
good security. Time matters to mission.
The industry is committed to take the actions needed to
hire trustworthy individuals and to help protect the Nation
from outside threats. We appreciate the committee's leadership
and the focus on this important matter. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Phillips follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Mr. Phillips.
Ms. Chappell.
STATEMENT OF JANE CHAPPELL, VICE PRESIDENT FOR GLOBAL
INTELLIGENCE SOLUTIONS, RAYTHEON CORPORATION
Ms. Chappell. Chairman Burr, Vice Chairman Warner, members
of the committee: I'm honored to represent Raytheon today
before the Select Committee on Intelligence. Raytheon and our
employees understand and take very seriously our obligation to
protect the Nation's secrets. We submit to the same clearance
process that governs our government and military partners and
we take the same oath to protect the information established
and entrusted to us. Every day our number one priority is
honoring that oath while meeting the needs of our customers.
As Vice President of Raytheon's Global Intelligence
Solutions business unit, I navigate the disruptions that
backlogs in the security clearance process cause on a daily
basis, not just for Raytheon, but for our suppliers and our
industry peers, but ultimately for the warfighters,
intelligence officers, and homeland security officials who rely
on our products and services to protect the United States.
The magnitude of the backlog and the associated delays is
well documented, and the metrics speak for themselves. But what
metrics fail to capture are the real-world impacts of the
backlog: new careers put on hold, top talent lost to non-
defense industries, and programs that provide critical
warfighter capabilities suffer delay and cost increases. The
delays also come with a real-world price tag. Those new hires
run up overhead costs while they wait for their clearances,
resulting in significant program cost increases and inefficient
use of taxpayer dollars.
Reducing the current backlog will require immediate and
aggressive interim steps, some of which are already being
addressed. Raytheon supports the government's efforts to add
resources and ease requirements for periodic reinvestigations.
We also appreciate efforts to streamline the application
process, automate and digitize information collection, provide
for secure data storage, and improve the related processes.
Beyond these actions, we recommend eliminating the first-
in, first-out approach to the investigation workflow, focusing
immediate resources on high-priority clearance and low-risk
investigations.
It's also critical that Congress and the Executive Branch
implement fundamental reforms that streamline the clearance
process and increase our Nation's security by leveraging
advances in technology. This effort should be guided by what
our industry calls ``the four ones.'' The first one is one
application, which is a digital permanent record forming the
basis of all clearance investigations, updated continuously and
stored securely.
The second is one investigation, which would implement
continuous evaluation and the appropriate use of robust user
activity monitoring tools to facilitate a dynamic ongoing
assessment of individual risk while securing sensitive
information on protected systems.
The third one is one adjudication, which calls for
streamlining and standardizing the adjudication system so the
agency's clearance decision is respected by other departments
and agencies. This would increase efficiency and promote
reciprocity based on a consistent set of standards for access,
suitability, and fitness.
The fourth and final one is one clearance, that is
recognized across the entire government that is transferable
between departments, agencies, and contracts.
We believe the implementation of these reforms will help
eliminate the inefficiencies that hamstring the current
clearance system while promoting more effective recruitment,
retention, and utilization of government employees and
contractors. And most critically, these reforms will help close
the security gaps that threaten our Nation's secrets and
personnel.
The modern threat environment can no longer be addressed
using outdated and infrequent security snapshots. But even the
most well-intended reporting requirements, working groups, and
legislative deadlines have not and will not overcome the fear
of change or the comfort of the status quo. Strong, sustained
leadership from both Congress and the White House will be
crucial to the success of these efforts.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Chappell follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Ms. Chappell.
Mr. Berteau.
STATEMENT OF DAVID BERTEAU, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, PROFESSIONAL SERVICES COUNCIL
Mr. Berteau. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman Warner,
members of the committee. We really appreciate you having this
hearing today. I would ask that my written statement be
incorporated in the record in its entirety and I'll just make a
few key points here.
You heard the description of the problems and the process
solutions, the four ones: one application, one investigation,
one adjudication, and one clearance. It highlights, I think,
the fact that this is really a whole-of-government problem.
Just look at the panel that you have following us. You don't
have a whole-of-government representation on there.
As Vice Chairman Warner pointed out, the Office of
Management and Budget plays a key role both in the Performance
Accountability Council and in the fundamental process across
the board. In the end, though, this is a set of processes that
exercises judgment. It makes the decision of where to place
trust. And in that decision is a calculus of how much risk are
we willing to accept. If it's zero, then we'll never issue a
clearance. So there's a whole level of dynamic that has to go
on there, and the four ones helps get you there.
What, though, can this committee and the Congress do? First
is keep that whole-of-government requirement in mind. Second
is, within that there's a funding process. So all of those 23
agencies that have separate authorities here have to provide
funding to somebody who's going to do the work. Typically today
that's the National Background Investigation Bureau. We can't
find, from where we sit outside, a record of where that funding
stands for those 23 agencies, because it's across all the
appropriations accounts. OMB used to track that and report
that, but that's no longer available to us. It may be available
to you. It should be available to you. And I think it's
important as we look at the fiscal year 2018 funding bill that
we'll see end of this week, early next week, make sure that
that funding is in there, because these systems will not
operate without adequate resources. You can't buy your way out
of it, though. There's got to be substantial process
improvement as well. My fellow panelists have talked about
that.
But in the meantime, you have a requirement for part of
this responsibility to be moved from the Office of Personnel
Management, the National Background Investigations Bureau, over
to the Defense Department, and you'll hear more about that in
the second panel. While that movement's taking place--and the
plan is it will take years--the system has to keep going as
well. So there's got to be both funding for the ongoing work
and funding for the new capabilities inside the Defense
Department. So that makes it all the more important.
My fellow panelists have mentioned reciprocity. This is a
critical, critical issue. How can it be that you're cleared and
acceptable for one part of the government at a certain level
and you're not cleared and acceptable at another part? The
records show 23 different agencies, but within those agencies
there's lots of subcategories. DHS alone has more than a dozen
separate individual reciprocity determiners who can say: You
may be good enough for those guys, but you're not good enough
for me. And they don't even have to tell us why, which makes it
very hard for us to figure out how to get out of that.
So industry can quantify its impact. You've already heard
some of that. We all know there's an impact on the government
as well. Somewhere in the government, something's not being
done or not being done as well as it ought to be or not being
done as fast as it ought to be. We don't have that kind of
information out of the government, but you've got to believe
that in fact somewhere a backlog of 700,000 is going to have an
impact, because this is not just contractors; this is
government civilian personnel, this is military personnel, this
is new recruits. All of those have effects as well.
So I think the single biggest thing is access to
information about what's going on, what the results are. You've
got a situation now where it used to be there was information
made available to the public that we could rely on to
prioritize our own resources. That's no longer there. We need
you to help make that information not only visible to you in
the committee--it might come to you in an FOUO kind of a
status--but visible to the public and to those of us who have
to operate within that system in order to do our job supporting
the government.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I'll conclude my remarks and
turn back to you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berteau follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Mr. Berteau.
The Chair would recognize himself, and then we'll go by
seniority for up to five minutes.
My question is very simple, and it's this. Let's make an
assumption that funding is not an issue. Why does it take so
damn long? Give me the three things that make this process be
so long?
Mr. Phillips. Let's start, sir, with we have from history a
number of agencies who have their own processes set up and they
have to go through those processes, and they're very manual. As
mentioned before, the process was established during the
Eisenhower administration. It's very manual.
Investigators have to go in person and write notes, rather
than use tablets. They have to go through the mail to send a
request to get an education check. They physically have to
visit a person, versus using social media or other access
points to get things done, when today's technology allows for a
much more rapid way of getting decisions done without, in our
view, changing the trustworthiness of the individual. That can
be done greatly and significantly.
I think the second part is that people want to walk through
the process and make sure in this environment that people are
trustworthy, and the timeline is taking longer because the
assurance is needed and it's impacting the mission. We want to
make sure time is factored in to the decisions or we will not
be able to defend the digital walls from outside threats.
So I think it's the process and I think it's the need to
have a more risk-based review against the mission requirements
and the need to protect our Nation combined from insider
threats.
Thank you.
Chairman Burr. Ms. Chappell.
Ms. Chappell. I would echo his comments, but I would say it
a little different. We are a Nation blessed with very high
technology. We are just not using that technology in this
process.
We talked about people having to physically go and meet
with people. I think that, while that gives us some level of
assurance, I think the continuous evaluation gives us a whole
other level of insurance, and we should use that technology to
give us more confidence in the results as well as decrease the
time lines.
Chairman Burr. Basically, what you've told me is I put more
effort into understanding who my interns are than potentially
the process does for security clearances, because you go to the
areas that you learn the most about them, which social media is
right at the top of the list. I can't envision anybody coming
into the office that you haven't thoroughly checked out
everything that they've said online, which is to them a
protected space. And we all know that it's a public space.
I think what you've done is you've confirmed our biggest
fear, that we're so obsessed with process and very little
consumption of outcome. I think that's how you get a backlog.
And you can let that continue to be the norm and nobody's
outraged.
What's the single change that you'd make to the security
clearance process if you only were limited to one?
Ms. Farrell.
Ms. Farrell. I think prompt action. This needs to be, as
some of the colleagues here have said, a high priority. We keep
hearing the words ``top leadership.'' There was top leadership
involvement when the DOD program was on the high-risk list from
2005 and 2011. We saw that top leadership driving efforts from
OMB, DOD, the DNI. That's what we're going to be looking for as
we measure their progress going forward to take actions to come
off of the high-risk list: top leadership actions engaging with
Congress to show that reducing the backlog is a top priority,
as well as taking action to communicate that to the other
members of the personnel strategic clearance community, as well
as my colleagues on the panel here. But leadership is
desperately needed in this area.
Chairman Burr. Mr. Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Sir, immediately it's funding. But putting
that aside, I think long-term it's one uniform standard and
reciprocity. It's a big deal.
Chairman Burr. Ms. Chappell.
Ms. Chappell. I would say continuous evaluation monitoring,
doing that on a continuous basis, which reduces the periodic
investigations, which allows those people to spend more time
reducing the current backlog.
Chairman Burr. Mr. Berteau.
Mr. Berteau. Do I get to use the three that they've already
used and add a fourth one to it?
Chairman Burr. Absolutely.
Mr. Berteau. Because I do think reciprocity is the top
priority in that process. But I think using technology, not
just in continuous evaluation, but in the investigations
process itself. I've had a clearance for nearly 40 years and
the guy still shows up with a pencil and a piece of paper and
makes sure that the questions I've entered into the form, which
are in many cases the same answers I've given for almost 40
years, are still what I believe, and he writes it down with a
pencil, and then he takes it off and puts it into a computer
system that's not compatible with anybody else's computer
system. Let's get the process down to where we're using 21st
century technology.
Chairman Burr. My thanks to all of you for your candid
responses, and I say that with the full knowledge of knowing
that this issue is a multi-committee jurisdictional issue on
the Hill. So we've got just as much to fix up here. I think
some of the things that you have expressed are the results of
no coordination legislatively, and I think we're going to take
that at heart as we move forward.
Vice Chairman.
Vice Chairman Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, thank the panel for their I think accurate
description. I think it's really important that we all think
about this, and I appreciate the GAO putting this on the
national security high risk, because not only are we wasting
taxpayer dollars by hiring individuals that then cannot do the
work they're hired to do or, as some of the industry panels
indicated, will then not take a job because of the clearance
process--and I think we particularly lose on the government
side, where people would come in and serve at a much perhaps
lower salary than they would on the industry side, but because
of the security clearance.
And I really appreciate, Mr. Berteau, your comments about
the use of technology. If you can give--we'll start with you
and at least start through our industry colleagues--other
specific examples on how, on a technology basis, we can improve
this process that, again, candidly, hasn't been significantly
updated since the 1950s? Mr. Berteau, do you want to start, and
then we'll go down, specific technology examples?
Mr. Berteau. I think that the entities that are involved in
both the front-end, the scheduling process, the investigation
process, and the adjudication process have all identified a
number of places where they can bring that technology to bear.
The greatest advantage I think we can take is to have
integrated data across the government, so that in fact we've
got access to everything everywhere.
The intelligence community has made more progress here than
much of the rest of the government has had. But they also have
the advantage of scale. The scale is smaller in they've got the
funding and resources and the motivation to do that. I think we
could give you a list of specifics that you could consider as
you go forward as well.
Vice Chairman Warner. Ms. Chappell.
Ms. Chappell. I would say, going back to my previous
answer, that continuous evaluation. A lot of this data that we
go personally ask these people, that are the same questions
we've asked for 40 years, that data, a lot of that data is
available in open source, that's available to anybody. It's a
matter of public record.
Vice Chairman Warner. Rather than having somebody send a
letter to an educational institution----
Ms. Chappell. Correct.
Vice Chairman Warner [continuing]. Or make personal visits.
Could you drill down for a minute on continuous evaluation, at
least for SECRET clearance level? It seems like it would make
so much sense.
Ms. Chappell. If you go down through and look for
bankruptcy, if someone files for bankruptcy that's a matter of
public record, for example. We can get that through just
trolling the web.
Vice Chairman Warner. Without an agent going to a
courthouse----
Ms. Chappell. Without an agent having to physically travel
and then go take that information down with pencil and paper,
for example.
Vice Chairman Warner. Thank you.
Mr. Phillips. Sir, I'll give you two examples and one
desired solution. We have--one of my fellow CEOs has a contract
where he has people in the Green Zone doing DOD work and they
cannot support in that same limited space, work for another
department because they have to file an entire process to get a
clearance in order to do that and it's totally separated. So
right across the street, they can't go in and support, with a
confined environment, for two agencies to do the same thing in
a very difficult environment.
Separately, we have a separate CEO who's got a contract
that does work, that the information flows to both DOD and
somewhere in DHS. That individual has to fill two applications
and go through two investigations to do the same job.
Industry quite often utilizes public systems that we share,
that are cloud-based, multi-layer security, and we pay for it
for ourselves. We control the data ourselves. But it is a
uniform set of systems that are available. We can make that
decision.
I think establishing a uniform system that every agency
that has funding can fund into and do its own processing would
be very beneficial, because then those accesses would be
available at the same security level for people to know what's
happening and that crossover and that reciprocity could happen
just like that.
Vice Chairman Warner. I think, just before I get my last
question in for Ms. Farrell, we need both reciprocity and
portability. One of the things, and I think one of the reasons
why ODNI Coats, this is so high on his priority, he lived this
experience. Having sat on this committee for a number of years,
being accessed to all types of information, the amount of--when
he left the Senate and a few weeks later when he was then
appointed head of ODNI, because there was that short-term gap,
he had to go through a whole new security clearance process.
That was pretty absurd.
Ms. Farrell, one of the things that I'd like you to comment
on is: What I've heard constantly is, typically from the
government side, everybody knows it's a problem, but this, like
much of G&A in terms of operations, gets pushed to the back of
the line. How do we make sure that we as Congress can, with
appropriate oversight, make sure that agencies don't take their
security clearance budget and push it to the back of the line?
Everyone acknowledges this is an issue and a problem, but these
are dollars that don't ever seem to be prioritized because they
are not sole to mission.
Ms. Farrell. I think this is something that goes back to
the top leadership, from the deputy director for management at
OMB, who is the chair of the council that's driving the reform
efforts and overseeing the reform efforts, and to send a
message that this is a top priority, whether it's reducing the
backlog or fully implementing CE, and resources will be
provided and the agencies will follow suit.
If I may comment on the technology, the continuous
evaluation is an area that you've heard has great promise, that
could help streamline the process, perhaps be more efficient.
As I noted, the efforts to implement continuous evaluation go
back to 2008, with full implementation expected in 2010, and
that has not happened.
We are encouraged by the DNI's recent directive expanding
on what CE is. However, we still don't really know what
continuous evaluation is going to comprise and when it's going
to be implemented. I think that's going to be a huge step, for
the DNI to develop a detailed implementation plan of when the
phases are going to occur and the agencies' expectations to
implement that.
Vice Chairman Warner. Mr. Chairman, I'd simply say I think
Ms. Farrell's comments are pretty clear. We've got to start at
the top. I'm disappointed, and I know you are as well, that OMB
did not take our invitation to actually participate, since they
chair the inter-agency council to try to move forward on this.
I think we need to get them back in at some point.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Burr. Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All three of our private sector witnesses today have been
understandably very critical of the unacceptable flaws in the
government's clearance process and the lack of a system of
continuous evaluation. Inadequate funding has been mentioned. I
want to turn the question around.
There have been three widely reported, serious breaches at
the NSA and all three involved contract employees. It is
evident that relying solely on a moment-in-time snapshot of an
applicant's security profile to determine clearances and secure
our information and facilities is simply not working. I've been
a strong supporter of moving to continuous evaluation,
particularly following the Navy Yard shooting.
But my question for each of the three of you is: What
responsibility do contractors have to identify and report
changes in employee behavior that may indicate a vulnerability
and should trigger a review of the security clearance? In at
least one of the widely reported incidents involving NSA, the
employees who worked with the individual were very aware of the
issues that should have triggered a review of his clearance.
So I understand the role that government has and that we
need to do much better. But what is your role, particularly in
light of those three serious breaches, all involving contract
employees? Mr. Berteau, we'll start with you and then move
across.
Mr. Berteau. Thank you, Senator. Those are critical
questions, obviously.
I make three points there. Number one, I know you know
this, but the process is the same, whether you're a government
uniformed personnel or a government civilian or a contractor,
in terms of the investigation and adjudication process.
Senator Collins. I do know that.
Mr. Berteau. And I think that the issues that we've been
talking about today, some of the process fixes actually
incorporate in them a number of the lessons learned from those
very examples that you cite here, continuous evaluation being
the key piece of it here. So I think that a number of the
proposals, some of which are already being implemented,
although, since we don't get visible insight into that, we
don't know how far that implementation is--that's a question
for your second panel--are designed to address those very same
problems.
But I think there's a third piece. In the examples that you
cite, you're right, there are individuals inside who do this,
but from the company's point of view these are people working
inside a government facility, and we frequently don't get the
information about, or our member companies don't get the
information, about the employee that the government itself has.
So there's got to be greater collaboration and cooperation
between the government oversight mechanisms and the contractor
oversight mechanisms. This is where personnel issues, privacy
issues, security issues, and contract issues come together, and
we've got to design it that way up front in the contract
itself.
I think we're very capable of doing that. We know how to do
it. We just don't do it every time.
Senator Collins. Ms. Chappell, what is Raytheon's
responsibility?
Ms. Chappell. We have a responsibility to train our
employees. Yearly, we go through an employee training series
that's mandated across all of our employees. In some cases
where we have employees sit at government facilities, they take
yet a second round of training that is required by the
government customer as well. So that's two.
The second thing we do is what we call ``user activity
monitoring.'' When you log on to a Raytheon system, it's very
clear to you. It says right there on the screen that your
activity is being monitored while you're on those systems. So
we have a process where we use analytic-type of capabilities to
look at what people are doing on the systems, to monitor their
behavior, to look for things that are outside their normal
patterns or their normal work scope. That data is then provided
to our security operations center, and then if it triggers an
alert we go through an investigation process.
If someone comes through and says there's something going
on with an employee, we trigger an investigation.
Senator Collins. Mr. Phillips, very quickly: If ManTech has
a group of employees working for the government on highly
sensitive information and many of the employees of that group
think that one of the employees has gone off the rails--
developed a drug problem, has financial problems--what
specifically happens?
Mr. Phillips. Specifically, ManTech has an insider threat
program that identifies high-risk employees, and once those
individuals, whether they hold a position of trust, we see a
behavior that we need to track, it rolls into a process that's
controlled through our senior security executive, coordinated
with our human resources and legal department, and overseen by
myself, with board updates every quarter to make sure that we
are tracking those individuals that have been identified from
an insider threat perspective.
We report that information to the government. We also start
monitoring their overall behavior, where appropriate, to make
sure that that individual's behavior doesn't provide additional
risk of harm to our employees or Federal employees or
potentially increase the position of trust or breach of data to
the government.
Additionally, we spot-check people coming out of our own
SCIFs for data. We want to make sure that as a partner we're
doing everything we can. The only thing we suggest: We have to
share information better about individuals who hold positions
of public trust.
Senator Collins. Thank you.
Chairman Burr. Senator Feinstein.
Senator Feinstein. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. I'd like
to follow up on Senator Collins' questions to you, Mr.
Phillips. Specifically, what changes have been made by your
company in the wake of Snowden and Martin?
Mr. Phillips. Ma'am, since then we've increased our insider
threat process. We do more training----
Senator Feinstein. From what to what? If you could be
specific here, that would be helpful.
Mr. Phillips. Sure. I think all of government is moving
towards mandating industry be a partner in this process. We
already had a process in place, but what we're doing is we're
making sure that every behavior--we physically go to our
program managers and we tell them: If you or your employees see
a behavior, we need to see it, we need to know.
Senator Feinstein. Well, where did you miss with Snowden?
Mr. Phillips. We did not--we did not have that event within
our framework. The Snowden component or something like that
specifically is the employee is on a Federal facility, and a
company cannot access the government's data to see the
behaviors. They have to be visually seen by the people around
that individual. We need to better share information.
Senator Feinstein. Isn't that an important point right
there?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, ma'am, it's very important.
Senator Feinstein. Because these were big events, and it's
very hard for us to know the background and how it happened. So
could you go into that in a little bit more detail?
Mr. Phillips. Anything that is on a secured government
network or secured government facility is controlled by the
government, regardless of whether it's a military, Federal
employee, or contractor. The information flow around that is
fairly limited, for security reasons, but also personnel
reasons.
The information-sharing program that we think is best long-
term, aligning those who have positions of public trust and
have agreed to that, with the appropriate protections of
privacy, if they are on a network having classified
information, how do we better collectively track the behaviors
and actions of the individual so that we as a contract
community can take the appropriate actions on that staff.
Senator Feinstein. Well, as you know, both these employees
were contract employees with NSA. How closely have you reviewed
the procedures and have you made any recommendations to NSA?
Mr. Phillips. Ma'am, the agency has gone through
significant review and we as a contract community are adjusting
to meet their required additional standards to be responsive to
the risks that they may have seen within their review.
Mr. Berteau. Senator----
Senator Feinstein. Well, maybe somebody can add to that,
because that's a very general statement and it doesn't leave me
really with any answer.
Mr. Berteau. Senator, if I could sort of add a little bit
to that, not necessarily the Snowden case or the Martin case,
but we see time and again a situation where the government will
tell a contractor, this person is no longer suitable, take them
off the contract, but they won't tell us why. They won't tell
us what behavior has occurred, what has motivated them to do
that.
So we're left trying to figure out what happened here,
without the information from the government.
Senator Feinstein. How often does that happen?
Mr. Berteau. I don't have a count of how often, because
there's no database to do it. But I hear about it more than
once a year, and I probably don't hear about it a lot of times
that it does happen. So you have individuals, and it may be
that the company releases that individual, but the individual
can go somewhere else.
So that information-sharing that should occur here between
the government and the contractors involved, cutting across the
security domain and the personnel and human resources domain,
has got to be improved.
Senator Feinstein. Because of the 4,080,000 national
security clearances, the contractors hold almost a million,
921,065 of those. That's a big constituency out there. Because
it involves the defense companies, of which Raytheon is a
California company that I'm very proud of, that's one of them,
it seems to me that the private sector has an increased
responsibility, too.
Ms. Chappell, how do you view that? How does Raytheon
specifically view an increased responsibility?
Ms. Chappell. I think we have stepped up our training
requirements around this area; more sensitivity to what has
happened and making people aware. When it's on our own
networks, we have control on what we monitor and where we see
risk and how we escalate that and where we investigate.
I think Mr. Berteau is very correct in that there needs to
be better partnership. When our employees sit on government
facilities and use government networks, there needs to be more
information-sharing on what we can do jointly, because we don't
have the ability to monitor those networks. So I think any
insight we can get there is most helpful to us in making sure
we adjudicate through our workforce.
Senator Feinstein. Right. On pages 7 and 8--I'm looking for
your written remarks and can't find them at the moment. But you
make some good recommendations. Could you go into them for us,
please?
Ms. Chappell. On the written?
Senator Feinstein. In the written, and let me find it.
[Pause.]
Ms. Chappell. Just one second, please.
Senator Feinstein. Yes. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman. I'm sorry.
My hand slipped and I lost the----
Ms. Chappell. I think that was around the one application.
Senator Feinstein. That's right, the fundamental reforms.
And you began with the clearance backlog of 300,000 and the one
application, and it runs through--now, this is more than a
decade, as you point out, since they were first proposed. But
to make immediate progress, you say ``Raytheon encourages the
government to prioritize and set incremental milestones for
implementing government-wide reciprocity, continuous
evaluation, and information technology reforms.''
Can you be more specific about that?
Ms. Chappell. On the one application, that is the one,
standardized--one standardized, one digitized, so it's
available, it can be shared across organizations. You don't
have to fill that out more than once. One investigation, to
make sure that, whether it's a DOD investigation, an Air Force,
Army, or a CIA investigation, that that's the same
investigation, that had the same standards, the same views on
risk. Those can be shared across the different agencies.
One adjudication of that, so instead of having different
adjudications you have one set of adjudication processes, one
set of risks that that adjudication is based on, so that then
that clearance can be agreed to and can be recognized across
the different agencies. Then clearly, just the one clearance,
to make sure that that reciprocity moves across organizations.
So I think they're pretty fundamental, pretty standard,
pretty simple processes: one application; one clearance
process; one adjudication, recognized by all.
Senator Feinstein. Do you think that would make a
difference with the 4 million and the 600,000 each year?
Ms. Chappell. I think it would make a huge difference,
because not only would it streamline the original
investigation; you're not re-investigating the same people over
and over, and the resources required to do the re-
investigations would be focused on the backlog.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Burr. Mr. Berteau.
Mr. Berteau. Mr. Chairman, if you would indulge me for just
one added point. Senator Feinstein's line of questioning is
really critical here. One thing I think is important to put on
the record: The member companies for PSC and companies like
Raytheon and ManTech are very limited in their ability to get
information out of the government of the status of the
investigation and adjudication that's going on with the people
that they've submitted into the process.
If Kevin Phillips or Jane Chappell calls the government
agency that's doing that, what they will likely be told is: We
can't tell you anything; go talk to your contracting officer
representative, who then has a process they have to go through
internally, not the speediest of processes, and they may or may
not get you an answer back.
We see cases where a decision has been made and not
communicated to the company, in some cases for more than six
months. So there is a lot that has to be done here in terms of
improvement of the communication back and forth. I think the
oversight role of this committee in encouraging that and
getting visible results of that from the agencies involved
would be very helpful.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much. Would you be
willing to write something up as to what both of you or three
of you think would be the specifics and send it to the
Chairman?
Mr. Berteau. Absolutely.
Ms. Chappell. Yes, ma'am.
Senator Feinstein. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Blunt.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
Ms. Farrell, in your testimony you talked about the 12
recommendations I think you made to the Director of National
Intelligence. How many of those did they accept?
Ms. Farrell. For the majority of those we directed to the
DNI, they did not comment whether they agreed or disagreed. So
we don't know if they're going to take action on those
recommendations or not.
Senator Blunt. I think I must have read your testimony
wrong. I got the impression that they had concurred with some,
but not all.
Ms. Farrell. They did concur with some.
Senator Blunt. What does that mean, they concurred with
some, but didn't accept them? I'm getting a thesaurus out here
to figure out what that means.
Ms. Farrell. They concurred, for example, with taking steps
to develop a continuation--continuous evaluation policy and
implementation. But on other actions they disagreed; they
thought that they had already had things in play and that no
more action was necessary.
Senator Blunt. Which of the 12 things you recommended do
you think would have the most impact on achieving the goal we
want to achieve here?
Ms. Farrell. For today, I think it would be the
implementation plan for continuous evaluation. But I also have
to note that there's been a lot of discussion about
reciprocity, and reciprocity is statutorily required by the
Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004. So by
that Act, agencies are supposed to honor investigations that
are conducted by an authorized provider, as well as
adjudications from an authorized adjudicator.
There's always certain exceptions, but reciprocity is in
statute. It just hasn't had guidance so it could be
implemented.
Senator Blunt. And continuous evaluation, Ms. Chappell, how
does that relate to--you're saying a lot of the same things:
continuous evaluation; using open source data or data that's
already been collected, rather than going through that process
again. Do you want to talk about that just a little bit more?
Ms. Chappell. What we're saying is, instead of waiting from
day one when you're given your clearance to year five and
having no investigation between that period, and then doing
your periodic investigation with sending people out, traveling
around the country, doing your investigation, all through that
time period to continuously monitor data to see if there is any
adverse data concerning that person and do you need to start--
is that person of higher risk and do you need to pay more
attention to that person sooner, rather than wait the normal
five to six years for that background investigation.
Senator Blunt. If that person, like Senator Warner
mentioned about Senator Coats and that brief space, when
someone has moved on to another job and is coming back, do they
have to go through the whole clearance process again? They have
to re-submit again everywhere they ever lived?
Ms. Chappell. Yes, sir.
Senator Blunt. Don't we have all that somewhere if they've
been cleared once?
Ms. Chappell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Berteau. Senator Blunt, I've lived in the same house
for the last 29 years. I've had the same neighbors on each side
of me for the last 29 years. Both are former government
employees with suitability determinations and clearances as
well. Every time I fill that form out, it's the exact same
information as it was the time before, the time before that,
and the time before that. It's already in their databases. They
just make me do it again.
Senator Blunt. Does anybody have a reason that would
justify why you'd have to do this again, if the government's
already collected all this?
Mr. Berteau. There's an old saying--Eric Sevareid brought
it out of World War II with him--called ``The chief cause of
problems is solutions.'' And in almost every case, these
elements of the process that are built in here was a fix to a
previous problem. What we've never done is the kind of end-to-
end analysis of what actual result are we trying to get out of
this and how do we design a process that gets that result.
I think what you'll hear from the second panel is some of
the efforts both at the National Background Investigations
Bureau has under way and that DOD is developing a plan for,
would take advantage of some of that opportunity. It's just
going to take a long time, and we'd like to see it speeded up.
Senator Blunt. Mr. Berteau, one other question. Are small
companies treated differently when it comes to getting their
employees cleared?
Mr. Berteau. Unfortunately, they go through the same
process, and I think they have an added disadvantage. If a
company has a substantial amount of work in the government,
they may actually be able to make a job offer to a new employee
and say: We've got something we can have you do while we're
waiting the year or two years it takes to get this clearance
through the process. It's very much harder for a smaller
business, who doesn't have the business base or the overhead
capacity to be able to do that. So you make a contingency
offer.
Well, if this is a critical skill--let's say it's a cyber
security expert who's just come out of college--you're asking
them: Put your career on hold for an indefinite period of time,
don't get paid, go do something else while you're figuring out
what to do here, and then maybe we'll get a clearance at some
point in time and be able to hire you.
This has two negative advantages. One, it's going to reduce
the number of people who are going to want to do that.
Secondly, they're going to have lost their technical edge,
because the system is moving on, the cyber security world is
moving along, while they're not working in it. So it has a
double impact.
When I mentioned the importance of balancing risk here,
there's a risk that we often don't take into account. It's not
just the risk of awarding a clearance to somebody who ends up
doing something wrong. There's a risk to government missions
and functions in every step of the way by not doing it in a
timely way and not by having the best and brightest people on
board to do that. That's got to be part of the calculus. Nobody
documents that.
Senator Blunt. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Burr. Senator Wyden.
Senator Wyden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's been a good
panel.
I'm just going to ask one question of this panel, and it's
for you, Ms. Farrell. It seems to me one of the central issues
here is there is a culture where over-secrecy is actually
valued and there is no accountability for excessive secrecy. So
we end up with four million people with security clearances.
I've heard my colleagues talk about the backlog question and I
know that that is very important to our companies. But I think
to really get at the guts of this issue we've got to deal with
this over-secrecy kind of question.
I'd like to ask you: What in your view is the government
doing that is most helpful in terms of reducing that four
million number, which I think reflects that there are too many
secrets out there and too many people are sitting on them.
What's the government doing about that?
Mr. Phillips. Senator, I'll start----
Senator Wyden. I'd like to start with the GAO on it.
Ms. Farrell. Thank you. That's okay. We have in the past
recommended that DOD and its components, the services, as well
as the agencies, evaluate their positions that require
clearances to make sure that the clearance is required in the
first place, and then have procedures in place where they
periodically reevaluate those positions to see if those
clearances are still necessary. That would be a way to make
sure that the requirement is correct.
Most people think that clearances follow people. Clearances
don't follow them. They follow the positions.
Senator Wyden. I want to be respectful. I know of your
recommendations. I'm curious as to whether you think the
government is moving effectively and expeditiously on actually
doing something about it, because this strikes me, this
excessive number of security clearances--and your
recommendations are always to have these efforts to reduce
them--it's been the longest-running battle since the Trojan
War. I've been on this committee--I think, with Senator
Feinstein, we're the longest-serving members. And I've heard
this again and again.
So what is the government doing that is actually effective
in your view about this? Not your recommendations, which I
think are very good, but what's the government doing that is
actually effective now in terms of reducing this number?
Ms. Farrell. I think the answer is obviously: Not enough,
because if they were doing enough in terms of leadership and
prompt action, they wouldn't have the backlog that they have or
the number of people that you're calling into question.
Senator Wyden. Okay. I'm going to submit some questions to
you in writing as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to the second
round.
Chairman Burr. Senator Cornyn.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
With the hack of OPM a couple of years ago, reportedly by a
hostile foreign power, countless Americans have had their
privacy violated and their personally identifiable information
obtained by that foreign power. Do any of you have any
observations or comments about what impact that sort of lack of
security for that sensitive information, what impact that's had
on the best and the brightest people who we would like to serve
in these important positions?
Ms. Chappell. I'll start with that, because my personal
information was some of that information that was leaked. Not
only my information, but the people who I had down as
references, my family members also, their information was also
compromised. So I think it's incredibly important that this
data is secured and that it goes through the same cyber process
that the programs that we support do.
Senator Cornyn. Mr. Berteau, you were saying how you have
to fill out the same information on repetitive applications for
security clearances. I guess we know that foreign nations have
that information, but the U.S. Government apparently doesn't
keep it in a place where they can use it without having to ask
you each time.
Mr. Berteau. Senator, it is my understanding that actually
a number of steps have been taken inside the Office of
Personnel Management to provide greater security. It's a
question I think for the second panel on the status of those
steps.
But we also have to recognize that we'll never be 100
percent secure on being able to do that. I think we have to be
able to mitigate against that as well.
I would also note that it's not just the central databases
that come into play here. It's all the individual things inside
each of the agencies as well. We probably are in a situation
where we're going to have to be able to recognize and mitigate
that as rapidly as possible.
I'm probably a little less concerned about that particular,
although I got a letter and my wife got a letter and my kids
all got a letter as well. I had the responsibility inside DOD
to actually oversee the mailing of those 22 million letters. We
mailed out a million a week and it took the better part of half
a year to notify everybody.
I note that that mailing occurred about a year and a half
after the breach. So we also need to be able to let people know
in a more timely way that their data has been compromised.
Senator Cornyn. I don't know anything about that episode
that we can be proud of. It just seems to be it would be
embarrassing, and obviously people are at risk as a result.
Let me move on to ask about interim clearances, the role of
interim clearances. What I don't understand is how can somebody
get an--have a sufficient background investigation to get an
interim clearance, and what limitations are put on that
clearance that would not be available--or that would not apply
to a complete clearance, so to speak? And how does that
actually work in practice, the role of interim clearances and
the background investigations that are conducted to approve
those?
Mr. Phillips. Senator, thanks for the question. ManTech is
entering its fiftieth year of supporting national security this
year, and we have forever had interim clearances being an
integral part of moving people into supporting the Federal
Government.
As you know, the interim clearance process is a decision
that's a government decision. It is not something we as
contractors can decide. We have to inform the government and
let them make those adjudications.
We have not seen, as a company, issues with the process and
how we do it. That said, one of the issues is, because of the
time it takes to get a security clearance, that the interim
security clearance timeline is now longer than it was three
years ago. So part of our suggestion is we need to move that
timeline back so the time people have interim security
clearances is narrowed.
The process itself is: The background investigation that is
commercial is done on the individual from a company standpoint.
The forms are reviewed in total about the employee to make sure
that the potential applicant, to make sure that all information
is available, so that that government employee or official can
make a decision whether sufficient grounds to grant an interim
clearance based on those facts, before the more manual
investigation takes place.
In our history as a company, less than one person per year
has been identified in that sequence as not being supportable
to doing security work in the future.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you.
Chairman Burr. Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to follow up a little bit on those good questions
from my colleague from Texas. For those of you in industry--and
we'll start with you, Mr. Phillips--how often have you seen a
TS-SCI interim clearance? Is that a common thing?
Mr. Phillips. For our industry, it is not uncommon. But as
an example, out of our, let's say, 150 people doing an interim
status, a vast majority of them are SECRET for the type of work
we perform. So I can't compare it to any other application or
requirement.
Senator Heinrich. Got you.
Mr. Phillips. Those who are in an interim SECRET status
have already received a SECRET clearance. So it's fairly narrow
bandwidth.
Senator Heinrich. Ms. Chappell.
Ms. Chappell. From my personal knowledge, I don't know of
interim clearances on a TS-SCI kind of clearance. Those are
usually finalized. From an interim clearance, they're more on
the SECRET side. Quite frankly, with the backlog of clearances
that we have right now, I think the risk of not doing that and
not being able to perform the mission is very high.
Senator Heinrich. That's very helpful.
Mr. Berteau. Senator, in my experience--I don't know if
there's data collected on this, but in my experience it was
more common in the past. It's a lot less common today, and it
has been a lot less common over the last few years. I think
it's one of those examples of as we've learned----
Senator Heinrich. For good reason.
Mr. Berteau. For good reason, I agree.
Senator Heinrich. For the risk that's inherent in that.
Does the government track how many interim security
clearances are issued by type, by agency, by personnel type?
And is there a process in place to make sure that when that
temporary access period has expired that there's a review to
say, red flag, this has come to an end, we should look at this
person again?
Ms. Farrell. I take it you want me to answer that?
Senator Heinrich. Yes, if you could.
Ms. Farrell. That information might be at the agency level
in their case management systems. But it was not at the levels
that we looked at in our reviews when we worked with ODNI to
collect data on the investigation time as well as adjudication
and intake for specific agencies.
Senator Heinrich. So obviously the whole of government, all
the agencies aren't here right now. But that's something we
should probably pay a lot of attention to.
Ms. Farrell. Yes.
Senator Heinrich. For any of you who want to offer your
advice on this: It seems to me from some of the previous
testimony that it sounds like continuous evaluation is really
important, but it shouldn't necessarily supplant a periodic
review; it should supplement a periodic review. Is that your
view across the board, and any of you who want to offer your
advice on that, I'd be curious.
Mr. Phillips. Yes, sir, I'll start. Technology allows for
continuous evaluation where ten years ago you really couldn't
do it. So start with that. It's a very good thing to utilize
and over time it will become a more and more important thing
because it can be depended on, and in fact it will identify
things, not five years from now, but along the way between now
and five years. So we consider it a use of technology to the
benefit of national security.
Within that framework, depending on the level of trust on
the CE process itself, the periodic re-investigation
percentages can come down. I don't see it going away, but it
can be like the IRS: We're going to audit you every once in a
while, versus everybody 100 percent.
Senator Heinrich. So the interim period between those
periodic reviews might get longer based on a lower rate?
Mr. Phillips. And there can be sample periodic re-
investigations to help inform and make sure the process is
working.
Ms. Chappell. I would just say it slightly different. I
would say it focuses where the higher risk is and where you
should focus periodic investigations on.
Senator Heinrich. Ms. Farrell, I want to ask you one more
question before I run out of time here. You testified that the
National Background Investigation Bureau is trying to decrease
the backlog, but it has huge challenges in actually achieving
this. One of the stories I've seen that I'm intrigued by that
seems to be working is NBIB is taking and deploying teams of
investigative personnel to specific sites for a two-month
period where they'll set up shop in a dedicated work space, and
they try to crank through some of the most time-sensitive
clearance investigations without the back-and-forth that we
heard about in some of the testimony, the travel, the
inefficiencies.
This is happening right now at a couple of labs in the DOE
labs in New Mexico. It seems like a rare good-news story of
increasing efficiency. Do you agree with that, and is this a
model that we should be potentially applying more broadly?
Ms. Farrell. What we found during the review was that the
Bureau did not have the capacity to carry out their
investigative responsibilities and reduce the backlog. The
Bureau looked at four scenarios of different workforces to try
to tackle this backlog. They looked at just if things stay the
same; they looked at very aggressive hiring of contractors.
They decided that it was not feasible for the plan where they
would put so much emphasis on the contractors; and the two
plans that they did look at, the backlog still would not be
reduced for several years.
There hasn't been a selection, though, of which plan
they're going to go with in order to reduce the backlog. So
that is going to be key. You can't reduce the backlog if you
don't have the workforce.
Senator Heinrich. I don't disagree with you. I don't think
you answered my question. But my time is over, so we're going
to have to move along here.
Chairman Burr. Senator King.
Senator King. Mr. Berteau, first I want to congratulate you
because you made the key point of this whole hearing for me.
It's the opportunity cost that we should be talking about. It's
the good people lost. That's what brings me here today, because
I know too many stories of people who just gave up, who spoke
Arabic, who had visited, lived in the Middle East, and because
of that couldn't get their clearance. It was a kind of Catch-
22, and those are the very people that we want.
So I think that's what we have to keep focusing on, is
those immeasurable people lost, the opportunity cost that has
made this such an important inquiry.
Ms. Farrell, who's in charge? If John McCain were here,
he'd be saying; Who can we fire? Why is this--this is a pure
management problem, it seems to me.
Ms. Farrell. This is a management problem, and I referred
to the Performance Accountability Council because those are the
principals that are in charge of implementing the reform
efforts and overseeing----
Senator King. Who is on that council? Who are the people?
Ms. Farrell. That's the deputy director for management at
OMB. It's the director for national intelligence, who is also
the security executive agent, which means that person sets the
policy across----
Senator King. My problem with that is any time you have a
council the term ``all of government'' has been used. I'm sick
of that term. That means none of government. That's what people
say when nobody's in charge.
Is there one person who has the responsibility for fixing
this problem, and who are they?
Ms. Farrell. I would point to the chair of the Performance
Accountability Council, because that person does have the
authority to provide direction regarding the process and carry
out those functions.
Senator King. Is that person going to be here today, do you
know?
Ms. Farrell. I believe that person declined.
Senator King. Well, that's kind of ridiculous, isn't it? So
the one person in the government that's in charge of this
issue, that's a very important issue, isn't here because--did
they have to wash their hair? What's the deal?
Ms. Farrell. I can't speak for OMB, sir.
Senator King. Well, that's really--that's really
disappointing. Okay.
Again for you, Ms. Farrell: The private sector has moved on
from the 1940s style of doing these things. The financial
sector does it much more quickly. Have we tried to learn from
them? Has there been any effort to study how the financial
sector does this, for example?
Ms. Farrell. I do believe that the Executive Branch
agencies have reached out to the private sector. After the Navy
Yard shootings, they did a 120-day review. They identified
challenges within the process. There was a lot of coordination
with government and non-government. Many of the recommendations
that they had were recommendations that they had been working
on, though, since the reform began back with the passage of the
OFAC.
Senator King. Well, I would hope that we could try to learn
something from the private sector, because they appear to be
doing this much more efficiently.
Mr. Berteau, a technical question. The people who come to
interview you to redo these security clearances, do they carry
a clipboard?
Mr. Berteau. I think they do, sir, and I think it's legal-
sized, so that it has more room.
Senator King. To me, the clipboard is the sign of not being
in the 21st century.
Mr. Berteau. I'm sorry to hear that. I actually own a
couple of clipboards and I occasionally use them.
[Laughter.]
Senator King. I used to say it was the universal symbol of
authority. But if you go into a hospital and they hand you a
clipboard, they're seeking data from you that they already have
somewhere else in their system.
Mr. Berteau. That's certainly been my experience, yes, sir.
Senator King. That's the point I'm trying to make.
Mr. Berteau. And I think that's certainly within my
experience.
If I could add something on the ``who's in charge'' thing.
I think you've hit a very key point here. There are divided
responsibilities and some of those divided responsibilities
actually spill over into the question that Senator Wyden raised
about really focusing on--we've been focusing entirely on the
supply side of this equation: How do we actually move people,
put them in the process, and put them in a clearance?
There's a demand side of this equation as well. Actually,
operating under the authorities granted by this committee, a
previous DNI did a substantial reduction in the number of
billets that required a clearance. I don't remember the exact
number. I think it was something around 700,000 that they
eliminated the requirement for a clearance.
If you could do one thing to reduce the backlog, getting
rid of the demand would be the one thing. But what we've seen
over time--and this is back to your question of who's in
charge--is other responsibilities, responses to other
incidents, the Navy Yard shooting, for example. When I was back
in the Defense Department, what I saw was in fact you had to
practically get a clearance to get a pass to get on the base,
even though there would be nothing you would ever touch in the
way of classified material once you got on. That's out of an
abundance of caution of we don't want somebody to be able to
come on the base with a gun and be able to kill our people.
There are other ways to do that, I would submit, than
expanding and lengthening the background investigation process,
and continuous evaluation using 21st century technology is the
key to that. The government has to do that.
Senator King. I'm running out of time, but I want to ask
one more question. Am I correct in taking from this panel that
these security clearances are not transferable, they're not
portable? You get one in one agency and if you go to another
agency you have to start all over?
Mr. Berteau. It varies. There are parts of the government
where----
Senator King. That's a disappointing answer.
Mr. Berteau. There are places where the portability is
pretty robust, and it doesn't take very long, sometimes maybe
only a day or two. There are others, Department of Homeland
Security, for example, where I believe the average to move from
one to another is almost 100 days, within the same Department,
under the same Cabinet officer.
Senator King. I'm sorry. They already--I can't believe what
you just said. You mean a person within the Homeland Security
Department who has a clearance, to move from one job in
Homeland Security to another job in Homeland Security takes 100
days?
Mr. Berteau. Yes, sir. And it could even mean that a
contractor sitting at the same desk, moving to a different
contract, has to go through a new process.
Senator King. That's preposterous.
Mr. Berteau. Yes. I think that's a very nuanced and subtle
word to use for it, yes, sir.
[Laughter.]
Senator King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Burr. Senator Lankford.
Senator Lankford. I want to be able to pick up where you
just left off, because that was actually one of my key
questions, was about the reciprocal agreements for clearances.
What's holding that back that you have seen at this point of
why the agencies don't trust each other enough to be able to
handle clearances? Is this an issue of ``No, our people have to
be able to do it; I don't trust your people'' or not a common
set of standards?
Mr. Berteau. It's probably a combination of a host of
things. I think the three things that you could do about it:
number one is force a set of common standards that are a
starting point. Even within DHS, for example, there's only
statutory standards for one part of DHS. It happens to be the
Transportation Security Administration and that's a result of a
different line of Congressional inquiry.
Setting common standards and then reviewing and making sure
that the deviations or the additions to those standards are
minimized and they have to be approved by the top leadership.
So there's a leadership question. That's the second piece that
comes in.
Senator Lankford. So what is currently not aligned right
now on our standards?
Mr. Berteau. I think it tends to be more in the civilian
agency side than it does in the intel community and the Defense
Department side. I think there the standards are a little
clearer. But they're not clear to us. We as contractors often
don't know what standards are going to be applied to the
individuals.
Senator Lankford. Can I push ``Pause'' in there real
quick''
Ms. Farrell, what would be the--could we get a list from
anyone to be able to say, where are we deviating in standards,
civilian, defense, contractors, whatever it may be?
Ms. Farrell. The standards should be the same. There's
Federal investigative standards. They do not differ by category
of the workforce. Federal adjudicative standards are also
supposed to be uniformly applied.
There are no--there's no data, there's no measures about
the extent to which reciprocity works or does not work. This is
something that we have recommended before, that there should be
a baseline to determine whether or not reciprocity is working,
and if it's not working then to be able to pinpoint the issues
that are being discussed as to why it's not working.
Many years ago, it was believed that reciprocity was not
working because agencies did not trust the quality of the
investigations that someone else had done. But we don't know
what the issue is today.
Senator Lankford. So when I meet with the chief human
capital officers of the agencies, affectionately called
``CHICOs,'' those folks tell me that one of the key areas that
slows down Federal hiring, which now is over 106 days on
average across the Federal Government, is this reciprocity
issue; that this issue is not only slowing down and creating a
bigger backlog and, as you mentioned, Mr. Berteau, a demand
issue, that we've got to be able to go through this again and
again and again for the same person, and an incredible nuisance
for the person that's actually going through it for the third
time, but it's also decreasing our Federal hiring and the speed
of actually getting good people on the job.
So what I'm trying to drill down on: Is this an issue of
agencies having a standard across all the Federal Government,
but they add one more and because they've added one or two more
than we've got to redo the whole thing, rather than trusting
somebody else has already done it and we're going to just do
this one additional check? What is it?
Ms. Farrell. This is an issue of the DNI not issuing the
policy on how reciprocity should be applied.
Senator Lankford. So reciprocity is already required?
Ms. Farrell. It's required by statute.
Senator Lankford. So it's required, but you're saying it's
just a matter of releasing a document from ODNI or from anyone
else on how to actually apply what is current law?
Ms. Farrell. Because current law does state ``with certain
exceptions.'' So it's up to the DNI to know what those certain
exceptions are, so that the agencies will be able to determine
if an investigative can be accepted as well as an adjudication.
Senator Lankford. Because at this point who is determining
what the ``certain exceptions'' are?
Ms. Farrell. The agencies.
Senator Lankford. So they can determine ``I don't trust
them'' or ``I don't know them'' or whatever it may be?
Ms. Farrell. Correct. There's some guidance out there, but
it's not clear. So the DNI is working on a reciprocity policy
and we are waiting for that policy to be issued.
Senator Lankford. What is the key information-gathering
that is needed? You also mentioned this as well, about
individuals getting onto a facility that may not need security
clearances, because they're not going to touch documents,
they're not going to see elements they shouldn't be able to
see. What is the lower level that could be done faster, to make
sure those individuals can get access and start to do their
job, but not have to go through the full check?
Mr. Berteau. The DNI does have the statutory authority and
responsibility for the standards for security clearances.
There's a second set of standards just for suitability or
fitness to be in the job and for the credentials to be able to
access the facilities. Those standards are governed by the
Office of Personnel Management, not the DNI, and there
frequently needs to be a little better mapping between these
two.
I think the greatest thing this committee could do is to
require regular reporting of a lot more information about this.
My experience as a government official is when I'm required to
send you a report on how I'm doing, I'm going to pay a lot more
attention to what I'm doing than if I'm not.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
Chairman Burr. Do any members seek additional time?
Senator Cornyn.
Senator Cornyn. Can I just ask one more question, Mr.
Chairman?
Chairman Burr. Absolutely.
Senator Cornyn. Who in the United States Government decides
who is eligible for a security clearance?
Ms. Farrell. That would be the--usually it's the agency of
the employee that's applying for the clearance. The agency
takes the investigative report and determines if someone is
eligible or not.
Senator Cornyn. Thank you.
Mr. Berteau. Mr. Cornyn, sometimes there are easy decisions
that are made at a lower level within the adjudication process,
and sometimes there are harder calls that have to go higher up
before a decision is made. This has to do both with the quality
and characteristics of the individual case, but also the
dynamic of the job and how fast it's needed and what needs to
come into play here. It can actually be calibrated a little bit
in terms of who comes into play here.
That's also a very good question, I think, to ask the
government representatives on the second panel.
Chairman Burr. Vice Chair.
Vice Chairman Warner. Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this hearing. This has been something that I've been
working on for some time. But I think getting more members
engaged, because we are losing good people. But I go back to
Ms. Chappell's comments: one, if we can use technology; and
two, the closer we can get, at least at the SECRET level, on
one standard, one form, one adjudication, and one clearance.
Seems like it's kind of common sense, and you marry the
technology with continuous evaluation and we could make real,
real progress.
The good news is there is no--ODNI Director Coats and I
think a host of others realize this is a problem. I again thank
the chair for holding this hearing.
Chairman Burr. I thank the Vice Chair. I thank all the
members and, more importantly, I thank those of you at the dais
as witnesses today. Your testimony is invaluable to us.
I walk away to some degree more optimistic than I came,
because I think that the biggest issues that you've raised can
be solved. And I think this is a question of can we put the
right people in a room that understand when you talk about
reciprocity, what is that? As I said to Senator King, we
shouldn't be shocked. DHS is the comingling of about 37
different pieces that we moved from different areas of
government and we put it under a new agency. Given that there
was baptism by fire of the Secretary, it's not unrealistic to
believe that they still operate like the core agencies they
came out of. They just happen to be under a new banner.
So I think these are all things that are doable, but we've
got to have the right leadership in the room talking about real
solutions. I think that it's the commitment of this committee
that we will start and complete that process, and at the end of
the day hopefully a year from now you will come back and tell
us what great things have happened within government, and it
will be because of your testimony today.
With that, the first panel is dismissed and I would call up
the second panel.
[Pause.]
I call into session the second panel. I'd like to welcome
our witnesses for the second panel. We just heard from the
industry on the challenges they face and some potential
solutions moving forward. We now have an opportunity to hear
from the Executive Branch, their perspectives and their ideas.
I understand the daunting task and job before each of you,
vetting more than four million cleared personnel and
identifying threats before they materialize. It's not easy.
But we can do better than we're doing today. As we continue
our dialogue, I hope you'll speak freely, frankly, and think
creatively, because this hearing is not only about identifying
the problem, but it's about uncovering the solutions.
I want to thank each of you for being here, and I just want
to reiterate what I said at the end of the last panel. I
actually am more optimistic right now than I was before we
started, because I think we've been able to clearly understand
the big muscle moves, and I think that putting the right people
in the room might enable us to try to overcome some of the
challenges and replace it with solutions that we would have
full agreement are worth trying or that we feel will achieve a
different outcome.
I'm not going to turn to the Vice Chairman. I'm going to
turn directly to Mr. Dunbar, who I understand will begin. Then
the floor will go to Mr. Phalen and then Mr. Reid and Mr.
Payne. Mr. Dunbar, the floor is yours.
STATEMENT OF BRIAN DUNBAR, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, SPECIAL SECURITY
DIRECTORATE, NATIONAL COUNTER-INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY CENTER,
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
Mr. Dunbar. Thank you, Chairman Burr, Vice Chairman Warner,
and members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss security clearances
challenges and reforms. The Director of National Intelligence
is designated as the security executive agent. In this role,
the DNI is responsible for the development, implementation, and
oversight of effective, efficient, and uniform policies and
procedures governing the conduct of investigations,
adjudications, and, if applicable, polygraph, for eligibility
for access to classified information.
The National Counterintelligence and Security Center has
been designated as the lead support element to fulfill the
DNI's SecEA responsibilities. We're responsible for the
oversight of policies governing the conduct of investigations
and adjudications for approximately four million national
security cleared personnel. The security clearance process
includes determining if an individual is suitable to receive a
security clearance, conducting a background investigation,
reviewing investigative results, determining if the individual
is eligible for access to classified information or to hold a
sensitive position, facilitating reciprocity, and periodically
reviewing continued eligibility.
We work closely with the agencies responsible for actually
conducting the investigations and adjudications and managing
other security programs associated with clearances. This
ensures that our policies and practices are informed by those
working to protect our personnel and sensitive information. We
have collectively enjoyed some noteworthy progress in security
reform, including the development and implementation of
multiple security executive agent directives, examples of which
I've outlined in my written statement for the record.
However, as recently noted by DNI Coats in his annual
threat assessment, today's security clearance process is in
urgent need of substantive reform across the entire enterprise.
We must quickly and with laser focus identify and undertake
concrete and transformative action to reform the enterprise,
while at the same time continuing to ensure a trusted
workforce.
Underpinning this reform effort must be a robust background
investigation process, which enables Federal employees and
contractor workforce partners to deliver on agency mission
while also protecting our Nation's secrets. When the background
investigation process fails or is delayed, mission delivery
suffers, the national security is put at risk, and our ability
to attract and retain the workforce of the 21st century is
inhibited.
Despite the hard work of dedicated, patriotic professionals
who are working these issues daily, we have reached a time of
critical mass which demands transformative change. Significant
challenges for the background investigation program continue to
adversely affect government operations. The current
investigative backlog is approximately 500,000 cases and the
average time for investigating and adjudicating clearance is
three times longer than the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism
Prevention Act standards.
For the first quarter of 2018, our metrics indicate the
fastest 90 percent of TOP SECRET background investigations
government-wide took an average in excess of 300 days. This is
four times longer than the IRTPA standards and goals. In
addition, background investigation-related costs have risen by
over 40 percent since FY 2014. The SecEA, the suitability
executive agent, or SuitEA, all security organizations, and all
impacted industry partners agree that this is unacceptable.
I would like to take the opportunity to provide the
committee with more detail regarding our upcoming Trusted
Workforce 2.0 initiative. This initiative is designed to
address the transformational overhaul I referenced earlier. It
is an enterprise effort sponsored by the security executive
agent and the suitability executive agent, in concert with our
partner organizations, which will bring together key senior
leadership, change agents, industry experts, and innovative
thinkers to chart a bold path forward for the security,
suitability, and credentialing enterprise.
The participants, including all Performance Accountability
Council principal organizations, are committed to critically
reviewing and analyzing with a clean slate and forward-leaning
approach how to accomplish the transformational overhaul which
is required. As mentioned in my statement for the record, our
Trusted Workforce 2.0 initiative kicks off next Monday and
Tuesday, 12 and 13 March, at the Intelligence Community Campus,
Bethesda. We look forward to conceptualizing, implementing, and
ultimately accomplishing the revolutionary change required
across the clearance enterprise. In addition, we look forward
to updating the committee on our progress.
The SecEA and SuitEA have committed to transformational
overhaul in at least three areas: first, revamping the
fundamental approach and policy framework. The current
standards are built on decades of layered incremental changes
and have not fundamentally changed since the 1950s. We accept
the ambitious goal that by the end of 2018 we will identify and
establish a new set of policy standards that transforms the
U.S. Government's approach to vetting its workforce. Our
objective must be to ensure a trusted workforce across
government and industry who will appropriately protect vital
national security information with which they are entrusted.
Second, overhauling the enterprise business process. The
current process is slow, arduous, overly reliant on manual
field work, and does not leverage advancements in modern
technology and the availability of data.
Finally, we must modernize information technology. Existing
information technology constrains our ability to transform fast
enough. We must leverage today's technology to connect vital
national security processing required and ensure we are well
positioned to adopt tomorrow's advancing technology. After more
than a decade of incremental policy change, there is still an
unacceptable operational burden on government agencies making
security and suitability determinations. We owe those dedicated
professionals a high-performing process that meets the needs of
our workforce and ultimately the American citizen. We are
committed to full transparency in these efforts.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
committee and I will be happy to respond to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dunbar follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Mr. Dunbar.
STATEMENT OF CHARLES S. PHALEN, JR., DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS BUREAU, U.S. OFFICE OF PERSONNEL
MANAGEMENT
Mr. Phalen. Chairman Burr, Vice Chairman Warner, members--
--
Chairman Burr. Let me thank you, thank you in his absence.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Phalen. I'll bring my clipboard later.
Members of the committee: My name is Charles S. Phalen, Jr.
I am the Director of the National Background Investigations
Bureau in the Office of Personnel Management, and I do
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today. NBIB
currently conducts 95 percent of the investigations across the
Federal Government. The results of this mostly singular supply
chain are used by over 100 agencies to make their independent
adjudicative decisions. Even those few agencies that have their
own delegated or statutory authority to conduct investigations,
such as agencies in the intelligence community, rely on our
services in some capacity.
I'd like to start by addressing our existing investigative
inventory and put some context around the numbers, which have
been the subject of much media attention. In 2017 we completed
2.5 million investigations across all our investigative types.
As of today, our inventory is approximately 710,000
investigative products. These include simple record checks,
suitability, credentialing investigations, and national
security investigations.
It's important to note that the top-end number I just
mentioned is much greater than the number of individuals
waiting for their first, their initial, security clearance to
begin working with or on behalf of the Federal Government. Of
that total inventory, about 164,000 are either simple record
checks that move in or out of inventory daily or are
investigations supporting credentialing or suitability
determinations. The remaining inventory is for national
security determinations or clearances. Approximately 337,000 of
those are for initial investigations and about 209,000 are for
periodic reinvestigations.
Since we've stood up 17 months ago as NBIB, we have worked
to increase our capacity and realize efficiencies. The
stabilization of the top-end inventory over the past six months
has been attained primarily because we have invested in the
necessary infrastructure. We are approaching this challenge on
three fronts: First, to recover from the 2014 loss of the USIS
contract for investigative capacity, we have rebuilt both
contractor and Federal workforce capacity. As of today, there
are over 7,200 Federal and contract investigators working on
behalf of NBIB. That's good. That's not enough.
Second, our investigative capacity can be significantly
enhanced through smarter use of our workforce's time. Through
the implementation of our business process reengineering
strategy, we have clearly defined the critical process
improvements and technology shortfalls corrections needed to
support those requirements, and our decisions have been
enhanced through better data analytics.
We have improved our field work logistics by centralizing
and prioritizing cases, first with agencies, beginning about 18
months ago, and more currently we are beginning to start hubs
with industry. We have increased efficiencies of conducting and
reporting on our enhanced subject interviews and implemented
more efficient collection methodologies by leveraging the
powers of technology to discover and gather information, and to
free the investigators' focus on those aspects of
investigations where human interaction is still critical.
Third, we are fully supportive of the upcoming executive
agents trusted workforce initiatives. Our processes today are
driven by the existing policies, some dating back seven
decades, and we know from our experience that there is much to
be gained through this strategic policy review effort, and we
are fully behind it.
Underpinning all of this is the planned transition to a new
information technology system being developed by the Department
of Defense. The National Background Investigation Services,
NBIS, will ultimately serve as NBIB's IT system to support
background investigations and will offer shared services to the
end-to-end process for all government agencies and departments.
NBIB, with the support of its inter-agency partners, has
made and will continue to make improvements to the background
investigations and vetting processes. As an example, for the
past year we have offered our customer agencies a continuous
evaluation product that meets today's guidance issued by the
Director of National Intelligence for continuous evaluation.
As we work to reduce this inventory, we will continue to
explore innovative ways to meet our customer agencies' needs,
leveraging their expertise as part of our decision making
process, and remain transparent and accountable to all of our
customers and to Congress. We recognize that solutions to
reduce inventory and maintain the strength of the background
investigation program includes people, resources, and
technology, as well as partnerships with our stakeholder
agencies and changes to the overall clearance investigative and
adjudicative processes.
Finally, as the Federal Government works to implement the
transition of the Department of Defense-sponsored background
investigations from NBIB to DOD, we will examine our workforce
needs, our capacity, our budget, and work with our partners to
minimize disruptions. We have a shared interest in reducing the
inventory, taking steps to effectuate the smooth transition of
operations, and we have a shared understanding of the
importance of this entire process and its ultimate impact on
national security.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today. I look
forward to the next year and I look forward to answering any
questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Phalen follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Mr. Phalen.
Mr. Reid.
STATEMENT OF GARRY P. REID, DIRECTOR FOR DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE
(INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY), DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Mr. Reid. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice Chairman,
distinguished members of the committee: On behalf of Secretary
of Defense Mattis, thank you very much for the opportunity to
meet today to discuss a very important topic at hand. I have
submitted my statement for the record and, sir, with your
permission, I would just like to take a few minutes to amplify
a couple points.
First of all, the Department of Defense fully recognizes
and appreciates the necessity for security clearance reform,
and we're fully committed to doing our part to develop and
implement new and innovative methods for establishing and
sustaining a trusted workforce, in a manner which upholds the
highest standards of protection for national security
information, safeguarding our people, and always ensuring the
highest degree of readiness to defend our Nation.
With the support of Congress, multiple committees, and our
close inter-agency partners represented here today from the
Office of the DNI, the Office of Personnel Management, and the
Office of Management and Budget, we have for the past some 18
months been developing plans to transition responsibility for
background investigations for our portion of the workforce from
Mr. Phalen's organization to the Defense Security Service led
by Mr. Payne.
The Chair and Vice Chair may recall, we met and briefed on
this about 11 months ago internally, and we've been moving out
steadily. Last August, Secretary Mattis approved our plan,
which was referred to as the Section 951 plan and was tasked to
us in the 2017 Authorization Act, to submit a plan for this
transition. This past December, upon approval of the National
Defense Authorization Act for 2018, this included direction to
the Defense Department to implement the transition plan we
submitted under previous tasking and to do so by October of
2020.
We are well under way to meet this objective, in fact can
project today that the initial phase of the plan--and there's
some dependencies I'll talk about, but we are preparing
ourselves to begin implementing this plan later this year, in
the October time frame, concurrent with the next fiscal year,
and there are some conditions I'll talk about.
Our team, this inter-agency team represented here today, we
are all working very hard every day to put the resources and
the procedures in place to make this happen, and Mr. Payne will
talk about some of that in detail. But more than just a
straight transfer of the current mission and the current method
to our department, and in line with the intent of the security
executive agent, as just talked about with the 2.0 initiative,
DOD is actively developing these alternative procedures for
conducting background investigations, advantaging ourselves
with all available technology and other things.
Our fundamental concept is to build on the existing
continuous evaluation program, which the security executive
agent has already established, to build around that and
supplement that with additional tools, such as risk rating
tools, which analyze individual risks, analyze risk by
position, and inform us of where to look and where to focus
these processes. We have a process for automated records
checks--some of this is in use today at NBIB--to build around
that, to take the shell of continuous evaluation, enhance that
with other tools that give us a full comprehensive picture on a
contemporaneous basis of the risks that we are dealing with in
individual risk, in human risk, associated with
responsibilities, levels of responsibility, risk profiles, and
a host of other data that are connected to other programs we
have, such as insider threat, such as user monitoring, such as
base access, facility access.
We are in a position to aggregate that data to give us a
much more comprehensive understanding of the risk than we
currently have. That is the backbone of the automated process
we're referring to. We have worked this with our colleagues
here. We have shared it and briefed this to many of the
industry leaders that you had in the previous panel and the
organizations they represent. And there is full agreement of
everyone I've briefed that this methodology is viable and
sufficient and goes far beyond where we are today in updating
our understanding of risk in the workforce to a more future-
looking state.
We will soon--I said there's a condition about when we'll
start. We will soon be submitting to the DNI our proposal
requesting approval to begin phasing in the use of this process
for selected segments of our workforce, and we will do this in
a very graduated manner so we can assess and evaluate the
results, everyone involved can understand what's taking place
and appreciate where we are and accept the results. At the same
time, we have to build up a capacity to do this on scale.
So this is a ramp. The plan we submitted is a ramped plan.
It's a three-part plan, over three years. As I said, we are
prepared, subject to the concurrence of the security executive
agent, to formally commence this in October of this year.
This will be a long-term process and it will be done in a
graduated manner. We will build up our capacity and we will
bring everyone along with this, industry, government,
Congressional oversight, all of our reporting requirements, all
of our accountability requirements. We have every ability and
full intent and no latitude not to uphold and not to represent
what we're doing. There's nothing below the waterline that
folks won't understand. We're very cognizant of this
reciprocity issue and how people need to appreciate what's
happening so they have trust and confidence in the system, and
we're prepared to do that.
We're equally mindful, as we do this, that we must continue
to rely on the National Background Investigations Bureau to
process the some 500,000 DOD cases that are in their inventory.
Those cases have gone into that system. We are enabling NBIB to
do that now. We are the sponsor for the IT system. We will
continue to do that and build those tools out, all of which
will transfer, but they will continue to be available to all of
government, and all investigative services providers in the
Federal Government will have access to these tools and
procedures that we are developing.
In the later stages of our plan, later into next year, we
will begin working with NBIB to understand and implement the
resource transfers. The financial resources we put into NBIB
are on a pay-as-you-go, on a revolving fund. But the human
capital, the Federal and contractor workforce that supports
NBIB now, as they ramp down to a smaller population--we are 75
percent of their business load roughly. So as we shift that,
we're working with them right now and we have a commitment to
provide a plan through the PAC principles of what our ramp-up
plan is and what their ramp-down plan is, and obviously those
need to be in harmony. We will continue to rely on them to work
down the inventory and we will support and enable them to do
so.
I would just add here, they've done a tremendous job of
dealing with a very difficult set of challenges with the
inventory that Mr. Phalen inherited when he took that job, and
we're very much appreciative of what they're doing.
I can't underestimate the complexity of this endeavor. This
is--as I said, it's about a $1.1 billion enterprise. We have a
volume of 700,000 cases a year that they process for us. There
are some 8 to 10,000 people that do this. And all of this will
be in motion as we phase and implement this plan, keeping them
whole and viable with a re-scoped mission and establishing our
ability to do our mission, which would then be benefited by the
fact that we have control of our own initiation process, the
submissions piece, the investigations piece, and the
adjudications, and then, very important going forward, the
follow-up, the continuous vetting, continuous evaluation,
foundations that I already discussed.
We're working on this every day. We have great teamwork. We
appreciate the support of Congress in this endeavor. Sir, thank
you again and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reid follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Mr. Reid.
Mr. Payne.
STATEMENT OF DANIEL E. PAYNE, DIRECTOR, DEFENSE SECURITY
SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Mr. Payne. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice Chairman, members of the
committee: Thank you very much for this opportunity to speak
with you on this topic. You have my written statement. I'm not
going to go into that. I'll try to keep my comments as brief as
possible because I know you have a lot of questions.
I will say that I am the individual who's going to be
responsible for executing the mission in DOD for background
investigations and begin to build that mission. As a result of
that, Charlie and I have to work, Mr. Phalen and I, have to
work very closely with each other and our teams have to work
very closely with each other so that we do this in a manner
that doesn't hinder NBIB's ability to work down the backlog
while at the same time increasing our capacity to pick up these
investigations.
That being said, and in view of the previous panel that was
here and the comments that came from the previous panel, I am
responsible for industry security currently. While we do not do
the background investigations ourselves--that's Mr. Phalen's
organization that does that--we initiate the background
investigations. I am the individual who grants interim security
clearances and takes them away. I am also responsible for the
execution of DOD's continuous evaluation program, which from my
perspective has been greatly successful and is the way of the
future. We have to go down this route if we are going to make
the necessary changes to make this process better.
In addition to that, the insider threat programs for DOD. I
own the Defense Insider Threat Management and Analysis Center,
which is where all of the insider threat concerns in DOD come
to. We work with the individual agencies within DOD to resolve
those particular issues.
All of those things combined, as Mr. Reid outlined a few
minutes ago, all of those things combined are things that we
did not have back in 2004, 2005 when DOD had the initial
mission for background investigations. We have them now. That's
the way of the future. That is the way that we have to go.
If we are going to make any progress in making this program
faster and making this program more secure, we've got to look
at a different methodology of doing this. It has to--we have to
utilize continuous evaluation and automated processes, many of
which Mr. Reid outlined in his statement. But in addition to
that, we have to look at the standards. We have to change
standards. If we are going to do this successfully, we have to
change standards. That's going to result in some big decisions
on our part, and those big decisions pertain to how much risk
we are willing to accept.
As Mr. Berteau in the previous panel stated, we're never
going to be able to reduce the risk to zero unless we stop
hiring. Obviously, we can't do that. There's always going to be
risk involved in the investigative process. There's always
going to be risk involved in the security clearance process.
What we have to determine is how much risk we find acceptable.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Payne follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Burr. Thank you, Mr. Payne. Thank you to all of
our witnesses.
Again, we'll recognize members based upon seniority for up
to five minutes. I recognize myself first.
I'm going to tell you a story. The story starts about ten
years ago. A 22-year-old graduates college, never even plans to
work for government, gets offered a job, a civilian at DOD.
Couldn't be more excited. Parents more excited than he was.
Job, paycheck, things that you hope they're going to find. Then
a process of 11 months of security clearance.
It gets back to some things that were said in the first
panel. I don't think that I'm an exception. That happened to be
my son. Here's a kid that is incredibly excited to work for
government, work where he did, ready to go. And after 11
months, he wonders whether he made the right decision. He
didn't lose his skills, like some will do today if it's
technological. But the question is, how much of that initial
passion for working for government do you lose from the
standpoint of retention down the road?
Understand, I get it first-hand why we've got to accomplish
what you've set out to do. It is unacceptable to this next
generation, just the fact that things go so slowly. I say that
with full knowledge, and I'm still talking about the Federal
Government, and there are some things even Congress can't
change. But the reality is that we can do much better.
Mr. Reid, I thank you for your brief almost a year ago. The
fact is the time line's about exactly where you told us it was
going to be. We're excited to see the roll-out. Mr. Payne, a
lot of pressure on your shoulders. I get that. But we can't go
forward unless we do this. I know the commitment of Dan Coats
and I don't think that that's going to change as long as he's
there. I think now we're matching it with a desire by members
of Congress to make sure we not only identify those things that
need to be changed, but we accomplish the solution. So I think
that we've got good partners.
Mr. Reid, Mr. Payne, this is to you. Are there additional
authorities that you need to accomplish this roll-out and
eventually fully move the system to what you have designed?
Mr. Reid. Senator, from an authorities standpoint, Section
925 of the current NDAA gives us--reinforces the Secretary's
authority in the first instance to conduct background
investigations, which was a plus. It also provides direction,
not so much authority, for us to consolidate other elements
within the Department, which also is very helpful.
Chairman Burr. Let me ask it a different way.
Mr. Reid. Yes, sir.
Chairman Burr. Is there anything in Federal statute today--
--
Mr. Reid. No, sir.
Chairman Burr [continuing]. That hinders your ability to
change your review process the way you think it needs to be
done?
Mr. Reid. Not that I'm aware, not in statute. Now, we are
wholly dependent on Director Coats and his leadership to
approve, as I outlined, our alternative process. The Secretary
cannot, Secretary Mattis, cannot do that unilaterally. We are
beholden to the security executive agent and the suitability
executive agent for the standards they set and the process they
control. We don't have a problem with that process. We're
eagerly looking forward to participating in the Trusted
Workforce 2.0, because it comports to the plan that we've
already set out to conduct. So I do not believe there's
anything in Federal law that is an impediment to what we want
to do, sir.
Chairman Burr. Mr. Dunbar, I'd also ask you to go back and
make sure from an ODNI standpoint that there's not some statute
out there that is going to pop its ugly head up and say: Well,
you know, this does make a lot of sense, what we're doing over
here, but you can't do that until we change this statute. If
we've got things to change, let us know now so that we can
implement this on the timeline that's designed.
Mr. Dunbar. Yes, Senator, absolutely.
Chairman Burr. I should have said this at the first panel
and I'll say it now. I'm not adverse to additional
investigators. I'm not adverse to increasing funding. I am
adverse in doing either of those things before we change the
system. So until you change, it's hard to truly evaluate what
the need is going to be, what the cost is going to be.
I am hopeful--and I think, Mr. Reid, this is your intent--
that this takes the timeline for security approval and drives
it down. Can you give us what your goal is from a standpoint of
a timeline? If today--if 9 years ago it took 11 months, I can't
imagine what it is today for that similar TS-SCI individual.
What's your goal now?
Mr. Reid. Yes, sir. The established goals for each level of
clearance are attainable under our plan, but, better than that,
under our plan--currently, for a SECRET reinvestigation, the
guideline goal is 145 days. It's taking about twice that long.
Under our plan, our vision is that that periodic
reinvestigation as it's currently conducted does not exist,
that a contemporaneous continuous vetting process would be
implemented in place of that.
Now, there will still be deliberate face-to-face sort of
re-upping of employees. It's not autopilot. But the monitoring
and the reporting, which we are already doing in our program
now, will be the backbone. So the answer to that question is
the goal is to eliminate the requirement currently existing for
periodic reinvestigations at all levels. We have some work to
do to get beyond the first level.
Chairman Burr. What can I tell that next 22-year-old who
wants to be a civilian DOD employee and is getting ready to go
through the background check, 22 years old, out of school,
never lived anywhere but school and home? How long is it going
to take to process him for a clearance?
Mr. Reid. Again, under the current process that ranges from
200 to 400 days. Under the future process, it's perfectly
attainable to get down to, in the current guidelines, which are
for TOP SECRET 150 days, but we feel it can go much lower with
the automation and the tools that I described, sir.
Chairman Burr. Vice Chair.
Vice Chairman Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we've heard a lot of commonality from the first
panel to the second panel in terms of goals. It's not a new
problem. But I look at just the last, performance over the last
couple years. We've had doubling of the backlog. From Mr.
Phalen, while you say it's stabilized, I don't hear--and I'm
going to come to you in a couple minutes--when are we going to
actually get it down?
We've had a doubling of the costs. We have everybody using
the term ``continuous evaluation,'' yet we seem to not have
commonality on that or how we're going to get there. We have
the notion of increased technology. But again, I don't see a
timeline presented. We see in certain areas, for example, the
financial sector, where there are enormous security concerns,
they have been able to implement tools like continuous
evaluation using increased technology.
I get the frustration on the DOD side that say, we've got
to split this up. But we're talking about an effort to go with,
if we accept some of the industry's interest in terms of one
application, one investigation, one adjudication, and one
clearance, it seems like we're going the opposite direction.
So I'd like to hear either from Mr. Reid or Mr. Payne how
we make sure, if we go through this process, we're not going to
simply create more duplication, less portability, less
reciprocity, than what we have right now, which again I'm the
first to acknowledge is not working.
Mr. Reid. Yes, sir. The application, the standards, are
federally directed. There is one, there is one standard. What
we are embarking on and preparing to implement is an
alternative methodology to reach those standards. Now, in
parallel, these guys talked about everyone getting together and
looking at the standards. If they change, they'll change for
everybody. We're not creating a new standard. We're not
creating a new application. We are automating behind the
application the process that we go through to collect the data
that's relevant to form the basis of a background
investigation, that becomes the basis of an adjudicative
decision or determination.
We are not changing the standard, sir.
Vice Chairman Warner. Recognizing that you are the vast
majority, how are you going to make sure the goal of
reciprocity and portability takes place as you build this new
system?
Mr. Reid. In the very first instance, sir, that will be by
adhering to the guidelines set by the executive agents in
everything we implement. We do not have unilateral authority to
change that process without the executive agents' concurrence.
So we will align our process to their standard.
Vice Chairman Warner. Respectfully, I know you're trying to
head us in the right direction, but it sounds like a lot of
process words rather than specific guidelines, timetables, and
how we're going to get there.
Let me just--and while I share the Chairman's concern about
simply throwing money at it, but my understanding is there's an
awful lot of agencies, they kind of build this into their G&A
and they don't continue to prioritize funding, so that the
funding that is even supposed to be there isn't getting there.
So I don't think we ought to throw more dollars, but I do think
we need to make sure that agencies make this a priority within
their funding scheme. I hope DOD, which has gotten a very
generous bump-up in the last budget--if you're going to take
this on, it would be very disappointing, at least to this
Senator, if we came back and said, ``Well, we didn't have the
dough to do it.''
I'm going to go to Mr. Phalen. Mr. Phalen, stabilizing at
700,000 is not acceptable. It's just not acceptable. I'd like
to know when we're going to start seeing those numbers driven
down on the backlog.
Also, Senator Heinrich raised issues on the earlier hearing
about new techniques that some of the government labs were
using in terms of, for example, hubbing interviews. Why is it
taking so long to try to implement what seems to make common
sense in terms of hubbing interviews. I've got an area like
Norfolk, Virginia, where we've got huge numbers of people
trying to--waiting for clearances. What can you talk--what can
you say specifically about using these tools that seem to be
working in DOE kind of across the breadth in other areas where
there's concentration of Federal employees, like Norfolk in my
area or Northern Virginia in my area?
Start with how we're going to drive that 700,000 backlog
down, not stabilize it, drive it down.
Mr. Phalen. Starting one step even further behind that,
when I first joined this organization 17 months ago, the
capacity to conduct the work that we were required to do was
insufficient to conduct that work, period. That's why, as you
saw in the first few months after we stood up, that that
inventory continued to rise as opposed to begin to stabilize.
When we reach the point where we have the same capacity
that we had in 2014 when this all fell apart, that's a way
station along the way to reach that point of stabilization.
It's not the endgame. In one sense, I'm proud we hit that
stabilization, but I'm not proud that we have not brought that
inventory down. Our goal is to bring it down. Last week I noted
to a committee on the other side, the House side, that we are
looking at potentially as much as 15 to 20 percent reduction by
this time--not by this time--by the end of the calendar year.
That's still not sufficient, but it will be--by itself, it will
begin to drive that number down. It will probably take us a
couple of years to get down to a level that is much more
effective.
Along the way, we are trying a number of things. We've
talked about technology. We need to be able to get at
information, collect information more reliably, more quickly,
through technology, as opposed to shoe leather, as was
mentioned in the previous session. The problem is getting to
some of those sources right now, particularly law enforcement
sources, is not as easy as one would hope, and we still have to
put a lot of people on the street to find police records in
relevant areas. But we're continuing to work on that closely
with the police agencies at the State and local, Federal,
tribal level, to continue to do that.
You talked about hubbing. We started that with the
Department of Energy as a surge rather than hubbing, about 17,
18 months ago in Los Alamos. It looked very promising. We have
since that point, we have done a number of things that are both
hubbing and surging. One is more concentrated than the other.
Most recently, we finished one in Wright-Paterson Air Force
Base in the Dayton area. We recognized an increased efficiency
of somewhere in the low 40 percent positive note. In other
words, what would normally be an hour's worth of work they were
finishing in 36 minutes. That's a rough estimate. They were far
more productive in that hubbing area.
You mentioned the area around Tidewater. We are actually
beginning a session in Tidewater on April 1st. We have pulled
together all of our--all the Federal agencies that are down
there, all the DOD agencies that are down there and pull
together all of our assets, both staff and contract
investigators, and we're going to focus on that area.
But that is one of probably about eight or nine that I
could mention just in the last year where we have actually done
this and found very positive results. Certainly Dayton, San
Antonio, out in Nevada, Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma City. I
mentioned Tidewater. And one that I think is going to be very
promising to us on two fronts. One is, we've been working with
industry directly to find areas, not by company, but by
geography and by program, to find those areas in the country
where we can again focus our resources--places like Southern
California, places again like Tidewater, like the Space Coast
in Florida, where we can bring that together and work with
industry to bring--to focus our energies down there.
A second part of that is, to follow on to a comment that
was made I believe by one of the early panelists, it's clear to
me from both our current work and my last experiences in life
that industry collects an awful lot of data before they put
somebody in for a clearance, before they even decide to hire
somebody. We need to find a way to leverage the work that they
have already done, accept it, and build it into part of the
process, and not having to go back and ask those same
questions. That will by itself reduce a lot of time in
collection and effort.
That's sort of a high-level view. I hope that it gets to
some of those points you mentioned, sir.
Vice Chairman Warner. I'm curious you didn't mention
National Capital Region as one of these areas that would be a
recipient of a hubbing area, since it's the greatest
concentration of the need for clearances.
Mr. Phalen. Interestingly enough, l asked that question
yesterday and spoke to the folks in charge of the activities in
this area. We are in the Washington, D.C., area, for work that
has to be done in the Washington area, we are actually pretty
close to being up to speed in the Washington, D.C., area. It is
other parts of the country where somebody's background may take
them to other parts of the country where it is not as up to
speed as it could be.
Vice Chairman Warner. I'll be happy to send a lot of my
friends in the contractor community to you on that fact. They
don't believe that fact.
Mr. Phalen. Understood.
Chairman Burr. Senator Lankford.
Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Reid, has DOD done its own background investigations
and work before and then handed that back over to the whole of
government?
Mr. Reid. Yes, sir. Prior to 2005, we had responsibility
for our background investigations at what's now the Defense
Security Service.
Senator Lankford. So what's the lesson learned there? So
why is this time going to be better, because last time it was
turned over and then now it's coming back? Give me the key
lessons learned?
Mr. Reid. Mr. Payne touched on one of those, sir. That is,
having the comprehensive process in place to deal with the
volume and the scale of investigative items. The continuous
evaluation tools that we have now are different, the risk-
grading and automated record checks; additional tools that we
are developing to streamline the submission process within the
Department. If you look at the current process and you look at
past practice, there's a high percentage of drag in the system
between submission and investigation, just to get the
submission clean and get all the data. We have tools in place
already to improve upon that.
I talked about the streamlined background investigations
and then the centrality and the positioning of our consolidated
adjudications facility, which did not exist at that time
either. So we have in place, or we will have in place when we
move investigations back, all three pieces of this enterprise--
submissions, investigations, and adjudications--all under a
single organization, with the authority and the resources and
the mission focus.
I would just say currently, sir, Deputy Secretary Shanahan,
the number one reform agenda for him is this clearance reform.
Secretary Mattis firmly, firmly, actively involved in pushing
us to better solutions and to make this functionality not a
back office thing that someone does in the Department, not an
administrative thing, but the security focus that exists in the
leadership team now--I can't say what it was in 2005--it could
not be any higher today, and we have the pieces aligned to put
this into action.
Senator Lankford. So give me two goals that are the nickels
and noses type goals here? Will this drive down costs? And will
this speed up the process?
Mr. Reid. Yes and yes.
Senator Lankford. Give me a ballpark of what that means?
Mr. Reid. In terms of speeding the process, again, current
timelines, we're experiencing 150 or so days for a SECRET-level
reinvestigation. We will eliminate that requirement completely.
So there's a time improvement there.
Current background investigation field activities, field
work, our studies and our pilots and everything we put into
place now, using aggregated data tools that I've talked about
can get us 90 percent of everything we're getting now from the
field investigation on the front end; and then the tools can
focus on the last 10 percent. We will still have to go out and
do some field work, but 90 percent of the field work can be
handled through automated processes. So that will drive down
the capacity needed to do those field investigations, and
therefore drive down the cost per unit that we currently
provide to OPM.
Senator Lankford. You had said first-time approval is still
at 150 days. That's still your assumption, first time, new
person, new hire?
Mr. Reid. That's the reinvestigation. But currently it's
about the same for the initial SECRET, at the SECRET level.
Senator Lankford. And you assume it's going to still stay,
that 150 days?
Mr. Reid. Pardon me, sir?
Senator Lankford. You assume that it will still stay 150
days? Currently it's 150 days. You assume when you transition
it over it will still be 150 days for a first-time hire, brand-
new investigation?
Mr. Reid. No, sir, no. That's the current standard. I don't
know today how fast we'll be able to do a SECRET. My
anticipation is it can be done in a matter of days. There's
processes in place now to gain access to certain programs and
facilities even here in the D.C. area, that run a series of
automated checks that are very thorough, and it takes 20
minutes. I don't know that we're going to be at 20 minutes. And
you always are going to have things you have to go check.
Senator Lankford. Back to the Chairman's question when he
talked about the 22-year-old, when he asked you specifically on
that how long it's going to take, that's when you gave him the
answer of 150 days. So I'm trying to be able to----
Mr. Reid. That's the current standard, sir. I apologize.
Senator Lankford. All right. So you're thinking it's not
going to be 150 days; it could be a couple of weeks?
Mr. Reid. Absolutely. At the SECRET level, absolutely. No
reason why that can't be.
Senator Lankford. Mr. Payne, do you concur on that?
Mr. Payne. I do. I think some of the things that we have in
place right now, again as Mr. Reid outlined, using continuous
evaluation--maybe I want to finesse that a little bit:
continuous evaluation as opposed to continuous vetting. So
continuous evaluation, the program set up by the DNI, is
designed to look at the risks in between periods of
reinvestigation. When we talk about--and they have seven data
sources that they're requiring every agency to utilize when
they do continuous evaluation.
When I talk about continuous vetting, I'm looking at
expanding that into other data sources, data sources within
DOD, other data sources within the U.S. Government, other data
sources within the public sector, that we can pull all those
things together, many of which are required already for the
SECRET-level reinvestigations, and do those on a continuous
basis.
If we're doing those things on a continuous basis, there is
no need to do a reinvestigation on someone at the SECRET level
unless you come up with derogatory information. So that's where
the significant savings is going to be.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Burr. Senator King.
Senator King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I've been surprised in this hearing that we haven't had to
talk much about money. Mr. Phalen, do you have adequate--and
Mr. Reid; are there adequate resources in terms of money and
people? Is it just management and automation? Or are there
shortfalls in terms of the number of people necessary to do
these, to work down this backlog?
Mr. Phalen. Under the current process, in our current
operation, we operate in a working capital fund, a revolving
fund. Agencies that wish to have an investigation done give us
the money to have the investigation done. So from our
standpoint, it is: Here's the money; do an investigation. So
we're not short of funding to do these investigations on our
end.
I think a better question would be: Are the agencies that
need to have an investigation conducted funded appropriately to
identify the money to send to us to do the investigation?
Senator King. Are there sufficient personnel? Are there
people? Our economy is pretty tight. Are there people? Is there
a shortage of qualified people to do this work?
Mr. Phalen. The high-end folks to do the investigative work
as a population are stressed at this point to hit beyond where
we are, although we have encouraged our suppliers and ourselves
to continue hiring. So today there are nearly adequate, but we
still have much more work to do. And if we don't change today's
processes, some of the things you've heard already, then we
will still need to continue hiring beyond all that, and that
puts even greater stress on the total number of people we have
to do it.
Senator King. So that's an additional imperative to seek
technological productivity?
Mr. Phalen. Yes. It's to make the current people more
productive and to reduce the need for having people in there,
yes.
Senator King. I think this could go to any of you. I'll
address it to Mr. Reid. Is the portability that we've talked
about part of this sort of revamped plan, Mr. Phalen, Mr. Reid,
to consider that factor so that we don't have to redo these
tests? Let me ask a specific question. We heard about DHS,
where you might have to have a whole new investigation to go
from one job to another in the same agency. Does that--please
tell me that doesn't happen in the Department of Defense.
Mr. Reid. No, sir, it does not. But we have single
adjudication facility all under one roof. In DHS, the
aggregation of independent agencies that were brought together
in DHS, they're still operating it differently. But we have for
years, had a single adjudication facility within the
Department, and external to the Department because----
Senator King. So the clearances are portable within the
Department of Defense?
Mr. Reid. Absolutely, sir.
Senator King. Is the portability issue in other agencies
part of this reinvention that's going on?
Mr. Reid. The interesting part is that it is mostly today a
singular investigation. Any agency can use the investigation we
do to conduct an adjudication. But it is up to that agency to
do the adjudication. In the example you heard earlier within
DHS, with the same set of facts they may decide to ask for more
information, ask for a re-adjudication.
Senator King. So portability isn't a part of the overall
structure of the new system. It's an agency by agency decision
whether they will accept, whether they will do reciprocity?
Mr. Reid. I'd say it's less about structure and more about
both empowering them and encouraging them to accept the
decisions made by others in previous lives. So a decision made
by one agency, for the second agency to accept that that first
agency probably did a pretty good job and was honest about how
they approached it to accept the results of that first
investigation, and not--maybe another question, but not ask a
lot more about it, not reinvestigate it, not--I'm sorry--not
re-initiate an investigation.
Senator King. Thank you.
Mr. Reid, why is it that it's taking so long, has taken and
apparently will take so long, to transition from the OPM to
Department of Defense? You are talking about 2020, I think, and
it started last year.
Mr. Reid. The Defense Authorization Act requires us to
implement the plan by October 2020. We intend to implement the
plan in October of 2018. We're projecting a three-year, three-
phase plan, starting at the SECRET----
Senator King. You're going to bring it in on time and under
budget?
Mr. Reid. Well, it says start by 2020. So we will start
now. It didn't tell us how long to finish, but we submitted a
three-year plan. So logically the expectation is we take three
years.
When we moved it out of DOD last time, it took more than
five years. And it's more complicated. But the short answer to
your question: We want to do it in a phased, deliberate, and
graduated way. We have to keep our partner agency whole. They
support a lot of other agencies in the government and they rely
on us to do that. It will help them work down their inventory.
Once we start processing new cases separately, that will drive
down the new work that goes to Mr. Phalen of tens of thousands
of cases a week that we are providing them now. We will turn
off that spigot, help with the backlog, as we build up our own
capacity and capability.
Senator King. I'm out of time, but, Mr. Payne, very
quickly: You used a phrase that struck me. You said: We have to
change the standards. What did you mean when you said that? You
mean lower the standards?
Mr. Payne. I don't necessarily mean lower the standards,
but we have to--the Federal investigative standards dictate
what steps have to be taken to achieve a SECRET level security
clearance or a TOP SECRET level security clearance. Again, as
has been outlined, we----
Senator King. It's the steps that might have to be----
Mr. Payne. That's correct.
Senator King [continuing]. Compressed, not necessarily----
Mr. Payne. Not the adjudicative standards necessarily, the
investigative standards.
Senator King. That's what I needed to know. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Burr. Senator Wyden.
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
A question for you, Mr. Phalen. I've made a special focus
of my work during this Russian inquiry the follow-the-money
kinds of questions. I want to ask you a couple of questions
relating to that. For you, I think, Mr. Phalen, the question
is: Should someone who fails to disclose financial
entanglements with a foreign adversary be eligible for a
security clearance? That is a yes or no question.
Mr. Phalen. I'm not sure I have a yes or no answer for you,
sir. I believe it would play a prominent role in a decision as
to whether that individual should be granted a clearance, and
it is not an inconsequential question to ask.
Senator Wyden. But how is it not an up or down, yes or no?
We're talking about significant financial entanglements with a
foreign adversary. Shouldn't somebody who fails to disclose
it--I mean, it's one thing if it's disclosed and you have a
debate and, like you say, it's balancing. But failure to
disclose seems to me a different matter altogether.
So I gather you don't think necessarily that somebody who
fails to disclose a significant financial entanglement with a
foreign adversary should be denied a security clearance?
Mr. Phalen. That is not what I meant to say.
Senator Wyden. Well, go ahead. Tell me what you mean to
say?
Mr. Phalen. Under the adjudicative standards--and I would
defer also to Mr. Dunbar to reply to this as well. Under the
adjudicative standards, there is nothing that says ``If you do
this, you can't have a clearance.'' It says to the adjudicator
to take into account all that you know about this individual,
make a decision regarding their candor, regarding their
entanglements, regarding their families, regarding crime,
regarding all sorts of things, and make a decision.
I would say that the scenario you outline would play a
prominent thought to be considered during the adjudication. But
there's nothing in today's standards that says any of those
things by themselves are disqualifying. It would be a very
important piece to consider.
Senator Wyden. Do you believe it ought to be disqualifying?
Mr. Phalen. I would have a hard time overcoming that.
Senator Wyden. Great. Thank you.
Okay. Mr. Dunbar, question for you. Jared Kushner's interim
access to TOP SECRET-SCI information has raised a variety of
questions. Under what circumstances should individuals with an
interim clearance get that type of access? That's for you, Mr.
Dunbar.
Mr. Dunbar. Senator, as we've heard earlier today with the
industry panel, interim clearances have been used throughout
the government for some time, many years. There are two
specific governing documents for interim clearances and the
guidance that's out there now allows interim clearances at the
SECRET level as well as the TOP SECRET level.
There are situations called out in the guidelines which
speak to urgency of circumstances, those types of ideas about
how when someone might be granted an interim security
clearance. I believe an example that would be applicable here
is an incoming Administration, which has the need to on-board
personnel and get them in positions as soon as possible in
order that they can perform the duties of their function.
In regard to Mr. Kushner's specific case, the DNI sets
policy, standards, and requirements. As Mr. Phalen has stated,
each individual adjudication--and this is contained in the
Security Executive Agent No. 4--is treated based on the whole
person concept, in which every particular piece of information,
positive and negative, past, present, all of those things, are
factored into the adjudication.
As Mr. Phalen has stated, in my opinion the issues which
you've raised, Senator, would be issues which would need to be
thoroughly vetted in the course of the investigation. I have no
reason to doubt that the Federal Bureau of Investigation would
not investigate each and every issue very fulsomely.
Senator Wyden. Let me ask one other question. During our
open hearing, in fact I think it was Worldwide Threats, the
Vice Chairman, to his credit, mentioned security clearance as
being central to the question of protecting sources and
methods. I asked FBI Director Wray, with respect to Rob Porter,
how that decision was made. I mean, when did the FBI notify the
White House? It was clear when you listen to Director Wray's
answer, it did not resemble what John Kelly had actually been
saying to the American people.
So I'm still very concerned about who makes decisions at
the White House. With regard to White House personnel, in your
view, Mr. Dunbar, who would make the decision to grant an
interim clearance holder access to TOP SECRET-SCI information?
Mr. Dunbar. Senator, that decision would be made, in my
understanding, by the White House Office of Personnel Security,
based on an investigation conducted by the FBI.
Senator Wyden. My time is up. I would only say, I'm not so
sure as of now who actually makes that decision, because we've
heard Mr. Kelly speak on it. I understand the point that was
made by all of you who are testifying. I think it still remains
to be seen who would make that decision to grant an interim
clearance.
I'm over my time. Thank you for the courtesy, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Burr. Before I turn to Senator Harris: Mr. Phalen,
since you do most of these right now, is it unusual or is it
acceptable that if an individual who's filed for a security
clearance finds out they left something off their application--
are they offered the opportunity to update that for
consideration?
Mr. Phalen. Yes.
Chairman Burr. So if somebody left it off, they could add
it on and that would be considered in the whole of the
evaluation?
Mr. Phalen. Yes, it would be, at any time during the
investigation. What we frequently find is two scenarios. Number
one is: I just forgot when I was filling out the SF-86 to put
that on there as an individual issue. And there are times when
we will go in and conduct the investigation, have the face-to-
face conversation.
Chairman Burr. So that's actually happened more than the
one instance that Senator Wyden referred to?
Mr. Phalen. We find it happens with some regularity.
Chairman Burr. Thank you.
Senator Harris.
Senator Harris. Thank you.
Mr. Phalen, it's important I think for the public to
understand why these background checks are so important to
determining one's suitability to have access to classified
information. Can you please explain to the American public why
these background checks are so important to national security?
Mr. Phalen. Yes. In taking a background check, in addition
to both the investigative piece and then ultimately a decision
by a government agency to grant that person access to
information or have some level of public trust, we owe it to--I
think we as a government owe it to the American people and to
the American taxpayer to ensure that people who are working in
the national security arena and in areas where there is a
public trust, that we have done everything we can within
reason, to determine that that person can--that trust can be
placed into that person.
I know in an earlier part of the conversation, earlier
hearing, there was a conversation about should we reduce the
number of people that have clearances? I think there's not so
much a counter-argument to that, but when we have people across
this particular environment and in the earlier panel where they
have access daily to national security information, secrets
that give this country an edge in war, in peace, and other
sorts of things, and at the same time we have our industrial
partners that we work with that are building all those tools
that help us fight those wars or keep that peace. This is a
very simple thing I've said in other venues: Do you want to
have less trust in the guy who is turning bolts on an F-35
assembly line or more trust? My argument is we probably want
more trust rather than less.
Senator Harris. And in addition to the trust point, isn't
it also the case that the Code of Federal Regulations lays out
13 criteria for determining suitability, not only to determine
who we can trust, but also to expose what might be weaknesses
in a person's background that make them susceptible to
compromise and manipulation by foreign governments and
adversaries.
Mr. Dunbar. That is correct. This is a process that is both
looking at history to ask if you have--do you already have a
record of betraying that trust and, perhaps more importantly,
both for initial investigations and for the continuous vetting
or continuous evaluation portion, to say, ``What is changing in
their lives and how do we predict whether they are going to go
horribly bad before they get that far?''
Senator Harris. So there are 13 criteria, as I've
mentioned. One is financial considerations. I'm going to assume
that we have these 13 factors because we have imagined
scenarios wherein each of them and certainly any combination of
them could render someone susceptible to the kind of
manipulation that we have discussed.
So can you tell us what we imagine might be the exposure
and the weakness of an applicant when we are concerned about
their financial interests, and in particular those related to
foreign financial considerations?
Mr. Dunbar. In a nutshell, it would be an individual who
has entangled themselves, whether it's foreign or not, in
financial obligations that have put them in over their head.
And oftentimes this causes people to make bad decisions, bad
life decisions. In some of these cases, we've found from the
history of espionage it causes them to decide, ``Well, I've got
something valuable here; let me sell it to somebody.''
Senator Harris. How much information is an applicant
required to give related to foreign financial considerations?
Mr. Dunbar. They're required to identify foreign financial
investigations, foreign financial obligations, foreign
property.
Senator Harris. Foreign loans?
Mr. Dunbar. That would be a financial obligation, yes.
Senator Harris. Of course.
Mr. Dunbar. Yes.
Senator Harris. When we talk about foreign influence and it
is listed as a concern, what exactly does that mean in terms of
foreign influence? What are we looking at?
Mr. Dunbar. It would be, how am I or am I influenced by
either a relationship I have with someone who is foreign, a
relationship I have with an entity that is foreign? That could
be a company. It could be a prior or co-existing citizenship I
have with a foreign country. It could be a family member who is
someone from a foreign country. And how much influence any of
those things would have over my judgment as to whether I'm
going to protect or not protect secrets and trust.
Senator Harris. Given your extensive experience and
knowledge in this area, can you tell us what are the things
that individuals are most commonly blackmailed for?
Mr. Dunbar. It is not--I'd have to go back and do some more
research. The instances of blackmail by people committing
espionage is not as substantial as the incidence of people who
have simply made a bad decision based on financial or other
entanglements. They just make a poor decision and decide that,
my personal life is worth more than my country.
Senator Harris. Then I have one final question, and this is
for Mr. Payne. According to press reports last fall, you said,
quote: ``If we don't do interim clearances, nothing gets
done.'' You continued to say: ``I've got murderers who have
access to classified information. I have rapists, I have
pedophiles, I have people involved in child porn. I have all
these things at the interim clearance level, and I'm pulling
their clearances on a weekly basis.''
This obviously causes and would cause anyone great concern,
the problem of course being that the inference there is that
interim clearances don't disclose very serious elements of
someone's background. So can you please tell us--and we also
know, according to press reports, that there are more than 100
staffers in the Executive Office of the President who are
operating on interim clearances--what we are going to do about
this?
Mr. Payne. I will say that the length of time that someone
stays in an interim capacity has to be limited as much as
possible. Just to give you an example from DOD's standpoint, in
my area of jurisdiction right now is industry, cleared
industry. Last year we issued 80,000 interim clearances to
industry. Currently there is about 58,000 people on interim
clearances.
If you look at the timeline that they have been involved or
they have had their interim clearances, it ranges anywhere from
six months to two years. But if you look at just the last year
in terms of interim clearances, and I'll give you a couple of
statistics here, 486 people from industry had their clearances
denied last year, their main security clearance, their full
security clearance. They were denied. Of those, 165 of those
individuals had been granted interim clearances.
Now, during the process of the investigation information
was developed during the investigation that resulted in us
pulling the interim clearances of 151 of those individuals, and
the remainder were individuals who did things after they
received their interim clearances. So the risk--you could see
the risk that is involved with interim clearances and the need
to reduce the amount of time that we have somebody in an
interim capacity as much as possible.
Senator Harris. I agree.
Thank you.
Chairman Burr. Vice Chair.
Vice Chairman Warner. One, I appreciate the panel, and I
appreciate your answers, and the first panel as well. This is a
high, high priority issue, I think, for all of us; and it is
remarkably non-partisan. We've got to get this improved.
I will leave you with one--because it's been a long morning
already, I will leave you all with one question for the record,
because it was raised in the first panel, but we didn't get a
chance to raise it today. I'd like to get a fulsome answer from
each of you. I would argue that, particularly in an era of more
and more open-source documents, we have to take a fresh look at
the need to have over four million-plus people actually have to
go through a clearance process of any type, and particularly
the tremendous growth of TOP SECRET clearances versus simply
SECRET.
So I'd like to hear back in writing from all of you, what
can we do and what would be your policy recommendations so that
we could not have so many people actually have to funnel
through on the demand side on a going-forward basis, where more
and more information is going to be out?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you again for holding this
in an open setting.
Chairman Burr. I thank the Vice Chairman. I thank all of
the members. This is one of those issues that the membership of
this committee has been extremely engaged on. I want to thank
those first, the first panel members who chose to stay and
listen to the government witnesses. I'm always shocked at the
number of people that have the opportunity to testify and stay
and choose not to do that. So I really respect the ones that do
take the time to do that.
I thank all four of you for not only providing us your
testimony today, but for the jobs you do. Mr. Payne, you've got
a big job. Mr. Reid, you've led this charge. Mr. Phalen, you
walked in. Not many people would take the job, and you have
performed as well as one can do, and that's faced with losing
80 percent of your business down the road, knowing that.
Mr. Dunbar, I'm not sure you knew that you'd signed up for
this when Director Coats asked you to come in. But this is--
it's important. As we've chatted up here as other members have
gotten an opportunity to question you, we're really confident
that this might be a model that we're beginning to see that we
can replicate and that the energy between you and Mr. Phalen,
that exchange is going to happen, and that there's a real
opportunity then for Director Coats to coalesce the rest of
government towards this model.
The one thing--one word that didn't come up in the second
panel, might have come up once or twice, that came up
frequently in the first one, was ``reciprocity,'' because
there's nothing that either one of you are doing on both ends
where it solves the problem of reciprocity within an agency or
from agency to agency. I can tell you, we've got a security
officer that got her security clearance at the State
Department, but when she came to be security officer for us,
the State Department said, ``We don't have accreditation with
the CIA,'' so she had to physically go pick up her paperwork
and take it to the agency to be recognized.
You'd think in 2018 something like that wouldn't exist.
It's bad enough that it does, but I think when we look at why
are we doing this, it's really not to solve that problem; it's
to make sure that the next generation of workers that are going
to come through the pipeline actually want to do it and can do
it, and they do it in a time frame that they're accustomed to.
It always mystifies me that somebody is willing to share
their entire life story, because they do. Right, Mr. Phalen?
Everything's out there to be exposed, because they believe in
what they're doing. I want to make sure the next generation has
just as much passion about doing this.
We wouldn't be quite as involved as a committee if it
wasn't for the passion of the Vice Chairman. He has been
relentless on this. I think it's safe to say that the
committee--and I say this to you, Mr. Dunbar: I will take up
with Director Coats--I will offer to Director Coats the
committee being involved in the issue of reciprocity and how we
bring agencies together to work through some of those things.
It's not that the Director doesn't have the authority to do it.
I think he's in full agreement with us. But sometimes having a
Congressional piece involved in those provides the Director an
additional stick that he might not have without us. So I'll
make that offer to Dan, that we will be involved to that
degree.
Mr. Reid, I hope that your history with us, which is at
least annual updates, if not faster, that you will continue
those, and that this committee will have a real inside look
into the success of the model you're setting up. Much of what
we're able to accomplish from this point forward is because of
the investment that you've made, not only today, but prior to
this, and we're grateful for that.
With this, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:25 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
Supplemental Material
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]