- DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:02 a.m., in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Richard C. Shelby (chairman)
presiding.
Present: Senators Shelby, Murkowski, Blunt, Murray, Tester,
and Baldwin.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Defense Health Program
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL NADJA WEST, SURGEON
GENERAL, UNITED STATES ARMY
opening statement of senator richard c. shelby
Senator Shelby. Good morning.
The subcommittee will come to order.
Today, I am pleased to welcome our distinguished panel to
review the funding request for the Military Health System and
Medical Readiness of our service members. Lieutenant General
Nadja West, Surgeon General of the Army; Vice Admiral Forrest
Faison, Surgeon General of the Navy; Lieutenant General Mark
Ediger, Surgeon General of the Air Force; and Ms. Stacy
Cummings, Program Executive Officer of the Defense Healthcare
Management Systems.
The committee here supports the advancements that our
military has made in treating our wounded from quicker
treatment of injuries and medical evacuations through the
battlefield, to medical research breakthroughs and technology-
assisted remote care. We support it all.
Last year, the Department deployed its new Electronic
Health Records system at four sites in the Pacific Northwest.
The goals of this program are to provide better quality of care
and a better value to the taxpayer by achieving an integrated
Electronic Health Record for service members, veterans, and
their families.
The Department of Defense recently initiated a review of
the program, and we look forward to hearing an update on what
challenges remain to improve coordination with the Department
of Veterans Affairs and private healthcare providers.
We hope to hear more about your priorities and work to
improve medical readiness, and to provide quality healthcare to
our service members and their families.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Richard C. Shelby
Good morning, the Subcommittee will come to order.
I am pleased to welcome our distinguished panel to review the
funding request for the military health system and medical readiness of
our servicemembers: Lieutenant General Nadja West, Surgeon General of
the Army; Vice Admiral Forrest Faison, Surgeon General of the Navy;
Lieutenant General Mark Ediger, Surgeon General of the Air Force; and
Ms. Stacy Cummings, Program Executive Officer of the Defense Healthcare
Management Systems.
This committee supports the advancements that our military has made
in treating our wounded. From quicker treatment of injuries and medical
evacuations from the battlefield, to medical research breakthroughs and
technology-assisted remote care.
Last year, the Department deployed its new electronic health
records system at four sites in the Pacific Northwest. The goals of
this program are to provide better quality of care and a better value
to the taxpayer by achieving an integrated electronic health record for
servicemembers, veterans, and their families.
The Department of Defense recently initiated a review of the
program and we look forward to hearing an update on what challenges
remain ahead to improve coordination with the Department of Veterans
Affairs and private healthcare providers.
We hope to hear more about your priorities and work to improve
medical readiness and provide quality healthcare to our servicemembers
and their families.
Now I turn to the Vice Chairman, Senator Durbin, for his opening
remarks.
Senator Shelby. Senator Durbin has not joined us yet.
Senator Tester, do you have an opening statement?
Senator Tester. I do not. I would love to hear from our
witnesses.
Senator Shelby. We will hear from our panel. Your written
statement will be made part of the record in its totality.
We will start with General West. General, thank you.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL NADJA WEST
General West. Thank you, Chairman Shelby and distinguished
members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the current
state of Army Medicine.
Your continued support enables us to remain ready and
responsive in a complex and demanding global security
environment.
Our Army must remain prepared to respond when called upon
and Army Medicine is postured to support our Joint Force with
scalable medical capabilities to support the full range of
military operations, as well as for natural and manmade
disasters, and potential infectious disease threats.
We have the opportunity to change and challenge the status
quo and make significant improvements in healthcare as we
implement the reforms outlined in the fiscal year 2017 NDAA
(National Defense Authorization Act).
We are working closely with the Defense Health agencies, my
colleagues Forrest and Mark, and other members of the Joint
Health Services enterprise to implement these legislative
changes, and we are fully engaged in the transition efforts.
In line with these changes, I would like to talk about how
we are focusing on readiness, modernization, and our people to
support the priorities of the Secretary and the Chief of Staff
of the Army.
Readiness permeates everything we do and has two essential
components: an Army that is ready and a medical force within
our Army that is ready. And so, readiness begins with a fit and
healthy Army that serves as a foundation of a strong national
defense.
Since I last testified before this committee, the total
Army has achieved the lowest medical non-deployable rates in
our history. Considering how our Guard and Reserve colleagues,
how difficult it is for them to always be ready, the numbers
that they have now are phenomenal.
We have operationalized and disseminated the performance
triad throughout our Army focusing on optimizing sleep,
nutrition, and activity to ensure that we have healthier
soldiers.
We have taken on the issue of treating acute and chronic
pain through our comprehensive pain management program reducing
our reliance upon opioids. And I am happy to say that there has
been a reduction from 2007 to current on the use of opioids.
Those within our ranks that have opioid use concerns is about
0.15 compared to our national average, which is 0.9; so a very
good comprehensive effort from our team for doing that.
To sustain our medical force in addition to our military
treatment facilities, which serve as our training platforms, we
leverage our 21 medical simulation training centers that have
realistic and challenging simulations to augment clinical care.
We also maintain very high quality graduate medical
education programs to generate to those required specialties.
Three of our master's and doctoral programs have been ranked in
the top 10 nationally by ``U.S. News and World Report''.
Further, we have incorporated the lessons learned and
lessons observed during operations in Afghanistan and Iraq to
modify or create capabilities to better support the war
fighter's needs.
This includes our new Expeditionary Combat Medic program
and our Expeditionary Resuscitation Surgery program, which we
believe will decrease morbidity and mortality during high
intensity conflicts, and will also increase our ability to
provide prolonged battlefield care in the future environments
that we will be operating in.
In the area of modernization, Army Medicine has come a long
way since the era of leeches and bloodletting, I am happy to
say. We leverage the expertise that resides in our Medical
Research and Materiel Command that is partnering with academic
institutions and industry to develop innovative solutions and
countermeasures to protect our forces in any environment that
we are asked to operate in.
We are also modernizing how healthcare is delivered. The
Army has pioneered virtual health in Somalia and recently in
response to Hurricane Maria. We linked virtual health
capabilities in Puerto Rico with those clinicians in Texas and
Georgia.
Our virtual health capabilities span 30 specialties,
delivered in 18 time zones, in over 30 countries and
territories.
With these virtual capacities and capabilities, we provide
remote care in multiple environments. We can also coach the
first responders at the point of injury on special lifesaving
techniques such as methods to decrease intracranial pressure or
pack and temporarily close an abdominal cavity in a gunshot
wound survivor. Imagine just doing that all remotely with the
person on the point of injury.
We are collaborating with the Food and Drug Administration
to bring freeze-dried plasma through the approval process as
expeditiously as possible.
Thanks to congressional funding, our researchers at Fort
Detrick have developed a new blood test to evaluate mild TBI
(traumatic brain injury) that has recently been approved by the
FDA (Food and Drug Administration).
None of these advancements could have been possible without
the great people that I am honored to lead. The strength of our
Army is our people. The ability to recruit, develop, employ,
and retain our soldiers who are agile, adaptable, and skilled
medical professionals is vital for us to accomplish our
mission.
As our Army stands up to futures command to ensure that the
land component of the Joint Force is ready to dominate in the
future environment, we have all but asked to change and
challenge the status quo.
As our new medicine evolves to transform in synchronization
with our service, and implement the reforms of our joint and
interagency partners, we must ensure that we remain ready to
enable our force with lifesaving and life-sustaining medical
capabilities at the point of need whenever and wherever our
Nation asks us to provide them.
I appreciate the subcommittee's work and continued support
of our soldiers, Army Medicine, and our Army.
I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant General Nadja West
Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, distinguished members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the current
state of Army Medicine and the opportunities and the challenges that
lie ahead. Your continued support enables Army Medicine to remain ready
and responsive in a complex and demanding global security environment.
It has been a privilege serving as The 44th Army Surgeon General and
Commanding General of U.S. Army Medical Command for the past 2 years,
and I am incredibly proud to lead a team of talented and dedicated
professionals. The strength of our Army is our people, Soldiers,
Civilians and Families; and we have a solemn obligation to care for
those who serve our Nation and their Families.
The United States Army must be prepared for an increasingly complex
world. Our senior defense leaders continually and clearly articulate
the concerns from North Korea, Russia, China, Iran, and terrorist
threats to the United States. In various ways, these potential
adversaries challenge America's power, influence and interests. Army
Medicine is prepared to support the Joint Force with scalable medical
capabilities in all threat scenarios and across all domains. We know
that future multi-domain conflicts will require enhanced capabilities,
to provide care at the point of injury or illness. Due to tactical or
operational circumstances, our healthcare teams may have to provide
prolonged care in environments lacking robust medical infrastructure.
Further, our mission requires that we respond to natural disasters and
infectious diseases, including possible pandemics and emerging threats.
Army Medicine has the opportunity to make significant improvements
in healthcare as we implement the National Defense Authorization Act
(NDAA) for fiscal year 2017, which will influence how we sustain
readiness. We are working closely with the Defense Health Agency (DHA)
and the rest of the Joint Health Services Enterprise (JHSE) to
implement these legislative changes, with thorough analysis, deliberate
planning and ongoing coordination. We wholeheartedly support the
transition efforts and will continue to work diligently with our JHSE
colleagues to implement NDAA requirements while improving medical
readiness, meeting the operational requirements of our Combatant
Commanders and providing quality healthcare to our patients.
We are the Nation's premier, expeditionary and globally integrated
medical force and readiness is my number one priority. We welcome the
recent 2-year bipartisan budget agreement which promised predictable
funding. With this funding, Army Medicine can provide the right medical
capabilities our warfighters need and conserve the fighting strength of
the Total Force. To that end, we will focus on Readiness, Modernization
and People, in concert with Reform, to ensure we are always ready.
readiness and health
The Army Medical Department (AMEDD) has over 180,000 patient
contacts daily. To put this in perspective, it is roughly equivalent to
reaching each person in Huntsville, Alabama every day. Yet, our
readiness mission extends beyond the walls of our Military Treatment
Facilities (MTFs). Readiness permeates everything we do from prevention
and resilience to rehabilitation and transition. There are two
essential components that make up readiness: an Army that is medically
ready and a medical force that is ready to meet the ever-evolving
challenges of today and tomorrow. First, AMEDD must ensure our Soldiers
are physically and mentally fit, ready to deploy anywhere, anytime.
Second, we must be a responsive medical capability with clinically
proficient individuals who are also worldwide deployable and adept in
their warrior tasks and drills. Many Army Medicine Soldier readiness
initiatives such as the Performance Triad, which promotes proper sleep,
nutrition and activity to improve overall health and reduce obesity;
the comprehensive pain management program to reduce reliance upon
opioids; and advances in traumatic brain injury care have garnered the
interest of the U.S. Surgeon General.
Soldier Medical Readiness
Readiness begins with a fit and healthy fighting force and is the
foundation of a strong national defense. The strength of our Army is
inextricably linked to our Soldiers' health and wellness. With that
foremost in our minds, we have enhanced individual and unit readiness
in several ways, to include: leveraging our health and readiness data,
an electronic profile system and embedding athletic trainers and
physical therapists at the unit level. We are also providing nutrition
education; wellness centers; and research through all portions of the
performance triad of sleep, activity, and nutrition. Medical readiness
is a shared Soldier and command team responsibility. However, Army
Medicine plays a decisive role in monitoring, assessing, and
identifying key health- related indicators and outcomes, as well as
providing recommendations to mitigate risks.
Through Medical Readiness Transformation (MRT) initiative, Army
Medicine focused on reducing the number of Soldiers in the most severe
non-deployment category to increase readiness of the Total Force. As a
result, the Total Force has achieved the lowest non-deployable
percentage in recent history. Additionally, the medical readiness (MR)
of the Total Army consistently improved over the past 12 months and the
Army exceeded the DoD goal. Current endeavors include the new Health
and Administrative Portal which expands MR visibility to additional
healthcare personnel for their supported Soldier populations. Regarding
the dental readiness of the force, the Total Army reached a remarkable
rate of 97.6 percent. MRT allows for better decisionmaking and
reporting, while improving communication and transparency between
Commanders and healthcare providers.
To assist in Soldier readiness and deployability, we maintain 14
Warrior Transition Units (WTUs) across the country. Warrior Care and
Transition embodies the Army's enduring promise to provide high-quality
care to our wounded, ill and injured. Since the establishment of these
organizations, nearly 77,000 Soldiers have completed the program with
approximately 43 percent (33,000) returning to duty. This is roughly
equivalent to six Brigade Combat Teams. Our WTUs have helped in
increasing readiness and provided retention cost savings for the Army.
The Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES) is also an
important aspect of continually improving Army readiness. The Army
average number of days for completing the Medical Evaluation Board
(MEB) Phase is performing better than the Army standard. Resourcing DES
staff at the MTFs ensures Soldiers are evaluated through the process
expeditiously, but with care. This translates to increased readiness
for the Army. Continuous process improvements and close coordination
with external stakeholders are necessary for continued success.
Readiness requires a broad and a carefully managed strategy to
minimize pain during the healing process. Over the last two decades,
Army Medicine has transformed its pain management strategy with great
success. Our MTFs have addressed complex pain through multidisciplinary
pain committees, which periodically review pain care plans for high
risk patients such as those with complex, difficult injuries; high
utilization of healthcare resources; or high risk pain-related
behaviors. In treating acute and chronic pain, our holistic management
system integrates traditional and non-traditional methods to ensure a
decrease in the level of pain while restoring patients' quality of
sleep, moods, and activity. In fiscal year 2016, the prevalence of
Opioid Use Disorder among the active duty Army was 0.15 percent, much
lower than the 0.90 percent rate in the overall U.S. adult population.
Our pain management program is integral to sustaining this process by
providing quality care, mitigating suffering and returning Soldiers to
the fight.
Next, in support of Army readiness, the Army has made several
innovations in behavioral health (BH) care which cannot be replicated
or purchased in the civilian healthcare system. Army Medicine has led
the way with our Embedded Behavioral Health (EBH) program. The practice
of assigning BH providers to operational units has consistently been
recognized as a DoD-wide best practice. More Soldiers are receiving
care in the outpatient setting, allowing clinicians to manage BH
conditions earlier, before crises occur.
The Behavioral Health Data Portal (BHDP) is recognized as the DoD
frontrunner in BH outcomes monitoring, as it enables precision
medicine, enhances quality and continuity of care, and contains systems
for providing individual feedback and action at the point of care.
Overall use of BH care increased from approximately 900,000 encounters
in fiscal year 2007 to over 2.25 million in fiscal year 2017; precision
BH care, enabled by the BHDP, enhanced the benefit level of treatment
provided during these visits. Army Medicine will continue to refine and
build on successes in the BHDP to enhance our ability to monitor
clinical outcome metrics and refine BH programs based on their metrics.
We are excited to report we have shared the BHDP with the DHA to
implement throughout the Services, thereby benefitting all Service
Members. Efforts continue to advance BHDP functional integration into
MHS GENESIS, the new electronic health record for the DoD.
Other key components of ensuring medical readiness are improving
our ability to execute preventive medicine, public health, health
surveillance and health risk assessment. This minimizes incidences or
the severity of disease or illness. AMEDD works to protect our people
against diseases or Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear,
Explosives hazards by applying uniform and timely countermeasures in
our Army and across the Joint Force.
Ready and Responsive Medical Capability and Force Development
The demand signal from the Army and the Joint Force is the
foundation of our ready and responsive medical force. Their
requirements drive how Army Medicine recruits, trains and operates,
from expeditionary and prehospital to primary and tertiary care. This
means maintaining our skilled medical force through daily MTF
operations, medical training, and education programs. Our training
facilities are essential to that end.
We use our Medical Simulation Training Centers at 21 locations to
augment training outside of our MTFs. For example, the Anderson
Simulation Center, located at Madigan Army Medical Center, Joint Base
Lewis-McChord, WA, is the first DoD facility to be accredited both by
the American College of Surgeons and the Society for Simulation in
Healthcare. The Center is one of seven sites nationwide to hold Level 1
accreditation by the Society for Simulation in Healthcare and the only
site in Washington State and Northern Oregon that provides the
Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS), Endoscopic Surgery (FES),
and Robotic Surgery (FRS) via simulation training. Anderson serves as
the primary training site for FLS training in Washington State and
certifies both military and civilian doctors in training to meet the
simulation requirement for their residencies further embracing
opportunities to collaborate with civilian partners; our Simulation
Center at William Beaumont Army Medical Center in El Paso, TX also
works with the University of Texas for its residency training programs.
We are extremely proud of the world class medical education and
training we provide.
Army Medicine runs the largest Graduate Medical Education (GME)
training program in the DoD. Annually, we train over 1,500 physicians
in our MTFs. Our reputation for superior clinical training and
leadership development boosts recruiting and retention efforts and our
first time medical board certification pass rate of about 92 percent
well exceeds the 86 percent national average in fiscal year 2017. Our
GME programs are vital force generation and retention tools. The reach
of Army GME extends across all Army components. Those leaving active
duty service are a primary source of GME-trained physicians for the
nation's civilian healthcare system, as well as the Army Reserves and
National Guard, helping to offset civilian physician training
shortages.
In addition to GME, the Army Medical Department Center and School
(AMEDDC&S) located in San Antonio, Texas is the largest civilian-
accredited service school. Annually, we train more than 31,000 U.S.
students and 330 International students. This includes enlisted,
officers, warrant officers and Civilians in diverse graduate,
leadership and technical programs. The AMEDDC&S has 13 Master's Degree
Programs and Doctoral Programs, three of which are ranked in the top 10
nationally by U.S. News and World Report.
Despite our GME reputation and efforts, we are challenged in our
recruiting efforts to acquire some low density specialties. Orthopedic,
thoracic, and general surgery are critically short specialties for Army
Medicine across all components, as are emergency medicine,
anesthesiology and psychiatry.
We are actively working to adapt and align residency and fellowship
training allocations to emphasize the sustainment of trauma care
capability. Moving forward we will continue to expand partnerships with
civilian institutions to establish enduring training agreements. We are
also continuing to collaborate across the Services to leverage tri-
service training platforms to optimize individual and team training
opportunities. Finally, in an effort to recruit and retain these
critical skillsets, we maximize our use of student loan repayment and
financial assistance programs, health professions scholarships,
accession bonuses and special pay and incentives. Predictable,
continued funding is essential to maintain and enhance these programs
and keep them relevant to recruitment and retention efforts.
The success of Army Medicine is ultimately determined by our
ability to meet the operational requirements of the Combatant
Commanders. The AMEDDC&S developed the curriculum for and graduated the
first 10 students in December 2017 from the Expeditionary Combat Medic
(ECM) program. The ECM is a force multiplier that will produce medics
able to provide additional advanced medical services to include
treatment of common conditions, prevention of disease and treatment of
combat trauma casualties. We estimate that the Total Force requirement
will be 2,600 ECMs by 2024. ECM represents the primary solution to
developing prolonged casualty care. It addresses FORSCOM's needs and we
believe this capability will decrease morbidity and mortality in a
major conflict.
The lessons of operations in Afghanistan and Iraq have informed
requirements for medical capability and development of force structure.
The Expeditionary Resuscitation Surgical Team (ERST) training also at
San Antonio is an additional training set to increase the readiness of
our medical force and meet the operational requirements for our Joint
Force. The three-week course provides advance surgical, resuscitative
and critical care training to surgical teams supporting operating
forces in austere, remote environments.
In the area of training, Army Medicine has developed Critical
Clinical Training Task Lists (CCTTLs) for 98 AMEDD Officer Areas of
Concentration and 24 enlisted military occupational specialties. This
enhances individual and unit readiness in support of Army and Combatant
Commanders' war plans and contingency operations by codifying unit
specific mission essential tasks.
Army Medicine is also able to increase its readiness through Army
and Joint Global Health Engagement. These international programs are a
form of medical cooperation, advancing best practices in military
medicine while assuring our allies and partners of our commitment to
their security. Army Medicine is postured to participate in
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief activities when directed by
our Nation.
Each of our Services provide medical support to Combatant
Commanders as directed in strategic and operational documents. During
early phases of any operation, setting the theater is essential to
mission success and enables successful transition to other military
operations. For ground operations, Army medical forces are the likely
force provider. Army medical personnel are integrated into all echelons
of support from organic medical forces in the Brigade Combat Team to
theater level hospitalization. The AMEDD makes up approximately 70
percent of medical force structure allocated to Combatant Commanders
and routinely provide support to the Joint Force. To reduce risk to
ground-based operations, we must remain ready--manned, trained, and
equipped, to support military operations.
Although medical support is a shared responsibility, the Army is
responsible for providing logistical support to Joint Forces assigned
to areas of operation. Currently Army Medicine has been identified as
the Theater Lead Agent for Medical Materiel for five of six Combatant
Commands including the Korean peninsula. We ensure a coordinated and
integrated medical logistics support plan for the Joint Force. For
contingency operations, AMEDD forces are the lead for the medical
logistics support essential to operational success.
modernization
Army Medicine has a long history and proven record of support to
our Nation, from Army surgeons operating independently during the
Revolutionary War to our current Globally Integrated Operations. We are
continually evolving to meet the environment we face. Thankfully, we
have progressed from the era of leeches and bloodletting to now
employing advanced technologies, such as virtual health and freeze
dried plasma. In the process, the battlefield survivability rate and
the overall health of the force has improved exponentially. Our
successes are due to the great team of researchers and modern
technologies we employ.
The U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (MRMC) is
unique to the Department of Defense and drives medical innovation. It
combines Medical Research, Development and Acquisition capabilities
with strategic and operational logistics as a total life cycle
management command. MRMC activities ensure that our Soldiers remain in
optimal health and are equipped to protect themselves from disease and
injury. Cutting edge technology research by our professionals in six
medical research laboratory commands in the continental United States
and across the globe have added to the readiness, lethality and
survivability of the Total Force. Proper funding has allowed MRMC to
make advancements in combat casualty care, clinical rehabilitative
medicine, medical training, health information, infectious disease
prevention and operational medicine. There is no nation on earth that
approaches the reach and scale of such support to deployable forces.
Virtual Health (VH)
Our ability to bring care closer to our patients, deployed or
stationed at home, through telecommunications is one of the most
promising and cost effective developments in Army Medicine in a
generation. In 1992, the Army pioneered portable virtual health (VH)
systems for operations in Somalia. Twenty-five years later and in
response to Hurricane Maria, the 14th Combat Support Hospital (14th
CSH) deployed to Humacao, Puerto Rico where they established clinical
operations for our fellow citizens including VH capabilities. The 14th
CSH in Puerto Rico coordinated their care through providers at Brooke
Army Medical Center in Texas and Eisenhower Army Medical Center in
Georgia.
Since 1992, there has been an exponential improvement in VH, and it
is now a global endeavor. The Army designated its first Virtual Medical
Center (V-MEDCEN) at Brooke Army Medical Center. We offer over 30
clinical specialties across 18 time zones, in over 30 countries and
territories, which enables providers to remotely monitor patient
vitals, provide virtual consultations, and assist medics engaged in
combat casualty care. VH is a way to transform access in garrison
facilities, patients' homes or at points of injury. The operational
benefits of this innovation include providing remote trauma and
advanced burn care and coaching special lifesaving techniques such as
methods to decrease intracranial pressure in a Soldier with a traumatic
brain injury, packing and temporarily closing the abdominal cavity in a
gunshot wound survivor accessing deep vessels to stop bleeding and save
a limb in a Soldier with a severe leg wound. Technology now allows Army
Medicine to mitigate the challenge of distance to save lives, limbs and
eyesight.
Medical Protection
Protecting the force through treatment or from infectious disease
is essential to the AMEDD mission. The DoD, through the MRMC, is the
largest sponsor of trauma and injury research and development in the
Nation. In fact, no other private or Federal entity provides
significant funding to advanced topics in acute casualty care. Through
this research, the DoD spearheaded development of a first-of-its kind
technique to control hemorrhaging from inside the blood vessel a
balloon that temporarily stops blood flow from large blood vessels to
the extremities while keeping intact the supply to vital organs.
Additionally, MRMC is collaborating with the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to bring life-saving products such as Freeze-Dried
Plasma, through the approval process as expeditiously as possible.
Future prolonged battlefield evacuation times will require these types
of novel solutions to improve battlefield survivability.
Malaria is still the number one infectious disease threat for
deployed forces. Due to the efforts of Army infectious disease
researchers, two anti-malaria drugs are in final stages of clinical
trials and FDA license packages. Two malaria vaccines also continue
testing in clinical trials as part of a broader DoD malaria vaccine
portfolio. For the first time, these candidates demonstrate a greater
than 85 percent efficacy, lasting up to 6 months against controlled
human malaria infections. Continued support for these programs will
result in a viable solution for Service members.
Finally, our modernization efforts have generated tremendous
progress regarding traumatic brain injuries (TBIs). Since 2000, Army
personnel have sustained over 217,000 TBIs, 177,088 of which were
classified as mild. Thanks to Congressional funding, the Army
researchers at Fort Detrick, Maryland have discovered a new blood test
to evaluate mild TBI, which was recently approved by the FDA. Soon, our
medical personnel will no longer have to rely on the symptoms of
concussions alone to diagnose TBIs, but will have access to an
objective marker of injury to the brain, all from a simple blood test.
This test has great potential to change the practice of medicine for
brain injury, in particular, to quickly evaluate injured Soldiers in
remote locations.
people
As previously mentioned, the strength of our Army is its people.
Notably, we have a ready medical force capable of global deployment for
the full range of military operations as we ensure the Total Force is
ready to fight and win our Nation's wars.
The recruitment, development, employment and retention of Soldiers
who are adaptive, skilled medical professionals is critical to the
ability of Army Medicine to conduct its mission across multiple
domains. Properly managing talent management is of vital importance to
enhancing readiness by aligning the unique talents of our people to the
needs of our Army in supporting the JHSE and any operational
requirements.
Our Soldiers and Civilians must be developed and equipped with
tools that enable effective, agile and adaptive leaders. Our education
and training must be developed in tandem with development of a career
progression model that identifies key assignments that impart the
experience and knowledge crucial to understand and solve the complex
and dynamic challenges associated with globally integrated health
services. These steps will produce medical leaders and staffs who
understand how to plan, coordinate and build synergy from medical
capabilities inherent to all Services, interagency, multinational
partners and nongovernmental organizations.
The ultimate outcome is Army Soldiers who are medical professionals
capable of operating within a joint framework and warfighting leaders
informed of the force- multiplying capabilities of JHSE. To this end,
we are committed to ensuring all Soldiers and Civilians are provided
full career opportunities to reach their highest potential and their
vast talent is realized.
conclusion
There is no other health service support capability on the planet
that compares to Army Medicine. We must be capable of transporting an
entire hospital, moving it half way around the world at a moment's
notice and establishing it where needed. We have been a reliable health
enabler supporting our Army and the Joint Force since 1775 and will
continue that mission as long as our Army and the Joint Force continue
to call on us. Congressional support has enabled Army Medicine to
advance military medical care in support of our Army, the Joint Force
and that has also advanced the healthcare system of our Nation.
The Strength of our Army is derived from our Soldiers, and in turn,
their Families. Our strength is not derived from a weapon or a weapon
system alone; it originates from our people. Army Medicine is the
driving force behind the medical innovations and technologies that
allow us to adapt to future challenges that may arise at home or
abroad. We will provide prolonged care at the point of need and through
every echelon of care, while continuing to meet or exceed national
quality of care standards. This is our solemn obligation to our Nation;
our readiness to support our Nation's Army will always be assured.
I remain committed working with all of our DoD, Joint, interagency,
intergovernmental, multinational and civilian partners to improving
readiness, enhancing the healthcare delivered to our beneficiaries,
evolving to support the Army and Joint Force in future conflicts, and
continuing to take care of our Soldiers, Civilians, and their Families.
I appreciate the subcommittee's work and continued support to our
Soldiers, Army Medicine and our Army.
Senator Shelby. Admiral Faison.
STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL C. FORREST FAISON, III,
SURGEON GENERAL, UNITED STATES NAVY
Admiral Faison. Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin,
distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to update you today on Navy
Medicine.
America's Navy and Marine Corps are busy, deployed and
operating around the world. I want you to know that the men and
women of Navy Medicine are serving alongside them providing
world class care anytime, anywhere.
On behalf of the Navy Medicine team, we remain grateful to
all of you for your support and confidence that you have placed
in us.
While my written statement provides a detailed overview of
Navy Medicine, I want to emphasize that our greatest
responsibility continues to be the readiness and support of a
highly deployed Navy and Marine Corps team.
To this end, we are preparing Navy Medicine and working
closely with our sister services and the Defense Health Agency
for the future fight, and forging a system of integrated
readiness and health.
To ensure our personnel can meet the demands of combat
casualty care in the maritime environment, and what will be a
very different fight from OIF (Operation Iraqi Freedom) and OEF
(Operation Enduring Freedom), we must leverage new, critical
training and skill sustainment opportunities.
Much of the success that we saw in saving lives on the
battlefield during our most recent conflicts can be directly
attributable to the heroic work of our first responders, our
corpsmen, medics, and technicians.
To address these emerging challenges, we have launched a
series of comprehensive programs targeted at preparing our
corpsmen to meet their lifesaving responsibilities and
missions, whether aboard a destroyer at sea or embedded with
the Marine Corps in conflict.
Specifically, we modernized and expanded our hospital corps
``A'' school curriculum, established a new Personal
Qualification System, deployed a Connected Corpsmen in the
Community pilot to increase competencies and confidence of our
Corpsmen, and developed a trauma training partnership with
Stroger Hospital of Cook County to provide our Corpsmen with
experience in Level 1 trauma care. Senator Durbin, we are
grateful for your support in this initiative.
We have also identified an opportunity to expand trauma
capabilities within Navy Medicine at the Naval Medical Center
Camp Lejeune as we stand up a trauma center at that location
and are actively pursuing designation as a Level 3 trauma
center there.
This effort will result in increased readiness and skill
sustainment for our providers while providing a valuable
service to the community.
We continue to embed our mental health providers directly
with the operational fleet and Marine Forces to support our
Sailors and Marines. These efforts reduce the distance between
providers and those seeking help, decreasing stigma, and
improving resiliency.
In addition, we are keenly focused on the importance of
providing immediate support to psychological traumatic events
that occur in operational environments. Most recently, we
deployed our Special Psychiatric Rapid Intervention Teams, our
SPRINT teams, to support the crews and families of the USS
McCain and Fitzgerald following those ship collisions in the
Pacific last year.
Mental health issues after complex or catastrophic events
frequently do not appear until later, sometimes much later. To
address this, we have also implemented a new tracking registry
for survivors to ensure that, as they continue to serve, they
have rapid and easy access to mental health services when and
where needed regardless of assignment in the future.
Navy Medicine continues to conduct worldwide research and
development in support of our warfighters and their deployment
readiness. These efforts range from trials of a new malaria
vaccine, to assessing the threats of newly discovered viruses
in far reaching corners of the world.
Our researchers are also directly engaged with the Naval
Aviation community in conducting vital research aimed at
understanding and mitigating physiologic episodes affecting
aircrews in tactical aircraft.
As I speak to you this morning, U.S. Naval Ship Mercy, one
of our two hospital ships, is participating in Pacific
Partnership 2018, a major multilateral humanitarian civic
assistance mission in the Indo-Pacific. She is currently in Sri
Lanka providing care in the region and working alongside our
international partners.
These missions are foundational to our global health
engagement strategy and provide unmatched training for our
medical personnel to respond to humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief operations, both domestically and around the
world.
Navy Medicine is comprised of military and civilian
personnel focused on caring for and protecting the health of
Sailors, Marines, and their families. Our success is based on
these skilled and dedicated professionals, and we appreciate
your support in providing the special and incentive pays
authorities and resources needed to recruit and retain this
talented workforce in a highly competitive workplace.
In closing, my guiding principles to the men and women of
Navy Medicine remain consistent: honor the trust placed in our
hands and the privilege of caring for America's sons and
daughters, honor the uniform we wear, honor the privilege of
leadership.
The men and women of Navy Medicine live these principles
every day and make me proud beyond words. Again, I thank you
for your support and look forward to working with you during
these transformational times in military medicine.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Vice Admiral C. Forrest Faison, III
Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to update you on Navy
Medicine. America's Navy and Marine Corps are busy--deployed and
operating forward around the world. I can assure you that the men and
women of Navy Medicine are serving with them and providing world-class
care, anytime, anywhere. On behalf of the Navy Medicine team, we remain
grateful to you for the strong support and confidence you have placed
in us.
strategic construct
Navy Medicine is fully aligned with the strategic imperatives set
out by the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) in his Design for
Maintaining Maritime Superiority and by the Commandant of the Marine
Corps (CMC) in his Planning Guidance. Our priorities are built on this
framework and we are focused on ensuring Navy Medicine is that ready,
rapidly responsive medical force that our Navy, Marine Corps, and Joint
Forces need and expect to support them and their demanding operational
missions. We protect the health and readiness of Sailors and Marines so
they are medically ready to meet their missions. Given the current
operational tempo of the Navy and Marine Corps, all of us in Navy
Medicine understand the significance of these responsibilities and we
will never waiver from our commitment to those entrusted to our care.
We must do this within a culture of constructive self-assessment,
improvement and innovation. My guiding principles to the men and women
of Navy Medicine remain consistent: (1) Honor the trust placed in our
hands to care for America's sons and daughters; (2) Honor the uniform
we wear; and (3) Honor the privilege of leadership.
The Department of Defense (DoD), Joint Staff and Services continue
to focus on the congressionally-directed changes to the Military Health
System (MHS) contained in the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
for fiscal year 2017. Careful and deliberate progress is being made in
the ongoing transition. With any transition of this significance,
foremost must be the opportunities that will allow the Services to more
efficiently and effectively execute their respective readiness
missions. Readiness and combat support remain our number one priority
and mission. This is especially relevant for the maritime forces as we
prepare for future conflicts that will be very different, and contested
in various environments, than the Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation
Enduring Freedom ground war.
The military treatment facility (MTF) has been the epicenter of
readiness for decades. As we move forward to realize the many
opportunities possible under NDAA fiscal year 2017, we must be mindful
of our core responsibilities of readiness, fleet support and
operational response and preserve those Service tenets necessary to
meet mission including: command and control responsibilities of their
uniformed personnel must be in place to ensure that our medical
personnel are trained and organized to execute their readiness mission;
oversight and control of the resources necessary to do those missions;
providing operationally relevant training; and, ensuring we have the
agility to get to our military personnel quickly.
You expect our Nation's armed forces to be ready to fight tonight.
That means being able to save lives tonight with medical forces that
are ready, prepared, and present. You rightly hold me, CNO, CMC and the
Secretary of the Navy accountable for this responsibility. Department
of Navy (DON) leadership is fully engaged in developing an
organizational construct that is responsive to Congressional intent,
while maintaining critical capabilities and framework to support the
Fleet and Fleet Marine Forces and, if needed, to be where it counts,
when it counts to save lives.
I fully support the President's Budget for fiscal year 2019 and the
resources it provides to fulfill the medical mission of the Navy and
Marine Corps. I assure you that we will continue to apply sound fiscal
stewardship at all levels throughout Navy Medicine and derive best
value from resources provided to us.
preparing navy medicine for the future fight
Navy Medicine is preparing our personnel to meet the demands of
combat casualty care in the maritime environment and we must leverage
current and new critical training and skills sustainment opportunities.
Much of the success that we saw in saving lives on the battlefield
during our most recent conflicts can be directly attributable to the
heroic work of our first responders--Hospital Corpsmen. The Corpsman is
the most important member of the medical team for combat survival.
While building upon this success, we recognize the rapidly changing
security environment dictates that we adapt and update our training at
all levels to meet the demands of future conflicts. To address these
emerging challenges, Navy Medicine launched a series of comprehensive
programs targeted at preparing our Corpsmen to meet their lifesaving
missions whether at sea aboard a destroyer or embedded with Marines
operating forward. These efforts include:
--Hospital Corps ``A'' School Curriculum: Implemented a modernized
and expanded Hospital Corps ``A'' School curriculum focused on
casualty care sustainment in sea- based and expeditionary
environments.
--Hospital Corpsmen Personnel Qualification Standards (PQS):
Developed a new PQS program that targets the knowledge, skills
and abilities required for all Corpsmen to perform across the
spectrum of operations. Their clinical experience is vital to
their performance, and combat survival, on the battlefield.
--Trauma Training Pilot: Initiated the Hospital Corpsmen Clinical
Trauma Experience Proof of Concept--a trauma training
partnership between Navy Medicine, the James H. Stroger Jr.
Hospital of Cook County (a Level 1 trauma center) and the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Our first cohort of 30 Corpsmen
completed training earlier this year and we are assessing
expansion opportunities with additional trauma centers
throughout the United States.
--Connected Corpsmen in the Community: To save lives, a Corpsman must
have the confidence in themselves and their abilities. Nothing
provides confidence better than caring for patients. We
established a pilot program in Pensacola to increase
confidence, clinical experience and core competencies by
allowing Corpsmen to deliver care, with appropriate supervision
and guidelines, to active duty service members outside the MTF
and beyond normal working hours. In addition, Corpsmen provide
care using telemedicine capabilities with oversight provided by
licensed providers. Beyond helping Corpsmen, this initiative is
also keeping aviation students in class, not at the hospital.
Later this year, we will be implementing this program aboard
Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton.
In addition to our partnership with Cook County Trauma and Burn
Unit, the Navy Trauma Training Center (NTTC) is a collaboration with
the Los Angeles County + University of Southern California (LAC+USC)
Medical Center where our teams are embedded in a high volume trauma
environment. NTTC trained 266 Navy Medicine and Special Operations
personnel in fiscal year 2017 and over 3,300 providers since 2002.
We have also identified an opportunity to expand capabilities
within Navy Medicine as the Naval Medical Center Camp Lejeune is
actively pursuing designation as a Level III trauma center. This effort
will result in increased readiness and skills sustainment for all our
providers--particularly our trauma teams--while providing a valuable
trauma response for Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune and the local
community.
Importantly, graduate medical education programs in place at our
teaching facilities remain critical to preparing Navy physicians to
meet Combatant Commander requirements for full spectrum operations
including combat casualty care and humanitarian assistance/disaster
relief. We run some of the top programs in the country, allowing us to
look into the eyes of America's moms and dads and confidently assure
them that the men and women caring for their sons and daughters have
the best training and preparation our Nation can provide. They are also
our steady source of trained physicians to meet the needs of the Fleet
and Fleet Marine Force during the vicissitudes of recruiting and
retention.
As part of our modernization efforts, we continue to address
requirements for modular, scalable and adaptable expeditionary medical
capabilities--both ashore and afloat--to reduce time/distance to care
in distributed operations. This priority is evident in Navy Medicine's
accelerated fielding (manned, trained and equipped) seven-person Role 2
Light Maneuver (R2LM) capability which was recently tested in the
amphibious exercise Dawn Blitz 2017. Smaller and more mobile, the R2LM
capability is designed to provide advanced resuscitation and damage
control surgery far forward ashore in support of conventional or
special operations forces and afloat on any surface vessel. We achieved
R2LM initial operating capability at the end fiscal year 2017, in just
7 months. In addition, we are developing a provisional containerized
Role 2 Enhanced capability for further testing and evaluation. This
will provide the increased adaptability for primary surgery, intensive
care, and acute care ward beds afloat on almost any cargo ship or
ashore. Along with other important lines of effort, this work is
focused on improving our expeditionary medical capabilities to meet
warfighter requirements. We are taking and applying the lessons from
Iraq and Afghanistan to the maritime domain.
In addition, both Pacific Partnership 2017 and Continuing Promise
2017, major humanitarian civic assistance (HCA) missions in the Pacific
and Central/South America, respectively, utilized expeditionary fast
transport vessels to move personnel and equipment ashore to provide
medical support. Hospital ship, USNS MERCY (T-AH 19), is currently
underway and participating in Pacific Partnership 2018. These HCA
missions are an integral component of the global health engagement
strategy, providing unmatched training and international exchange
opportunities for Navy Medicine personnel as well as building local
partner capacity.
optimizing navy medicine for the warfighter
Our mission is to keep the Navy and Marine Corps family ready,
healthy and on the job. Sailors and Marines must be physically and
mentally capable to meet their demanding mission and we want them to
deploy confident that their families are well-cared for during their
absence. One of CNO's guiding principles is toughness and the need to
tap all sources of strength to succeed and win. Health is vital to
building and sustaining this resiliency.
We continue to leverage the success of our embedded mental health
program. Embedding mental health assets directly within line units
decreases the distance between providers and those seeking help,
fostering improved support for Sailors and Marines while decreasing
stigma. Embedded mental health providers now represent 25 percent of
our mental health officer billets and roughly the same percentage for
all enlisted behavioral health technician billets. These mental health
providers are now permanently assigned throughout Fleet and Marine
units and complemented by additional mental health providers in primary
care settings and the expanded use of telebehavioral health.
We are keenly focused on the importance of providing immediate
support to psychological traumatic events that occur in the operational
environments. We deployed our Special Psychiatric Rapid Intervention
Teams (SPRINT) to support the crews and families following the ship
collisions in the Pacific last year. Mental health issues after complex
or catastrophic events frequently do not appear until later, sometimes
much later. To address this, we have also implemented tracking
registries for survivors to ensure that, as they continue to serve,
they have rapid and ready access to mental health services when and
where needed. In addition, we continue to work collaboratively within
the Navy and Marine Corps on suicide prevention efforts. All active and
reserve component Sailors and Marines are now screened for mental
health concerns via the annual Periodic Health Assessment (PHA). In
addition, our Psychological Health Outreach Program (PHOP) provides
specific and valued access to important behavioral health services for
reserve Sailors and Marines.
Prevention, treatment and research of traumatic brain injury (TBI)
are critical to keeping warfighters healthy. TBI programs throughout
Navy Medicine, including those at the Intrepid Spirit Centers onboard
Marine Corps Bases Camp Lejeune and Camp Pendleton, provide
comprehensive treatment to Sailors and Marines impacted by TBI. The
return to duty rate continues to be over 85 percent. Programs have been
developed at Camp Lejeune and Camp Pendleton, along with Naval Medical
Centers Portsmouth and San Diego, to address specific needs of special
operators, including condensed comprehensive assessment, cohort
treatment plans, and shortened treatment duration to expedite return to
the unit. We continue to make progress while recognizing the importance
of robust research collaborations with leading academic institutions
and private sector partners in furthering our understanding of TBI and
ways to improve exposure monitoring, diagnosis and treatment.
I also want to highlight the Navy Comprehensive Pain Management
Program (NCPMP) and our continued focus on enhancing the safety of
opioid therapy for the treatment of pain. Earlier this year, we issued
a comprehensive Long-term Opioid Therapy Safety Program policy that
directs specific actions throughout Navy Medicine and emphasizes safe
opioid prescribing practices including provider training requirements,
patient screening, and surveillance protocols. Over the last 4 years
(fiscal year 2013--fiscal year 2017), we saw a 35 percent decline in
the number of opioid prescriptions for active duty Navy and Marine
Corps personnel and a 30 percent decline in the number of personnel
receiving those prescriptions as part of their treatment. We have also
expanded the scope of this program with continued incorporation of
complementary and integrative medicine modalities.
The Navy Medicine Research and Development (R&D) enterprise is
comprised of eight laboratories that conduct world-wide, operationally-
focused research in support of our warfighters and their deployment
readiness. Key areas include infectious diseases, biological defense,
combat casualty care, environmental health as well as undersea medicine
and several other important and relevant areas. At all labs,
researchers are confronting some of our most significant challenges
that impact the health and readiness of our globally deployed service
members. Emerging infectious diseases require constant attention
throughout our R&D enterprise to protect the readiness of our forces.
These efforts range from closing in on the development of a malaria
vaccine to assessing the threat of newly discovered viruses in far
reaching corners of the world. Researchers, led by the Navy Medical
Research Unit--Dayton, are directly engaged with the Naval Aviation
community in conducting vital research aimed at understanding and
mitigating physiological episodes (PEs) affecting aircrew in tactical
jet aircraft. In addition, our Navy Medicine flight surgeons and
aerospace/operational physiologists are involved in all aspects of PE
research, mitigation and treatment.
For injured Sailors and Marines, we continue to implement process
improvements to accelerate the disability screening process, while
maintaining outstanding medical care. We fully deployed the new Sailor
and Marine Readiness Tracking (SMART) program to document and track all
temporarily medically-restricted Sailors and Marines at Navy MTFs. To
foster earlier outcomes, we implemented a Temporary Limited Duty
Operations (TEMPO) process to ensure a multi-disciplinary team actively
reviews and manages all Sailors and Marines identified in a medically-
restricted status. An important developing component of the SMART
portfolio is the Health Readiness Common Unfitting List Evaluation
System (HERCULES) module which identifies Sailors and Marines with
potentially deployment limiting medical conditions and supports
providers as they assign the appropriate duty status. In addition,
deployability will be a consideration at every encounter with Navy
Medicine, particularly during the annual PHA. All these initiatives are
making a difference in helping us get Sailors and Marines healthy and
back on the job.
Health promotion and disease prevention are essential to sustaining
a medically ready force which is why promoting tobacco free living is
so important. Tobacco use affects the health, fitness and readiness of
the force and that of their families. Navy Medicine providers encourage
all who use tobacco to quit, discourage others from starting and strive
to protect everyone from the harmful effects of secondhand smoke. Navy
MTFs and operational units provide counseling, a variety of FDA-
approved medications, and assistance to those who want to quit. We have
more work to do but I can assure you that we are committed to reducing
the prevalence of all forms of tobacco use in the Department of the
Navy.
providing world-class care
The healthcare landscape is rapidly changing. Convenience and
experience of care, along with connected technologies, are often the
primary drivers in our patient's healthcare decisions, particularly for
our active duty service members and their families. We recognize these
dynamics as they are particularly relevant and impactful as we progress
in transforming the MHS.
As part of these efforts moving forward, the DHA will assume
administration, direction and control of the MTFs. In the meantime, in
conjunction with the other Services and DHA, we are working to improve
access to care for all beneficiaries to include reducing variability in
appointing and scheduling processes across primary and specialty care
to improve patient satisfaction and convenience of care. All of us
recognize the importance of promoting additional options for accessing
care and measuring our performance through a standardized set of
metrics. These efforts are particularly important since we want Sailors
and Marines to get the care they need when they need it so they are
medically ready to deploy. We currently have 43 Marine- Centered
Medical Home and Fleet-Centered Medical Homes in place to provide
improved access for operational Marines and Sailors.
We are making sustained progress in improving patient safety,
clinical quality and high reliability thereby improving the care
provided to service members both at MTFs and in operational settings.
Navy Medicine providers working in MTFs today could be deployed
tomorrow so our robust culture of patient safety remains foundational
to the care we provide, anytime, anywhere. We recently created the
position of Chief Medical Officer at all our MTFs. These are senior
experienced physicians monitor quality and safety in all aspects of
care delivery. They are led by the Navy Medicine Chief Quality Officer,
a two-star admiral who meets with them monthly to review issues. That
network also drives rapid dissemination of information about safety
issues and risks to ensure information is quickly passed to all our
MTFs worldwide for issues impacting patient safety or care quality.
Correspondingly, we have established better analytics to link data and
help improve risk identification, real-time decision- making and active
surveillance at all levels. All of us in the MHS are committed to these
efforts and will continue to build on the progress we are making to
ensure our service members receive the safest and highest quality of
care possible.
Another important component of optimizing our care is the continued
implementation and expansion of virtual health capabilities. Leveraging
telehealth technology allows us to eliminate geographical barriers in
providing care to Sailors and Marines in all environments including
challenging operational settings. Employing the capabilities of Health
Experts on-Line and other systems is expanding the reach of specialists
to operational units, effectively reducing the number of medical
evacuations and referrals to the private sector network. Virtual
health, including the expanded use of smartphone and tablet
applications, continues to be an important component of our care model
as we work to ensure Sailors and Marines have access to high quality
care, where and when they want it.
Successful deployment of MHS GENESIS, DoD's new electronic health
record, is critical for us all in military medicine. When fully
implemented, MHS GENESIS will be transformative in that it will affect
all aspects of how healthcare is delivered in our MTFs, as well as
operational environments and well into the future. We must ensure that
we get the deployment moving forward safely and be relentless in
rapidly implementing corrective actions and lessons learned. Two of our
Navy Medicine commands, Naval Health Clinic Oak Harbor and Naval
Hospital Bremerton, implemented MHS GENESIS in the fourth quarter
fiscal year 2017 as part of initial operating capability site
deployment in the Pacific Northwest. Both commands are encouraged by
the potential of MHS GENESIS and are diligently working hard to address
the initial implementation challenges that are associated with a new
EHR deployment. The Services continue to collaborate closely with the
Program Executive Office, Defense Healthcare Management Systems (PEO
DHMS) and the DHA in addressing important aspects related to MHS
GENESIS deployment and the way forward.
valuing an outstanding team of professionals
CNO consistently emphasizes the strength of our one Navy team--our
Sailors and Navy civilians--as a key line of effort in meeting mission.
His message resonates with all of us in Navy Medicine as we are
comprised of approximately 63,000 military and civilian personnel
focused on caring for and protecting the health of Sailors, Marines and
their families. Our success is based on these skilled and dedicated
professionals and we appreciate your support in providing the special
and incentive pays, authorities and resources needed to recruit and
retain this talented workforce in a highly competitive marketplace.
Recruiting Navy Medicine Department officers, both active component
(AC) and reserve component (RC), remains an essential priority. In
fiscal year 2017, Navy Recruiting was successful in meeting goals for
AC officer corps (Medical, Dental, Nurse and Medical Service Corps)
while RC recruiting met 70 percent of goal. Our most significant
challenges continue to be in RC Medical Corps (62 percent), Nurse Corps
(73 percent) and Medical Service Corps (78 percent). We are not immune
to the pressures of American healthcare which is making it difficult
for providers, especially those in solo practice, to have the time for
reserve service. While overall manning in both the AC and RC is stable,
we must remain focused on ensuring we have the proper specialty mix of
personnel to meet operational missions, now and in the future. These
efforts require us to be particularly attuned to increasing, and
changing, requirements for both the Navy and Marine Corps, particularly
in our critical wartime specialties. We are working hard to target
these specialties in our training and accession plans while rigorously
assessing our overall Medical Department manpower requirements to
support our readiness mission. Importantly, this focus must also
include our Hospital Corpsmen and we have identified several
Independent Duty Corpsmen (IDC) Navy Enlisted Classification codes
(NECs) for recruiting and retention incentives.
Navy civilians continue to demonstrate their importance to Navy
Medicine, fulfilling diverse and essential roles. They contribute as
providers, researchers, instructors, program managers and in countless
other key positions throughout the Navy Medicine enterprise. They
provide continuity and stability in our facilities as well as skillful
mentorship and training to assigned military personnel. To recognize
their contribution and ensure they continue to grow professionally, we
established a new Civilian Corps Chief position, filled by a member of
the Senior Executive Service, to provide career guidance and
opportunities for them. Navy Medicine continues to leverage authorized
flexibilities using several special hiring authorities. In addition to
Expedited Hiring Authority (EHA) for Certain Health Care positions, the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) has delegated Direct Hire
Authority (DHA) for hard-to-fill healthcare positions such as
physicians, nurses and pharmacists. In fiscal year 2017, 470 positions
were filled using EHA and DHA for hard-to-fill occupations; an
improvement of almost 100 hires over fiscal year 2016.
moving forward
As the Navy Surgeon General, first and foremost, I am committed to
ensuring that the Navy Medicine team is trained and equipped to keep
Sailors and Marines healthy and on the job today, and, moving forward,
that our personnel are ready with the skills and confidence necessary
to meet the challenges of the next conflict. We do all in our power to
return America's sons and daughters--who volunteer and sacrifice to
defend us--home safely and alive. We are making solid progress on all
fronts, from improving the training and preparation of our Hospital
Corpsmen to save lives in combat, to force protection research
initiatives around the world, to taking full advantage of MHS reform to
refocus on our core mission and responsibility: Readiness and being
where it counts, when it counts, to save lives wherever needed.
We are honoring that trust placed in our hands. We are not ``Kaiser
in uniform'' or ``the HMO that goes to war'' but a strong, trained,
ready and formidable medical force integrated with and integral to our
Nation's fighting forces, going wherever and whenever needed to
protect, support and those in harm's way. We are part of a military
health system that delivered the highest combat survival in history in
the previous conflict and are working hard to build on that track
record for the next conflict and beyond.
Again, thank you for support and I look forward to working with you
during this pivotal time in military medicine.
Senator Shelby. General Ediger.
STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL MARK A. EDIGER, SURGEON
GENERAL, UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
General Ediger. Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify before you today.
Air Force Medicine is at a crossroads. Just as the U.S.
military is mapping its adaptation to a changing security
environment as described in our National Defense Strategy, Air
Force Medicine is at the confluence of strategic drivers that
mandate a path to newly defined future operational
capabilities.
Even as 730 medical airmen serve in deployed settings today
and thousands more support daily operations from our bases, we
see steadily increasing demands for Air Force capabilities
making the health and performance of every airman in every
environment vital to the mission.
To meet shifting operational demands, we need a different
mix of skills and capacity within the medical force that must
be provided within existing end strength. Changes in our force
mix are out of alignment with staffing requirements for legacy
hospitals and clinics requiring that we embed more deployable
teams in partner institutions, and reconsider the scope of
services we offer.
In 2017, we revamped our surgical teams by changing their
composition, training, and equipment to increase independence
and agility in coordination with our sister services in the
Military Health System.
They are known as Ground Surgical Teams consisting of only
six airmen proven capable of trauma stabilization and damage
control surgery in remote settings. We are building more Ground
Surgical Teams to increase our capacity to respond to the
combat and command.
Critical care during air medical transportation has proven
transformational for medical support and combat operations. We
are responding to a significant increase in operational
requirements for critical care air medical transport teams by
repurposing end strength into critical care skill sets.
The Chief of Staff of the Air Force directed us to expand
day to day operational medical support to enhance the health,
resilience, and fitness of airmen. We are using the experience
we have gained with embedded medical teams in selected missions
to build operational medical outreach teams through which we
deliver mission-tailored support to any squadron.
Outreach teams are currently operating at Joint Base
Elmendorf-Richardson and Whiteman Air Force Base with 15 more
teams to stand up in 2019.
To keep trauma and critical care teams ready, we
implemented in 2017 new standards for keeping deployable teams
ready specifying the annual frequency and mix of clinical
procedures necessary to sustain readiness.
We also increased our use of partnerships with premiere
institutions such as the University Medical Center in Las
Vegas, Baltimore Shock Trauma, University of Cincinnati, St.
Louis University, University of Alabama Birmingham, and
Addenbrooke Hospital in Cambridge, England. These partner
institutions have proven to be highly effective readiness
platforms for our trauma and critical care teams.
Even as we transform our medical force to meet these
operational demands, we are working vigorously to achieve the
reform specified in the fiscal year 2017 National Defense
Authorization Act and the Department's reform of the Military
Health System.
We are working to implement a framework--in close
collaboration with the Army, Navy, Joint Staff, and Defense
Health Agency--that will produce meaningful reform to
healthcare delivery while implementing a new approach to
sustaining a ready medical force.
We are in the process of a bottom-up restructuring of Air
Force medicine at every level that will reduce headquarter size
and consolidate units while enhancing our operational
capability.
We are excited about our culture of safety and continuous
improvement that we call Trusted Care. Through Trusted Care, we
have reduced serious patient safety events by more than 50
percent and implemented system-wide standard processes, such as
daily safety and process improvement huddles.
An innovation that originated with a family health team at
Ramstein Air Base has spread rapidly, significantly improving
access to care, team satisfaction, and patient satisfaction in
the primary care setting.
Air Force Medical Groups have attained national performance
recognition over the past year from entities such as the
American College of Surgeons, the Joint Commission, and the
Institute for Health Care Improvement.
As we transition to DHA (Defense Health Agency) management
of our hospitals and clinics, we will become more focused on
our growing operational responsibilities. We will be relying on
DHA's performance to support the readiness of our teams and to
sustain the progress in our health services. As we map this
transformation, we remain committed to the mission, airmen, the
joint team, and the families we serve.
This is my final appearance before the subcommittee, as I
will complete 32 years of active duty service this summer. It
has been my privilege to serve as an airman alongside the
extraordinary medical professionals throughout the Joint Team.
I thank the subcommittee for your steadfast support to the
health and resilience to the airmen, sailors, soldiers,
Marines, veterans, and families with serve.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant General Mark A. Ediger
Chairman Shelby, Vice Chairman Durbin, and distinguished members of
the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify before you
today.
Today, Air Force Medicine is at a crossroads. We support the health
and performance of today's Airman as part of the Joint Team, delivering
capabilities under years of steadily increasing demand. As Airmen apply
innovation, expertise and vigilance to meet evolving challenges in the
mission, our medical teams have done the same to provide Trusted Care
and advanced medical interventions in difficult environments on the
ground and in the air. Even as 730 medical Airmen serve in deployed
settings today and thousands more support operations from our permanent
bases, we see a future described in the National Defense Strategy and
the evolution of operational plans in the combatant commands that
mandates change in our operational capabilities. Provision of those
capabilities is requiring new processes for sustaining a ready medical
force more reliant on proven partnerships with trauma centers and
critical care centers outside DoD. Provision of those capabilities will
require a different mix of skill sets among medical Airmen that must be
met within existing end strength, moving our medical force structure
out of synchrony with staffing requirements for legacy hospitals and
ambulatory military treatment facilities. This change is evolving as we
work to reform the Military Health System under the direction specified
in the fiscal year 2017 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA),
moving authority for management of the administration of military
hospitals and clinics to the Defense Health Agency.
Meeting the operational imperatives while achieving important
efficiencies via reform is requiring that we reconsider the roles and
distribution of medical Airmen, expand proven readiness partnerships,
strengthen a mutually supportive partnership with the Defense Health
Agency, and focus our healthcare operations on operational
requirements. Simply put, increasing our operational capability within
existing end strength will require that we repurpose part of the
medical force, thereby reducing uniformed participation in
nonoperational services where other options exist. This must be done
judiciously and with careful analysis. This approach is consistent with
the intent and language of fiscal year 2017 NDAA and DoD reform of
business processes.
So, this is our crossroads, shaped by a confluence of operational,
health-related and economic strategic drivers. All must be duly
honored. We are working to strike the needed balance to define the path
for Air Force Medicine in close coordination with the Army, Navy,
Defense Health Agency (DHA) and the Joint Staff. As we do this, we must
remain committed to the quality and safety of the care we provide,
something we call Trusted Care. We are 3 years into Trusted Care, in
which we are applying principles borrowed from military aviation
coupled with continuous process improvement to develop a culture of
high performing teams, always vigilant for risk, with every Airman a
problem solver every day.
A prime example of evolved requirements changing our processes for
sustaining a ready medical force is damage control surgery for
stabilization of trauma near the point of injury. Over the past 17
years, combat operations have focused largely on counterinsurgency and
irregular warfare. Over that period, the geographic range of military
operations has expanded considerably with dispersed forces operating in
small, highly mobile force packages. The agile nature of these
operations and geography over which they operate have generated a
considerable evolution of requirements for medical support. This
mission, primarily in CENTCOM and AFRICOM requires trauma stabilization
teams capable of using state-of-the-art advanced trauma resuscitation
techniques in a space of opportunity, rather than a field hospital,
with the ability to relocate rapidly. The forward locations require the
ability to hold and sustain a trauma patient post-operatively for 12-18
hours in some cases even as the team stabilizes other patients. Air
Force Medicine has been steadily adjusting its capabilities to provide
the flexibility and agility required to bring excellent trauma
stabilization into this operational environment and enhance critical
care capabilities during aeromedical movement.
Counterinsurgency and irregular warfare plus advances in field
medical capabilities drove the evolution of battlefield medicine
towards highly capable medical teams deployable into austere
environments to provide trauma resuscitation and life-sustaining care
at, or close to, the point-of-injury. Capabilities like Special
Operations Surgical Teams, or SOSTs, and Ground Surgical Teams, or
GSTs, fulfill that role admirably, and deploy around the globe to
support unconventional operations by U.S. and coalition forces.
Forward deployable teams use structures of opportunity in the field
to treat critically injured patients, even when lacking access to basic
requirements like clean water, air conditioning and electricity. Five
SOST members recently received the Bronze Star for a four-month tour in
support of Operation INHERENT RESOLVE, where they delivered combat
casualty care out of a two-room, concrete-walled farmhouse in the
Middle East. They treated more than 750 patients--mostly local
residents and coalition forces--working around the clock to treat what
one SOST member called ``a fast-moving river of trauma.''
SOST teams typically consist of a trauma surgeon, emergency
physician, nurse anesthetist, surgical scrub technician, critical-care
nurse, and a respiratory technician. They also possess advanced
tactical training, making them capable of far-forward support. GSTs are
an adaptation (of the SOST) giving conventional field surgical support
some of the characteristics and capabilities of the SOST while
maintaining GST readiness for conventional missions.
GSTs incorporate the damage control and surgical capabilities
previously delivered by the Mobile Field Surgical Teams, or MFSTs, and
build in organic critical care and logistical capacity. GSTs include a
general surgeon, an emergency services physician, an anesthesiologist,
a critical care nurse, a surgical technician, and a health services
administrator/logistician. Making all these components organic to the
GST delivers a leaner, more nimble platform that can deploy more
rapidly, meeting operational demand. To better support the combatant
commands, Air Force Medicine is currently training and equipping GSTs,
with enhanced flexibility and capacity, to replace the legacy
capability provided by MFSTs.
Timely, evidence-based damage control surgery and trauma
stabilization coupled with critical care in aeromedical evacuation have
become the standard for U.S. medical support to military operations.
The Air Force is currently training and equipping additional Critical
Care Aeromedical Transport Teams (CCATTs), in response to requests from
combatant commands to increase our critical care aeromedical evacuation
capacity. This will require greater numbers of medical Airmen with
critical care skills and keeping those Airmen ready will require a day-
to- day clinical practice of critical care beyond what our population
of military beneficiaries will require.
These deployable teams, Special Operations Surgical Teams, Ground
Surgical Teams and Critical Care Aeromedical Transport Teams, were the
primary drivers of a new concept for sustaining a ready medical team.
New and evolving capabilities to bring advanced diagnostic and
treatment capability into the field and into aeromedical evacuation
demands a new process for keeping Air Force medical personnel
clinically prepared for their deployed roles. This concept led the Air
Force to implement new standards, known as the Comprehensive Medical
Readiness Program or CMRP, specifying the case volume and case mix
within the medical practice to keep a medical Airman's skills honed for
deployment. This new readiness concept also led us to expand our use of
partner institutions to sustain ready medical teams, a practice we
believe will grow in order to meet new readiness standards. Commanders
now balance practices in our hospitals and clinics with those in
partner institutions in order to meet standards.
These partnerships are critical to Air Force medical readiness. Air
Force Medicine maintains numerous training affiliation agreements with
civilian facilities, including the University Medical Center in Las
Vegas, Baltimore Shock Trauma, University of Cincinnati, University of
Miami, University of Nebraska, Miami Valley in Ohio, St Louis
University, UC Davis Medical Center, Addenbrookes Hospital in
Cambridge, England, and 54 agreements with U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs facilities.
These readiness partnerships have proven effective in pre-
deployment preparation of teams, initial team training, and for long-
term sustainment of skills through either part-time or full-time
embedded Air Force clinicians. The SOST team referenced earlier, that
was awarded the Bronze Star, is fully embedded in the level-one trauma
center at the University of Alabama- Birmingham. One such partnership
with University Medical Center in Las Vegas demonstrated its value to
the community and the Air Force in the response to the tragic 2017 mass
shooting in Las Vegas. Air Force surgeons, as well as nurses and
technicians from Nellis Air Force Base, were integral to the trauma
care provided to victims.
VA partnerships open access to Air Force specialty care to
veterans, thereby sustaining the readiness of Air Force clinicians
while enhancing efficient use of Federal healthcare capacity. However,
contrary to expectations, implementation of the VA Choice Act led to a
15 percent decrease in veteran referrals to Air Force hospitals. As we
seek to efficiently sustain the readiness for specialty providers at
our hospitals, this is an area of concern. The DHA's new authorities
under the fiscal year 2017 NDAA will help our hospitals capture more
specialty care via partnerships, efficiently utilizing specialty
capacity while enhancing the readiness of deployable teams.
CMRP establishes standards for a ready medical force at the
individual Airman level, and allows commanders to manage their units to
those standards. We developed checklists for each Air Force specialty
code, which guide Airmen through their readiness requirements in three
categories. The Air Force Medical Readiness Decision Support System
tracks these individual tasks, which inform commanders' unit readiness
reports in the Defense Readiness Reporting System. We are confident
that management to CMRP standards will be important to putting forward
advanced medical capabilities in support of deployed operations today
and into the future.
As the military medical services and the DHA continue to implement
direction from the 2017 NDAA, the CMRP will be a vital tool to measure
the impact of the transition on medical readiness standards. We look
forward to partnering with the DHA as it leverages its new authorities
to meet service readiness requirements, particularly for specialty care
providers. Developing new avenues to bring specialty care into the MTFs
so that our providers can maintain their skills should be a vital
component of the future MHS model.
Flexible deployable teams and equipment sets enable Air Force
medics to respond to a diverse set of operational scenarios. When a
field hospital is needed, the Air Force Medical Service deploys the
Expeditionary Medical Support System, or EMEDS. EMEDS is a modular,
scalable field hospital system. It has emergency, intensive care,
recovery, laboratory, dental, and primary care capabilities. EMEDS
enables the Air Force to deploy scalable capabilities. Smaller teams
can provide trauma stabilization or primary care for a modest number of
casualties. Bigger teams deploy as a medical system up to the size of
an Air Force Theater Hospital that can provide specialized medical care
to a patient population of several thousand, such as the Joint Theater
Hospital at Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan.
Air Force Medicine recently updated the EMEDS training curriculum
to include the most current doctrine and lessons learned, incorporating
tactics, techniques, and procedures for the new GSTs, as well as
updated scenarios for the full spectrum of medical operations. An
EMEDS+25 (capable of supporting 25 inpatients and an at-risk population
of 5,000) deployed to San Juan, Puerto Rico this fall to aid in the
relief efforts following Hurricane Maria. EMEDS plays a vital role in
the Air Force Medical Service's wartime readiness mission and in
humanitarian and disaster relief efforts around the world. In addition
to delivering critically needed care, these efforts serve as vital
training and readiness preparedness opportunities for Air Force medics.
The skills required are similar to a combat deployment, especially
since the lack of infrastructure in post-disaster environments can
resemble austere combat deployments.
Another platform, the En Route Patient Staging System, or ERPSS,
deployed to the U.S. Virgin Islands for hurricane relief. ERPSS
specializes in triaging and preparing patients for aeromedical
evacuation, and can quickly deploy. The ERPSS team on St. Croix began
clearing patients for transport back to the mainland within hours of
arrival.
An additional platform is the Transportation Isolation System, or
TIS. Developed to support the 2014-2015 Ebola crisis outbreak in West
Africa, the TIS allows the Air Force to transport patients with highly
contagious diseases without risking contamination of aircraft or
exposure to others. This platform can transport patients with hazardous
biological, chemical, and even radiological exposures. The Air Force
Medical Service is further developing this capability to support future
humanitarian crises, and to enhance capabilities to move patients
exposed to biologic warfare agents.
Air Force commanders are asking us to expand operational medical
support in the mission environment to enhance the health, resilience
and fitness of Airmen through medical engagement in the environment in
which they serve day-to-day. We have gained experience applying this
concept, found it to be successful and are moving to apply it broadly
across the Air Force in two forms: embedded medical support and
operational medical outreach.
Air Force Medicine is embedding growing numbers of medical
specialists into operational units. There, they deliver preventive and
rehabilitative support in the mission setting tailored to the Airman's
operational role. Preventive measures, early intervention and teaching
self-help techniques in a high tempo mission hold promise for
significantly enhanced health, performance and resilience.
We are also testing Operational Support Teams (OSTs), where Medical
Groups deliver mission-focused support to line and squadron units.
Teams rotate through different units at their base, with the goals of
decreasing injuries while increasing psychological and physical
resilience, Airmen mission availability and performance, and squadron
mission effectiveness. Base OSTs will use evidence-based interventions
to provide targeted engagement for units identified as ``higher risk''
for mission related psychological or physical injury. The teams include
a licensed mental health provider, mental health technician, physical
therapist, exercise physiologist or certified athletic trainer, and a
human performance integrator.
Base OSTs are currently operating at Joint Base Elmendorf-
Richardson and Whiteman Air Force Base. We plan to stand up OSTs at 13
additional bases next year and continue adding teams until at least one
is in place at each Air Force base, available to support any unit.
These medics will know the mission, build relationships, and pursue
opportunities to improve Airmen's health and performance.
An additional change we are pursuing pertains to our operational
health processes. These processes provide periodic assessments of the
readiness of each individual Airman, communicate with commanders about
duty limitations, assess deployment health and prepare reports for
disability evaluation by the personnel system. These processes are
currently conducted in family medicine and aerospace medicine clinics,
which complicates access to timely primary care and negatively impacts
the provision of timely and accurate fitness for duty determinations.
Our remedy will be to establish dedicated operational health teams at
each military treatment facility, which will require repurposing a
portion of the medical force. Moving operational health processes into
a dedicated lane will enable streamlined and accurate operational
health services while permitting the Medical Homes to focus on timely
access and team-oriented preventive care.
In 2017, the Air Force implemented the annual person-to-person
mental health assessments for all Airmen as required by statute. The
annual mental health assessment consists of an evidence-based screening
assessment with a patient interview. The mental health assessments are
now incorporated in annual periodic health assessments. As of February
13, 2018, Air Force Medicine has completed 148,000 Mental Health
Assessments for Airmen. The Air Force continues to perform mental
health assessments pre- and post-deployment as well, using the same
standard assessment as the annual screening.
Research is essential to continued advances in our deployable
medical capabilities and to advising the Air Force on the optimal
human-machine interface for safety and effective performance. The 711th
Human Performance Wing at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio
researches human-centric capabilities to apply to future weapon system
and sustain current systems. Human Systems Integration is the means by
which the Department applies these research initiatives to optimize
performance and minimize life-cycle costs in our weapon systems.
Air Force medical researchers are working with the Air Force
Research Lab to develop emerging medical applications of advanced
wearable technologies for battlefield Airmen. The Battlefield Airmen
Trauma Distributed Observation Kit, or BATDOK, is a new point-of-
injury, multi-patient monitoring capability. This technology resolves
an urgent point of injury mass- casualty need for dismounted pararescue
jumpers, or PJs. BATDOK enhances a PJ's ability to care for multiple
patients by wirelessly monitoring five or more patient vitals
simultaneously through a specially designed mobile interface. BATDOK
has been operationally tested via several mass-casualty military
exercises and Air Combat Command and Air Force Special Operations
Command are currently evaluating it for use by their medical elements.
Our researchers are also developing a portable capability to
produce U.S. Pharmacopeia-quality sterile water for wound irrigation
and injection in austere locations. This capability will allow medical
units to use any water source at deployed locations and shipboard to
reconstitute freeze-dried plasma, IV solutions, and perishable
medications for immediate use to treat patients. This reduces the
logistical burden of transporting and storing heavy water-based
solutions and increases storage life of perishable medications. This
capability follows breakthroughs in hollow-fiber ultrafiltration and
resin-based filters, which replaces larger and more costly heat
sterilization and the reverse osmosis process. We anticipate a
deployable system will be available by 2021.
En route care is another significant avenue of Air Force medical
research efforts.
Researchers with the 711th Human Performance Wing have developed a
Critical Care Aeromedical Transport Team patient monitor that connects
to hand-held smart tablets, allowing one medic to monitor several
patients at once. These monitors continuously collect patient vital
signs. The data from these monitors is then used to create trends over
time. Initial studies suggest that these trends can be used to predict
and prevent the development of life-threatening conditions before they
occur. With the constrained resources available onboard an aircraft,
the ability to stop a more serious condition before it emerges is
especially vital.
Air Force Medicine also engages in research to improve care for
service members recovering from injury. Combat-related extremity and
facial trauma are common injuries for deployed service members.
Improving treatment for these traumas requires the development of more
sophisticated techniques of surgical reconstruction. The Restorative
Endeavor for Service members Through Optimization of Reconstruction, or
RESTOR, group at the 59th Medical Wing is identifying cutting-edge
cross-disciplinary strategies, technologies, and therapies for advanced
management of combat trauma through tissue preservation and limb
restoration. Ongoing efforts in this field are using novel therapies
and techniques to support replanted and transplanted tissues during
surgical reconstruction. Our researchers are exploring ``bio-
absorbable'' space-filling constructs as a revolutionary negative
pressure wound therapy technique to save limbs. They are also
facilitating long-term graft survival by evaluating custom immuno-
therapeutics to mitigate the risk that the body rejects the graft.
Air Force Medicine is deeply engaged in reforms to the Military
Health System established by Congress in the 2017 NDAA and pursuant to
the Secretary of Defense's reform of DoD business processes. We
continue to work with our Army, Navy, and Defense Health Agency
partners in finalizing plans to implement the NDAA and continue with
comprehensive reform of the Military Health System.
We are embarking upon a phased implementation, moving one Air Force
hospital and two clinics to direct DHA management. We are working hard
to implement under a framework that will produce meaningful reform to
healthcare delivery while implementing a new approach to building and
sustaining a ready medical force.
Just as the U.S. military is mapping its adaptation to a changing
security environment as described in the National Defense Strategy, Air
Force Medicine is at the confluence of strategic drivers that mandate a
new path to newly defined future capabilities. This will require
reassessment of the operational alignment of our legacy scope of
services as we meet new operational imperatives. As we map this path,
we remain firmly committed to serve the mission, Airmen, the Joint Team
and families with Trusted Care, a ready medical force and operationally
engaged health services.
This is my final time appearing before the Subcommittee as I will
complete 32 years of active duty service this summer. It has been my
privilege to serve as an Airman and serve alongside the extraordinary
medical professionals throughout the Joint Team. I thank the
Subcommittee for your steadfast support to the health and resilience of
the Airmen, Sailors, Soldiers and Marines we serve.
Senator Shelby. Ms. Cummings.
STATEMENT OF STACY CUMMINGS, PROGRAM EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
DEFENSE HEALTHCARE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Ms. Cummings. Chairman Shelby, distinguished members of the
subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I am honored to be here with my MHS (Military Health
System) colleagues, representing the Department of Defense as
the Program Executive responsible for modernizing the
military's Electronic Health Records system and enhancing
interoperability with the VA (Department of Veterans Affairs)
and private sector providers.
The mission of PEO (Program Executive Office) DHMS (Defense
Healthcare Management Systems) is to transform the delivery of
healthcare and advanced data sharing through a modernized EHR
(electronic health record) for service members, veterans, and
their families.
To this end, we are committed to three equally important
objectives. Deploy a single, integrated, inpatient and
outpatient EHR; improve data sharing with the VA and private
sector healthcare partners; and successfully transform the
delivery of healthcare to the Military Health System through
advanced tools that give patients more control over their
healthcare experience.
As we work towards fully deploying a modern EHR across the
MHS, I am excited to share that we reached an important
milestone last year, completing full deployment to all four
initial operational capability sites culminating with Madigan
Army Medical Center in Tacoma, Washington. I would like to
acknowledge and thank the Defense Health Agency, the initial
site commanders, and the Surgeons General for their continued
support. Active leadership engagement is a key driver in a
successful EHR implementation.
I would also like to acknowledge our great team of
professionals at PEO DHMS, as well as the many functional
representatives across the HMS involved since day one.
To streamline and improve healthcare delivery, MHS Genesis
delivers an integrated inpatient and outpatient solution that,
for the first time, connects medical and dental information
across the continuum of care. Over time, MHS Genesis will
replace DoD (Department of Defense) legacy healthcare systems
and support the availability of Electronic Health Records for
more than 9.4 million beneficiaries, and over 200,000 MHS
personnel worldwide.
Our immediate focus is to gain approval to continue to
deploy MHS Genesis beyond the Pacific Northwest beginning in
2019.
For an 8 week period, beginning in January, we sent
representatives from PEO DHMS, the Leidos Partnership for
Defense Health, and DHA to respond to end user feedback with a
focus on MHS Genesis configuration, as well as training,
adoption of workflows, and change management.
Based on direct user feedback, we made immediate
configuration updates and we provided training and support to
system users. These activities, which were planned refinements
based on lessons learned, were functionally led and frontline
informed.
Recognizing the need for an independent measure of the
progress and effectiveness of MHS Genesis, we engaged HIMSS
Analytics, widely recognized as the industry standard for
measuring Electronic Health Record adoption, to assess adoption
and conduct usability assessments at our four initial sites.
Prior to MHS Genesis' deployment, inpatient and outpatient
scores for our legacy systems averaged Stage 2 out of 7. Post-
deployment, MHS Genesis' sites scored at or above Stage 5,
which is well above the national average.
We continue to share these early successes, as well as our
lessons learned, with the VA and other Federal agencies. This
includes the United States Coast Guard who, earlier this month,
committed to a partnership with the Department of Defense to
deploy MHS Genesis.
While we continue to focus on modernization, our commitment
to expand interoperability with the VA and private sector
providers remains unchanged. The departments share data through
the Joint Legacy Viewer or JLV. Since the last time I updated
this committee, JLV use increased by fivefold. Each month, over
1 million patient records are viewed by DoD and VA users.
The DoD also steadily increased its data sharing
partnerships with private sector healthcare organizations.
Today, we have almost 50 Health Information Exchange partners,
more than doubled from this time last year.
Another phase of interoperability is connecting the
benefits and capabilities of MHS Genesis to operational forces
in a deployed theater environment. Leveraging agile development
practices, PEO DHMS will continue to support current readiness
requirements, while we modernize the information technology
that supports operational medical providers across the
continuum of care.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to share the progress
that we have made to transform the delivery of healthcare for
service members, veterans, and their families.
Deployment of MHS Genesis to our initial sites in the
Pacific Northwest is a first step in implementing what will be
the largest, integrated inpatient and outpatient EHR in the
United States. As a partner in our progress, we appreciate
Congress' interest in this effort. We ask for your continued
support as we deliver on our promise to provide world class
care to those who faithfully serve our Nation.
I look forward to your questions.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ms. Stacy A. Cummings
Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Durbin and distinguished Members of
the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today. I am honored to represent the Department of Defense (DoD) as the
Secretary's program executive responsible for modernizing the
military's electronic health record (EHR) system and enhancing
interoperability with the VA and private sector providers.
The mission of the Program Executive Office Defense Healthcare
Management Systems (PEO DHMS) is to transform the delivery of
healthcare and advance data sharing through a modernized electronic
health record for service members, veterans, and their families. To
this end, DoD is committed to three equally important objectives:
deploy a single, integrated inpatient and outpatient electronic health
record, branded MHS GENESIS; improve data sharing with the VA and our
private sector healthcare partners; and successfully transform the
delivery of healthcare in the Military Health System (MHS) through
advanced tools that give beneficiaries more control over their
healthcare experience.
Our mission aligns with Secretary Mattis' National Defense Strategy
(NDS) to modernize the Department of Defense and provide combat-
credible military forces. The threats facing our nation constantly
evolve and a medically ready military force is critical to our national
defense. MHS GENESIS advances that mission. This cutting edge
technology will supply MHS providers with the necessary data to
collaborate and make the best possible healthcare decisions for our
service members to remain mission ready and mission focused;
contributing to the NDS strategic approach to restore warfighting
readiness and field a lethal force.
The DoD was an early pioneer in the development of a centralized,
global electronic health record when it introduced AHLTA in 2004. At
the time, the DoD's in-house EHR solution was viewed by private sector
enterprises as the future. However, over the last decade the private
sector has made significant advances in technology. As result, in 2013
the DoD made the decision to transition from multiple home-grown
government-developed EHRs to a single, integrated commercial-off-the-
shelf (COTS) capability. Two factors contributed to this decision.
First, the needs within the MHS could be better met by state-of-
the-market commercial applications. Second, the DoD could leverage
private sector investments in technology and established data sharing
networks with civilian partners to reduce costs and improve the
customer experience. Staying current with the latest advancements in
technology without being the only investment stream enables the DoD to
benefit from some of the best products in health IT without carrying
the financial burden alone.
In July 2015, the DoD awarded a $4.3 billion contract to the Leidos
Inc. to deliver a modern, secure, and connected EHR. The Leidos
Partnership for Defense Health (LPDH) team consists of four core
partners, Leidos Inc., as the prime integrator, and three primary
partners in Cerner Corporation, Accenture, and Henry Schein Inc. MHS
GENESIS provides a state of the market COTS solution consisting of
Cerner Millennium, an industry-leading EHR, and Henry Schein's Dentrix
Enterprise, a best of breed dental module.
As we work toward the goal of fully deploying a modern EHR across
the MHS, I am excited to share that we hit an important milestone last
year by deploying to all four Initial Operational Capability (IOC)
sites, culminating with deployment to Madigan Army Medical Center
(MAMC), the largest of the IOC sites, in Tacoma, Washington. This
massive effort took the coordination, guidance, and support of multiple
DoD agencies and organizations. I'd like to acknowledge all those
involved in IOC including Mr. Thomas McCaffery, acting assistant
secretary of defense for Health Affairs; Navy Vice Admiral Raquel Bono,
director, Defense Health Agency (DHA); Air Force Colonel Michaelle
Guerrero, 92nd Medical Group, Fairchild Air Force Base; Navy Captain
Christine Sears, commanding officer, Naval Health Clinic Oak Harbor;
Navy Captain. Jeffrey Bitterman, commanding officer, Naval Hospital
Bremerton; and Army Colonel. Michael Place, commander, MAMC for their
tremendous work to make the IOC in the Pacific Northwest a success. I
would also like to thank our great team of professionals at PEO DHMS
for acquisition and program excellence as well as the functional
representatives across the Military Health System who were involved
since day one in setting the strategy for modernization.
go-live success, optimization, baseline configuration and common
deployment strategy (stabilization and adoption)
To streamline and improve healthcare delivery, MHS GENESIS
integrates inpatient and outpatient best-of-suite solutions that
connect medical and dental information across the continuum of care,
from point of injury to the military treatment facility, providing a
single patient health record. This includes garrison, operational, and
en route care, increasing efficiencies for beneficiaries and healthcare
professionals. Over time, MHS GENESIS will replace DoD legacy
healthcare systems and will support the availability of electronic
health records for more than 9.4 million DoD beneficiaries and
approximately 205,000 MHS personnel globally.
The deployment and implementation of MHS GENESIS across the MHS is
a team effort. Complex business transformation requires constant
coordination and communication with stakeholders and partners,
including the medical and technical community, to ensure functionality,
usability, and data security. DoD engaged stakeholders across the MHS
to identify requirements and standard workflows. The result was a
collaborative effort across the Services and the DHA to ensure the
clinical workflows enabled by MHS GENESIS are standard and consistent
across the enterprise to minimize variation in the delivery of
healthcare. Representatives from the functional community also
collaborated to identify critical data to pull from legacy systems into
MHS GENESIS: Problems, Allergies, Medications, Procedures, and
Immunizations (PAMPI). Other data, including lab results, radiology
results, discrete notes, discharge summaries, etc., is still available
through the Joint Legacy Viewer (JLV) as we sunset legacy systems.
Through a tailored acquisition approach, DoD leveraged commercial
best practices and its own independent test community to field a
modern, secure, and connected system that provides the best possible
solution from day one. One example of leveraging commercial best
practices was opting to utilize commercial data hosting, which allowed
DoD to combine private sector speed and technology with the
Department's superior data security knowledge and provide advanced
analytics for our end users and beneficiaries. While there is still
much work to be done, the integration of the commercial data hosting
into DoD networks and systems represents a new direction in Pentagon
information technology (IT) culture and practice. This innovative
approach set the bar for COTS systems and commercial partnerships by
the DoD and other Federal agencies in the future.
Additionally, we are employing industry standards to optimize the
delivery of MHS GENESIS. Rollout across the MHS follows a ``wave''
model. Initial fielding sites in the Pacific Northwest were the first
wave of military treatment facilities (MTFs) to receive MHS GENESIS,
which began February 2017 at Fairchild AFB, just 19 months after
contract award, and officially concluded in January at MAMC. By
deploying to four IOC sites that span a cross section of size and
complexity of MTFs, we are able to perform operational testing
activities to ensure MHS GENESIS meets all requirements for
effectiveness, suitability, and data interoperability to support a
decision to continue MHS GENESIS deployments later this year.
Deployment will occur by region--three in the continental U.S. and two
overseas--in a total of 23 waves. Each wave will include an average of
three hospitals and 15 physical locations and will last approximately 1
year. Regionally grouped waves, such as the Pacific Northwest, will run
concurrently. This approach allows DoD to take full advantage of
lessons learned and experience gained from prior waves to maximize
efficiencies in subsequent waves, increasing the potential to reduce
the deployment schedule in areas where necessary. Full Operational
Capability (FOC), to include garrison medical and dental facilities
worldwide, is scheduled for 2022.
As with any large scale IT transformation, there are training, user
adoption, and change management opportunities. The configuration of MHS
GENESIS deployed for IOC provided a minimally suitable starting point
to assess the system as well as the infrastructure prior to full
deployment. Now that DoD has the results from each service operating
MHS GENESIS in a representative cross section of military hospitals and
clinics, DoD can make adjustments to software, training, and workflows
and be confident the changes are positive and impactful throughout the
MHS.
Our immediate focus is to gain approval to continue to deploy MHS
GENESIS in 2019. This acquisition decision requires an MHS GENESIS
baseline software configuration and a repeatable agile deployment
strategy to support program deployments beyond the Pacific Northwest.
To that end, we are working with our industry partner, LPDH, to engage
representatives from the sites, the functional community, the technical
community, and the test community with the goal to validate the MHS
GENESIS baseline software configuration based on IOC lessons learned
through an independent operational test at Madigan this year.
For an eight-week period starting mid-January, we sent
representatives from PEO DHMS, LPDH, and DHA to collaborate with
initial fielding site users with a focus on MHS GENESIS configuration
as well as training, adoption of workflows, and change management
activities. Specific areas of refinement included: roles, clinical
content, trouble ticket resolution, and workflow adoption. Following
this period, we collected feedback, evaluated, and provided
enhancements to the system. These activities were always part of our
IOC process, and we are experiencing measurable results. End user
feedback is positive. Our approach has and always will be functionally
led and frontline informed.
measuring user adoption of mhs genesis
Recognizing the sizeable investment in an EHR for its 9.4 million
beneficiaries and more than 200,000 providers, the DoD needed a way to
independently measure the progress and effectiveness of MHS GENESIS
adoption. To that end, the DoD engaged the Healthcare Information and
Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Analytics to assess adoption and
conduct IOC usability assessments for MHS GENESIS. HIMSS provided
adoption scoring and benchmarking gap analysis assessments on IOC sites
to rate the top HIMSS usability principles including the Electronic
Medical Record Adoption Model (EMRAM) and the Outpatient-Electronic
Medical Record Adoption Model (O-EMRAM). The HIMSS Analytics EMRAM is
widely recognized as the industry standard for measuring EHR adoption
and rated from Stage 0 to Stage 7. The clinic at Fairchild Air Force
Base was scored only on the O-EMRAM as an outpatient facility.
Prior to MHS GENESIS deployment, the average score was below a
Stage 2 EMRAM and slightly above Stage 2 O-EMRAM. Post deployment, the
sites scored at or above a Stage 5 on the EMRAM and O-EMRAM, with
Fairchild Air Force Base achieving an O-EMRAM Stage 6. These scores are
well above the national averages of Stage 2 and Stage 3 respectively.
It is important to note, Stage 6 obtained by Fairchild is an indicator
that an organization is effectively leveraging the functionality of its
EHR. Stage 6 is an accomplishment only 20 percent of ambulatory
providers have attained. To achieve this level, the facility was
required to demonstrate a number of technology functionalities that
contribute to patient safety and care efficiency, including
establishing a digital medication reconciliation process, a problem
list for physicians, and the ability to send patient preventative care
reminders.
department of defense and other agency collaboration
In June 2017, former VA Secretary Shulkin announced his decision to
adopt the same EHR as the DoD. To facilitate that decision, he signed a
``Determination and Findings'' that allows the VA to issue a
solicitation directly to Cerner Corporation for the acquisition of the
EHR currently being deployed by DoD, for deployment and transition
across the VA enterprise in a manner that meets VA needs and enables
seamless healthcare to veterans and qualified beneficiaries.
This decision is the next step toward advancing EHR adoption across
the nation and is in the best interest of our veterans. The VA's
adoption of the DoD's EHR will fundamentally solve the problem of
transitioning patient health record data between the Departments by
eliminating the need for moving data altogether. The VA also is
adopting DoD workflows to the greatest extent possible, while adding
some necessary VA-specific tasks. The VA and DoD are committed to
partnering in this effort and understand that the mutual success of
this venture is dependent on the close coordination and communication
between the two Departments which continues to be supported by the DoD/
VA Interagency Program Office.
The DoD continues to support the VA's ongoing EHR modernization
efforts. During fiscal year 2018, the DoD and VA collaborated to
provide updates on the Departments' modernization efforts, technical
challenges, and joint capabilities. The DoD also supported joint
collaboration meetings between DoD and VA Chief Information Officers
(CIO) and other senior leadership to facilitate other future activities
relating to a single integrated EHR. As a result of these meetings,
leadership established a DoD-VA CIO Executive Steering Committee as
well as working groups focused on identity management, joint
architecture, and cybersecurity. As the VA seeks to finalize a contract
for their own COTS, it is critical for the DoD and VA to work together.
This is the next logical step to support the congressional mandate for
greater DoD and VA integration.
In April 2018, the DoD announced a partnership with the United
States Coast Guard for MHS GENESIS. The Coast Guard will adopt and
deploy MHS GENESIS to its clinics and sick bays. Approximately 6,000
active duty Coast Guard members receive care in DoD hospitals and
clinics. A complete and accurate health record in a single common
system is critical to providing high-quality, integrated care and
benefits, and to improving patient safety. MHS GENESIS will supply
Coast Guard providers with the necessary data to collaborate and
deliver the best possible healthcare.
interoperability and data sharing
As the DoD transitions to MHS GENESIS, our commitment to expand
interoperability efforts with the VA and private sector providers
remains unchanged. Service members and their families frequently move
to new duty assignments, they deploy overseas, and eventually,
transition out of the military. As a result, there are many different
places where they may receive medical care. More than 60 percent of
active duty and beneficiary healthcare is provided outside an MTF,
through TRICARE network providers. Healthcare providers need up-to-date
and comprehensive healthcare information to facilitate informed
decisionmaking whenever and wherever it is needed--from a stateside MTF
to an outpost in Afghanistan, from a private care clinic within the
TRICARE network to a VA hospital, and everywhere in between.
The DoD and VA are two of the world's largest healthcare providers
and today, they share more health data than any other two major health
systems. In January 2017, DoD and VA certified to Congress that they
are fully interoperable, in accordance with the fiscal year 2014
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). While the Departments met
the required objectives, interoperability is a spectrum wherein data
sharing and functionality can continually improve. As a result, we
continue to expand interoperability beyond the DoD/VA Joint
Certification of Interoperability. The modern capabilities of MHS
GENESIS will allow DoD to share more complete data with similarly
equipped Federal and private sector partners while simultaneously
increasing the number of DoD data sharing partners by the thousands.
The two Departments currently share health records through the
Defense Medical Information Exchange (DMIX) program, which includes the
Joint Legacy Viewer (JLV), a health information portal that aggregates
data from across multiple data sources, to include MHS GENESIS, to
provide read access to medical information across multiple government
and commercial data sources. Since March 2017, the last time I updated
the committee, patient data accessed through JLV increased more than
fivefold; including over 1 million patient records viewed between the
DoD and VA combined.
In addition to enabling enhanced data sharing between DoD and VA,
JLV allows DoD to leverage our expanding relationships with private-
sector providers to give clinicians a comprehensive, single view of a
patient's health history in real-time as they receive care in both
military and commercial systems. JLV is still available to DoD
providers in AHLTA and is now incorporated into MHS GENESIS.
Over the past 5 years, DoD steadily increased its data-sharing
partnerships with private sector healthcare organizations. Since many
service members and their beneficiaries receive specialized care
outside of the MHS, seamless access to healthcare records from civilian
providers supports clinical decisionmaking by delivering a
comprehensive picture of patient health. Expanding these partnerships
will enable medical providers to move from a reliance on paper records
and into a modern era with increased, current health data available
anytime, anywhere. In March 2017, there were over 20 Health Information
Exchange (HIE) partners. Today, the number is more than doubled as the
DoD has nearly 50 HIE partners. DoD leverages its partnership with the
Sequoia Project, a network of exchange partners who securely share
clinical information across the United States. We are also targeting
CommonWell--an independent, not-for-profit trade association with
connections to more than 5,000 private sector healthcare sites as a
partner. Leveraging this connection through MHS GENESIS will expand the
great work DoD accomplished through HIEs. As DoD and VA continue to
improve data sharing between the Departments and with the private
sector, deployment of MHS GENESIS will enable more advanced data
sharing capabilities through the existing architecture. Securely
sharing health data is a critical piece of the mission delivered today.
operational medicine
Another phase of interoperability is connecting the benefits and
capabilities of MHS GENESIS to operational forces in a deployed theater
environment that includes more than 450 forward and resuscitative
sites, 300 ships, six theater hospitals, and three aeromedical staging
facilities. While each service currently uses the Theater Medical
Information Program-Joint, MHS GENESIS will be fully leveraged as the
core application for accessing, capturing, and documenting medical and
dental care through the Joint Operational Medical Information Systems
to provide continuum of care support in various treatment phases
including combat casualty care, medical evacuation, and in-theater
hospitals. The DoD is also employing modern tools for operational first
responders to document patient status and treatments rendered at point
of injury. The Mobile Computing Capability is a medical application
that operates on DoD-approved phones and tablets in no or low
communication environments and allows first responders to document and
transfer patient treatment information, access reference material, as
well as view diagnostic and treatment decision support tools.
Leveraging agile development practices, PEO DHMS will continue to
modernize support to operational medical providers across the continuum
of care, from point of injury to the military treatment facility.
conclusion
Thank you again for the opportunity to come here today and share
the progress we've made to transform the delivery of healthcare for
service members, veterans, and their families. The successful
deployment of MHS GENESIS to our four IOC sites was an important
milestone in implementing what will be the largest integrated inpatient
and outpatient EHR in the United States. Because DoD purchased lifetime
upgrades with MHS GENESIS, our healthcare providers will always have
the latest advancements in technology in a timely manner. DoD
beneficiaries will have greater access to their information, allowing
them to be more engaged in their own health-related activities.
Research in 2017 from KLAS identifies leadership engagement,
education, and good governance as factors that contribute to the
success of an EHR implementation. Leadership from the DoD is heavily
engaged and invested in the success of MHS GENESIS, and we continually
take lessons learned from training, adoption of workflows, and change
management activities. While we are well on our way, PEO DHMS continues
to progress as an organization accepting nothing less than outstanding
results and acquisition excellence. We are agile and iterative in our
approach and are committed to identifying the right capabilities and
delivering those capabilities to our customers. As a partner in our
progress, we appreciate the Congress's interest in this effort and ask
for your continued support to help us deliver on our promise to provide
world-class care and services to those who faithfully serve our nation.
Again, thank you for this opportunity, and I look forward to your
questions.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM--ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD SYSTEM
I will start, again, with you Ms. Cummings. As I noted in
my opening statement, the Department of Defense has deployed a
new Electronic Health Record system called MHS Genesis.
Ms. Cummings, could you please update the committee here
today on this effort? Tell us whether it remains on track for
full deployment across the Military Health System by 2022? Can
you describe the lessons that you learned from the initial
implementation? How you will ensure the deployment of the
record to the remaining medical facilities will be successful?
Ms. Cummings. Thank you.
We have successfully deployed to our four initial sites,
and we received a great deal of feedback and lessons learned
from those deployments.
We are on track to fully deploy by 2022 and to begin the
remainder of our deployment in 2019, again, based on those
lessons learned.
So for 8 weeks, we spent some time looking at the user
feedback and we sent teams directly to the Pacific Northwest to
listen to the users and to make configuration changes based on
their feedback.
And while we still have a few challenging areas that,
working with the Surgeons General, we have committed to making
enhancements over the next year, we are on track to begin our
next deployment on the West Coast in 2019, and to deploy fully
in 2022.
Through our lessons learned, there are two major areas that
we learned from an enterprise perspective that we need to
consider.
One is the adoption of enterprise workflows, and we
recognized that during our training, we focused more on
training the IT as opposed to training the transformation and
workflow that we are implementing through the IT. So that is
one of our major lessons learned in working with the Surgeons
General.
We are revamping our training strategy so that we can first
focus on workflows and then how to use the workflows within the
system.
The other lesson learned is around the infrastructure. The
IT infrastructure is the backbone that MHS Genesis rides on,
and it needs to be stable and reliable. And so, one of our
pacing items for our full deployment will be that
infrastructure, and our intention is to have infrastructure in
place and stable for 6 months, so that we can do all of our
testing, connect our medical devices, and make sure that we are
delivering a secure, reliable, and fast Electronic Health
Record that meets the needs of our providers. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. What about Madigan Army Medical Center?
Ms. Cummings. With the Madigan deployment, we have
demonstrated the breadth of our capabilities within the MHS
Genesis. Thanks.
TRANSITION FROM MILITARY DEPARTMENT SURGEONS GENERAL TO DEFENSE HEALTH
AGENCY
Senator Shelby. The National Defense Authorization Act for
2017 and 2018 contained a number of provisions that will
transform the Military Health System, including moving some
responsibilities from the Military Department Surgeons General
to the Defense Health Agency.
Would each one of the Surgeons General comment on how this
transition is going from your perspective, and explain what
concerns you have with the transition of management and
administration responsibilities away from the military
departments?
General West, we will start with you and just move down the
table.
General West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I can tell you Army is 100 percent onboard with
implementing the provisions of the NDAA; in fact, the total
Army, not just Army Medicine.
General Milley and our Secretary of the Army actually
established an Army-led taskforce led by our Army G-3/5/7 along
with all of the elements of our staff to ensure that this is a
successful transition.
Then we also have our line involved, Forces Command, who
will be impacted by the first phase facility, which is for us,
Womack Army Medical Center to ensure that there is no impact on
readiness.
And so, we are moving forward with teams to assist DHA
working together with Air Force and Navy to ensure that we have
processes in place. We are on multiple workgroups, multiple
meetings to make sure that we are real time getting after the
implementation plan and Ops to make sure that it is successful.
The one thing that I know our Chief and our Secretary of
the Army always say is readiness is number one. So the real
concern is that if there is anything that would impact our
ability to perform our missions in the things that I mentioned
that we are responsible for to the Joint Force.
Senator Shelby. Admiral Faison.
Admiral Faison. Thank you, sir.
We are all-in on this. We see enormous opportunity that
comes from the changes that are mandated in the law, which
would allow us to get back to our primary focus of readiness in
preparing for the next conflict, as I share, will be a very
different conflict for us than any conflict we have seen in the
last 70-plus years.
There is enormous value and benefit to doing this. And so,
we are all-in.
From my Secretary, CNO, Commandant on down, they are
getting regular updates and are heavily engaged to make sure
that we are fully supporting this and doing this right. All of
us are engaged on a daily basis to work this.
This is all transformation change in a time when optempo
remains high. Our focus, as with my sister services, is to
ensure we reap the benefits without the risk to readiness. We
are proceeding very deliberately and carefully to ensure that
we continue to support optempo, continue to do things necessary
for a brighter future.
Senator Shelby. Thank you. General Ediger.
General Ediger. Thank you.
The Air Force is fully onboard and we have been applying a
great deal of energy and critical thought to working in the
Military Health System to map this change.
We see this as a great opportunity to achieve efficiencies,
but also to set up a progressive Military Health System that
provides healthcare within the best models for all of the
opportunities that medicine is going to offer into the future.
Our priorities for Air Force medicine, as we map this
change, is to ensure that as we do this, we will be able to
field a modernized, deployable medical force that meets the
evolving requirements of the combat and command fully capable
and ready. We know that that is going to require a use of new
standards and new practices in terms of maintaining the
readiness of deployable clinical teams.
Our second priority is to ensure that we continue to
provide operational medical support that is tailored to the Air
Force mission.
We know that as we go from base to base, and the mission
varies from base to base that, in particular, aerospace
medicine operations are tailored specifically to the
requirements of the airmen in that missions to ensure their
performance, their health, and their safety.
And so, I am confident that as we map this change, we will
be able to see to the readiness and operational support
requirements while achieving the full intent of the National
Defense Authorization Act.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
In the area of medical research--and I am glad we have with
us on the committee, Senator Blunt, who has more than a passing
interest in medical research because he chairs the committee
over NIH--this committee has consistently recommended funding
for medical research, funding that is supported by a majority
of the Senators.
I will direct this to you, General West. Can you update the
committee on how this funding has contributed to medical
breakthroughs to the benefit of our service members? Is there
some coordination between what you do in medical research and
what, for example, the NIH and others do? Although it should
be, I think.
Go ahead, General West.
General West. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for that
question and also, thank you for the phenomenal support that we
have been receiving.
Eighty-five percent of the congressional special interest
funding goes to the MRMC, our Medical Research Materiel
Command. I can tell you, it is used very wisely and
cooperatively with our academic partners and with industry, and
so, you mentioned with NIH.
All of our programs, or research projects, are actually
vetted through a recognized research protocol process, and we
also make sure that we are not duplicating or unnecessarily
duplicating research in other fields by ensuring that we use
this stringent process with NIH, again, and with all of other
partners.
Some of the things that we have, there are multiple areas
and breakthroughs. Recently, there has been a hand-sight-vision
augmented touch system that are clinical trials that are
helping with processing power and speech for those that have
difficulty with trauma, that have sustained trauma.
There are some funds with advanced ocular treatment for
austere conditions, so basically where you can inject a
hydrogel to sustain the eye while you are waiting to get the
person to definitive care.
There is targeted muscle regeneration for treatment of
neuromas associated with amputations. Some of these, surgical
nerve transfer procedures were actually developed with our
civilian partners using practices that were used in kidney
transplants. And so there is a lot of coordination with our
civilian sectors.
I can go on. There is more.
Senator Shelby. Okay.
General West. So there is quite a bit of research and we
really do appreciate the support for that.
Senator Shelby. Thank you.
General West. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Yes, thank you, Chairman Shelby.
I want to thank you all for being here.
I have to ask you a question that I do not know the answer
of.
TRICARE CONTRACT ISSUANCE
Do any of you deal with a third party provider with
TRICARE, as far as contract issuance?
Admiral Faison. Sir that is the responsibility of the
Defense Health Agency.
Senator Tester. Okay. That is what I thought.
Admiral Faison. I would be happy to take back any
questions.
Senator Tester. Well, we have some, but we will put them in
written form for sure. We will not go down that line of
questioning.
ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORDS
I do want to talk about electronic medical records. Ms.
Cummings, you said the rollout in the Northwest has gone well.
That is good; kudos to you and your team.
The VA is supposed to be utilizing the same health records.
It is an issue that we have talked about on many committees is
having a seamless medical record transition between active
military and the VA. It appeared like it was going to happen,
although I am not sure now, since the Secretary of the VA was
fired a month or so ago.
Are you aware of the VA's involvement with the DoD, because
you are kind of the lead dog on this? Have they been proactive
in moving that medical record across the platform?
Ms. Cummings. So I will start by saying that I fully
support the VA's decision----
Senator Tester. As do I.
Ms. Cummings [continuing]. To adopt the EHR, Electronic
Health Record MHS Genesis.
We have had regular engagement with the VA since that
decision was made. We meet regularly. We share lessons learned.
We talk about the technology implications.
Senator Tester. And how often do you meet with them?
Ms. Cummings. We have an entire day meeting scheduled once
a month. We have meetings scheduled every week to catch up.
Senator Tester. Good.
Ms. Cummings. And then we have technical meetings at the
CIO (Chief Information Officer) level, the DoD CIO and the VA
CIO, and they meet every 6 weeks. So it is very regular
engagement and we have been very open with sharing data.
Senator Tester. Good.
Ms. Cummings. And they have been very open too.
Senator Tester. And have those meetings continued since
Secretary Shulkin has been out?
Ms. Cummings. They have.
Senator Tester. I believe their CIO resigned last week.
Ms. Cummings. He did.
Senator Tester. And the meetings still are continuing?
Ms. Cummings. They are.
Senator Tester. And we are still moving the ball forward
from your perspective?
Ms. Cummings. From my perspective.
Senator Tester. Good, thank you.
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Admiral Faison, thank you for being here. In your
testimony, you talked about, in verbal and written, it said,
``Mental health issues after complex or catastrophic events
frequently do no appear until later, sometimes much later.''
Mental health is a huge issue. It is a huge issue for our
active military. It is a huge issue for our Guardsman and
Reservists because of access. They have almost no access, if
they have not been deployed and they lose the DoD services if
they are outside their deployment window. Right?
So about 4 months ago, the President directed the DoD--this
is not new information to you--the VA and DHS to come up with a
plan for mental health. The plan probably should have been out
long before now.
I still have not seen it and it is for our Guardsman and
Reservists that are transitioning from service member to
civilian. It happens many times over in this day and age.
My concern is we are not--and I think it was in your
written and verbal testimony too--that we are not doing what we
need to do for the Guards and Reserve.
Will the plan, which I have not seen, for transitioning
service members help Guardsmen and Reservists with mental
health services when they are outside the deployment window?
Admiral Faison. Sir, yes, sir. Thank you very much for that
question. I defer to my Army colleague.
Senator Tester. It is okay. You can go anywhere you want to
go.
Admiral Faison. For the Reservists for the Navy, we have
implemented a series of efforts with Returning Warrior
Workshops, and other outreach initiatives, to be able to care
for our returning warriors who will then go back to civilian
life.
In the active component, about 25 percent of my mental
health workforce is actually embedded in operational units now
to provide the care and support, and decrease the distance
between need and the provider, and reduce stigma. That has
actually borne fruit for us.
We have also increased our hiring of mental health
providers to be able to provide that network of support.
Senator Tester. Okay.
Admiral Faison. So there are several efforts going on.
Senator Tester. So the real issue is the one you brought
up. By the way, thank you for what you are doing from an active
component standpoint.
But what about the issues that come up after the job is
done, after they go home? Is there any potential with the plan
or any other method out there, to be able to get these folks
help?
Admiral Faison. Yes, sir. Thank you very much for that.
Senator Tester. After their days, this is down the line, as
you spoke of, which I agree with one hundred percent, by the
way.
Admiral Faison. The Department has done several
initiatives, but as you know, mental health in our Nation is a
challenge right now.
Senator Tester. It is a big problem. Outside of that
deployment window is what I am talking about.
Admiral Faison. Right. Yes, sir.
Senator Tester. Is there any help out there?
Admiral Faison. Yes, sir. We have put in place several
initiatives with help lines and things like that when people go
back to areas that are underserved for mental health services.
I can get you specifics on that and respond back to you
more fully.
Senator Tester. I would like that.
I think that you all realize, more than anybody else, the
issues that revolve around mental health in civilian life, but
we are talking about the military here, and it is a big, big,
big issue.
If we do not do what we need to do, and I think you put
your finger on it. We have problems during service and we have
problems outside the deployment window, and I just think that
we owe it to these folks to make sure that they have access.
I come from Montana and there are not a lot of mental
health providers out there, which is another challenge that we
have to deal with. We ask them to serve and they serve. They do
a heck of a job in that capacity. We owe them this.
Go ahead.
General Ediger. Senator, if I could add a little bit from
the Air National Guard perspective.
Senator Tester. Yes.
General Ediger. To build on what Admiral Faison provided is
the Air National Guard has created Director of Psychological
Health positions in every wing, and Air Force Reserve is doing
the same. That is the behavioral health provider who is
assigned full time to the Air National Guard Wings to help the
members at any time during their service with the Air National
Guard in terms of securing mental health support.
If, in fact, their mental health problem turns out to be
service connected, in other words, it is related to Title 10
duty, then we will facilitate their referral into our system
for care, but also help them with obtaining care in the private
sector as required.
Senator Tester. Okay.
General West. Yes, sir. I agree with my colleagues. This is
an issue that we really need to get after. I think there are
many opportunities, especially in virtual health.
Some of the lessons learned, I had the opportunity to visit
Mercy Virtual in Missouri and to see how they have health
navigators to help get rural patients care virtually.
Since we established, in January, we just cut the ribbon
for the first DoD virtual health med center in San Antonio,
Brooke Army Medical Center. We can use and established that as
hubs to get that care, at least virtually, out to our Guard and
Reserve colleagues.
So we are working very closely. We have our Reserve and
Guard surgeons to determine, how can we do that? It is very
difficult in the States when there are individual States for
our Guard. So we are getting after it now.
In fact, our Guard down in Arkansas is at a conference for
medical personnel for our National Guard. And so, we are going
to make sure to tackle the issue and come up with a solution to
get after that.
Senator Tester. Thank you for your work.
General West. Thank you.
Senator Tester. I look forward to working with you to do
what we can do to solve this problem. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Blunt.
Senator Blunt. Thank you, Chairman.
Senator Tester, I totally agree with him and with you on
the importance of continuity on these electronic records. I
have spent some time on this issue, and I do think that we are
held back by a decision, maybe, as to whether or not the Deputy
Acting VA Administrator can sign the contract that is waiting
to be signed. But it is very much negotiated as the Defense
contract was, and I know you are on top of that.
The memory act, that we passed a few years ago, requires
some greater commitment to what a person in the service went
through in their service activities, which later, when you are
trying to qualify for behavioral health, will become much more
important than it is probably at the time that that is being
filled out.
I have two topics I want to be sure and get to here,
though, and three counting just a mention to General West.
Appreciate your trip to Fort Leonard Wood. You are looking at
Mercy Virtual and the importance of telemedicine.
I know that the three times you have been before this
committee, the other two times, we talked about the hospital at
Fort Leonard Wood, which you visited, being the top medical
facility priority. I am glad we have the first phase of that
underway now, the first $100 million committed to that.
For the record, I would like to see some sense of the way
we would phase the full facility in. Again, glad that you have
spent the time you have on this.
TELEHEALTH SERVICES
Let us talk about telehealth for a minute generally. I
think also I would be particularly interested, Admiral, in
telehealth as it relates to the ships at sea; both mental
telehealth as well as other telehealth services.
If you want to start, General West, with that.
General West. Thank you, Senator.
I do appreciate your support. Because of your advocacy, we
were able to get the Leonard Wood facility moving forward. So I
really appreciate that.
You have my commitment that we will continue to ensure that
that facility comes to fruition because our population there
deserves that facility.
For virtual health, again, as I mentioned, it is really
exciting to cut the ribbon on the first virtual med center.
That actually is joint, because we had linkages with our Navy
and Air Force colleagues, and even our inter-agencies. So that
is really a very positive, I think, advancement for that.
The number of visits that we have of virtual health, we
have about 17.9 million visits per year in our facilities.
Right now, about 20 percent of those are virtual, by the
definition of virtual, and that is e-mails, secure e-mail, and
telephone.
But when you talk about the real virtual, we mean the video
or the synchronous, it is a lot smaller, but we are actually
improving that.
We demonstrated that just recently with our teams that were
deployed. We deployed a virtual health satellite package with
the teams that supported our citizens in Puerto Rico and the
Virgin Islands. They actually were linked with providers back
in Texas and Georgia to provide that virtual care. So that was
just recently when we did that.
We do that operationally for the deployed forces and for
behavioral health. We find that our young soldiers, especially,
really prefer that method. When we do post-deployment mental
health or behavioral health screenings, initially they were
given options of either the face to face or the virtual, and
they actually seized that because I think that their generation
likes that.
Senator Blunt. Thank you.
Admiral, do you want to talk a little bit about what your
deployed service personnel benefit from and are challenged by
the virtual health concept?
Admiral Faison. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
As you know, 40 percent of the Navy and the Marine Corps is
forward deployed or at sea every day to protect our interests
around the world.
We also have the most highly trained, specialized, and
educated Navy and Marine Corps in our Nation's history. Every
sailor and Marine is critical to the mission. So we have used
telemedicine to great effect to keep them healthy and to keep
them on the job.
Ships at sea have that capability. We have a network out of
Naval Medical Center in Portsmouth that provides specialty
access on-demand to any ship around the world to care for those
Sailors and to provide care for them without having to evacuate
them; to keep them on station and on the job.
We have also used telemedicine to great effect in our shore
stations. So our hospital at Guam has the busiest Intensive
Care Unit in DoD, and they are supported by my colleagues, the
doctors in the Intensive Care Unit at Tripler Army Medical
Center in Hawaii. That allows us to take care of patients on
Guam without medical evacuation, give them the best care that
we can, and get them back to duty quickly.
And you are citing an issue that we just started this year
called Connected Corpsmen in the Community. As I shared with
you, our Corpsmen are our most critical member of the medical
team for combat survival.
To give them increased experience and exposure, and to help
build confidence in their ability to take care of patients, at
the same time keeping students in our schools, we have put
clinics run by Corpsmen in our schoolhouses down in Pensacola
where our aviation students are going through school.
Previously, if they got sick, they had to go to the hospital,
which was on another base, to get their care.
By having Corpsmen-run clinics connected virtually to
physicians back at the hospital, they are able to provide care
to those students and keep those students in school. So
telemedicine has been a big success for us.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HEALTH RESEARCH
Senator Blunt. Excellent. I have one other question I want
to cover before we are done, and I may have some more questions
for the record.
I did intend to ask about the research in defense. This is
a fight that Senator Shelby leads every year to try to continue
to be sure that we have that research component available to
us.
But there was an article yesterday in the ``U.S. News and
World Report,'' the headline was, ``Military Health System
Acknowledges Risk.'' And the point of that article was that
many people in military facilities do not do the same
procedures as often as they might in other places, and a strong
suggestion in that, that because of that, we need to take a
closer look at that.
One of the people, at least, that was mentioned in the
article that said he thought they warranted a closer look was a
retired Air Force surgeon.
So General Ediger, do you want to start with that? The idea
was that hip replacements, knee replacements, some cancer
surgeries that are infrequently done may not be as well done in
military hospitals as they would other places.
I think I would like to give you all a chance to respond to
that.
General Ediger. Yes, Senator. Thank you.
Naturally, there is increasing interest in the relevance of
volume of a certain procedure, particularly a surgical
procedure, done in volume at a hospital as it relates to the
quality of outcome. We think that is a very important
consideration.
Recently, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health
Affairs asked the Defense Health Board to actually study this
issue specifically in regards to the Military Health System.
I know that the Defense Health Board met just this week and
they have embarked upon a very detailed study of the volume of
surgical procedures as it relates to the readiness of our
surgeons, but also as it relates to the quality of the outcome.
This is something that has led us to increase our use of
partnerships with trauma centers and critical care centers in
order to give our surgeons and critical care specialists the
opportunity, through affiliation agreements, to actually take
trauma calls and do surgical procedures in partner institutions
in order to increase their volume to maintain proficiency.
We need to really work to maintain the proficiency of the
entire surgical and critical care team; that includes nurses
and technicians. And so now, we are expanding those
partnerships in Air Force Medicine to involve the nurses and
the technicians in those abilities to do that.
We believe the question about volume and its relevance to
the outcome and the reliability of the care we provide is very
important. So we fully support and are participating in the
Defense Health Board's study of that with recommendations due
back to the Department later this year.
Senator Shelby. Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Well, thank you very much to all of you for
being here and for your comments.
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD
Ms. Cummings, I wanted to start with you because, as you
know, my home State of Washington was chosen as one of the
initial test sites for the deployment of the MHS Genesis, the
new Electronic Health Record.
As we know, the Department has invested over $4 billion
into this system. So I was very concerned when I started
hearing at home disturbing reports about the rollout plagued by
technical problems.
I was out there. I heard issues about inaccurate
prescription submissions, misdirected patient referrals, long
waits to resolve problems in the program that were identified
by the clinicians. And some practitioners recorded that they
could not even open the program in a timely manner.
And worse, I have received reports that staff has received
inadequate training on the system and fear they may have to
take money out of their own operating budget to pay for that
training.
So, as you can imagine, this has had a significant morale
impact on the practitioners in my State, not to mention serious
concern about putting patients' lives at risk.
In your testimony, you sounded pretty positive. User
feedback was positive. There are change management
opportunities with any large scale IT transformation.
I just want to emphasize, this is not just a normal IT
problem. Patients' lives and safety are really at stake here.
So I wanted to ask you specifically what you are doing to
address those issues.
Ms. Cummings. Sure. Thank you for the opportunity to talk
about that.
We did get feedback across multiple parts of the MHS
Genesis deployment. Some of the lessons learned, I specifically
talked about around technology as well as training.
So just last night, we did an implementation of a
technology upgrade that significantly is bringing down the time
to log on. We recognized that login time was a huge challenge,
especially with doing documentation with the patient in the
room. And so, that was one of the things that we partnered with
the DoD CIO as well as the DHA CIO to make sure that we were
bringing the technology together in a way that would help ease
the adoption of MHS Genesis.
Some of the other issues that you mentioned were what we
have tackled in the optimization period from January to March.
We sent several hundred specialists from the Leidos partner in
Defense Health to actually sit with the users, and walk
through, and determine what was the technology configuration
versus what was a training issue. And so, we were able to work
with the users to make some significant improvements there.
There are still a couple of challenging areas.
TIMELINE OF FIXES
Senator Murray. My understanding is there was a backlog of
issues that need to be addressed. Do you have a timeline to get
those done?
Ms. Cummings. Sure. So we have currently, when we began the
optimization period, we had about 7,000 trouble tickets. I
think that is the backlog that you are referring to.
Out of those 7,000 tickets, we have been able to, we are in
the process of closing about 1,000 of them. The remainder are
broken up into two halves. Half of them are functional
decisions that need to be made. We have done some configuration
of our management structure on the functional side to be able
to make those decisions quicker.
What we want to make sure we are doing is we are making
enterprise decisions, and that represents about 2,500 of the
tickets. Those are enterprise decisions.
Senator Murray. Okay. Let us go back. There were 7,000
tickets.
Ms. Cummings. Seven thousand tickets.
Senator Murray. You have addressed 1,000.
Ms. Cummings. Correct.
Senator Murray. You are talking about 2,500 right now. That
leaves a lot out there.
Ms. Cummings. So that leaves about 2,000 that remain that
are currently in work by the Leidos partnership that we have
approved to have changed, and we are in the process of making
those changes.
Depending on the level of complexity and how much needs to
be done directly with the user, those changes will be made over
the remainder of the year.
Senator Murray. The remainder of this year, okay.
Ms. Cummings. Right.
Senator Murray. My understanding was that a lot of these
were identified long before the deployment of that. They should
have been addressed prior to people all of a sudden using them
when peoples' lives are at stake.
We are following this very closely. I just do not want
everybody to think this is ``happy-rosy'' because there are a
lot of issues that need to be addressed and we need to stay on
top of this.
WASHINGTON VACCINE PROGRAM
Let me ask you while you are here too. My home State of
Washington implemented a State vaccine program that has been
providing vaccines to children, including military dependents
since 2010.
The National Defense Authorization Act requires TRICARE to
reimburse Washington and other States' vaccine programs just
like other insurers do. But despite the law, despite the intent
of Congress, and despite these programs routinely providing
savings of up to 30 percent, TRICARE has not been a reasonable
partner.
It has taken years, multiple acts of Congress for my State
to get any reimbursement at all. Washington State even had to
put out a line of credit to keep this program solvent because
of this obstruction.
Now, TRICARE is refusing to reimburse more than $2 million
that is owed to the State of Washington and is now daring to
sue it.
So this is really unacceptable for the Department to treat
our States this way. I know your office does not have direct
control over this, but as the Defense wide person who is
sitting here today, I do want you to take this back to the
Department, and I want to know when that payment for $2.2
million will be paid to Washington State. If you could take
that back----
Ms. Cummings. I will.
Senator Murray [continuing]. And get an answer to me, I
would really appreciate it.
EMBED HEALTH PROGRAM
Finally, I just want to go back to embed behavioral health.
This is a critical issue. I worked really hard back in 2011 to
pass legislation to create the embed program in the Guard and
Reserves. We have seen real progress in fighting the stigma,
and building credibility, and improving quality of care for our
soldiers.
We know that since the implementation of that, soldiers and
family members now spend about 40 percent fewer days admitted
to the hospital for inpatient care than they did 5 years ago.
I think this is really the right way to go. We talked about
it when you were in office. Admiral Faison, I think you
mentioned it, that you are doing embeds as well.
General, you mentioned that you have them assigned to every
wing. Does that mean they are embedded with the soldiers?
General Ediger. Yes, Senator. So the directors of the
psychological health for the Guard and Reserve, Air Guard and
Reserve wings are actually assigned at the wing level.
Typically, a wing will have multiple squadrons. So they support
all the squadrons in the wing.
Senator Murray. Okay.
And General, as we talked about this the other day, share
with us the experience of some of the members you have that
have seen this work.
General West. Thank you, Senator.
We are really pleased with the results that we have seen
from this program. Embedded Behavioral Health, instead of
having our soldiers go to the hospitals for care, several years
ago, we decided to embed them with teams, some 12 member teams
depending on the size of the unit, out in the unit areas.
As of today, we have 61 of these teams embedded with our
Brigade Combat Teams. They are operational units; 31 with BCT's
and then another 156 battalion and brigade sized units other
than Brigade Combat Teams.
We have seen an increase in the usage of them; so back from
2012, when the number of visits that we had was 900,000 visits
to about 2.2 million visits. Not that there is more pathology,
but people just feel more comfortable using them because they
are in their area.
We have also seen a decrease in the admission rates by
about 41 percent. So 69,000 less admissions for acute
behavioral health because we have been able to handle it at the
local level and intervene earlier before it becomes an
admitable condition.
We have also seen that with our schools. I know it is not
so much readiness for soldiers, but we have actually had some
embeds in the schools that have a predominant number of
military children. There has been a really positive response
back to that as well.
Senator Murray. I really hope that in the long run, this
takes away some of the stigma. So as Senator Tester alluded to,
when they are back in civilian life that that stigma will not
be a barrier for them for seeking care as well. So I really
hope we continue to do this in a lot of ways.
Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to each of you for your leadership. I appreciate
all that you do as we are talking about mental health, and ways
that we can be there for our men and women in uniform, and
their families.
I think we recognize that there are different ways that we
can reach out and provide a level of services.
I have been really pleased with the healing arts program
that was begun a couple of years ago; this partnership between
the NEA (National Endowment for the Arts), between DoD, the VA,
our States' arts programs. We started out with 4 different
sites. We are now up to 11, I understand.
But not only has this proven to be a way for those who are
dealing with PTSD and other forms of trauma through expression,
perhaps not verbal, but to express in different ways. I think
we are seeing some very positive results.
The other thing that we are seeing is the support from the
community in a way where they feel that they can help with
those who have dealt with this level of trauma to bring the
community into the healing process. My observation has been
that this has been very good.
So I bring that to the attention of the committee because I
think it is an important part of how we deal with so many of
the issues associated with mental and behavioral health.
General West, I want to speak today about the concerns that
we have with Bassett Army Community Hospital and whether they
will be prepared to address the influx of airmen and military
families that will be coming to Eielson in the 2020 timeframe
with the bed down of the F-35. We are very excited about this.
When the Air Force stands up a new mission, it creates a
Site Activation Task Force to assess the readiness of the base
to receive the new mission. My understanding is that last year,
the Task Force scored healthcare as a red item. Now, I think
that that may have been upgraded to yellow; I hope so.
WILL HEALTHCARE AVAILABILITY IMPEDE THE ARRIVAL OF F-35
But my question is whether Army Medicine is prepared to
commit the necessary resources to ensure that the availability
of healthcare does not impede the timely arrival of the F-35
squadrons there at Eielson, and whether you see any gaps that
we need to address as we prepare for that influx?
General West. Yes, Senator. Thank you for the question.
We are excited as well to support any expansions that our
Nation needs. And so, for the medical care for those service
members and their families is very important to us as well.
And so, as part of that, and I know working with the Air
Force, when we are given a demand signal of what is required,
that energizes us and mobilizes us to ensure that we have the
end strength to place in those areas. If we need to increase
construction at the facility or any type of other things to
accommodate additional end strength, we will definitely work on
that.
We have a team that actually looks at, based upon the
patient mix, the patient population, what types of skill sets,
what services need to be provided. So we do have a team that
looks at that as a methodical way of increasing the capability
based upon the requirements. That is how we place our providers
and our capabilities at each one of our facilities.
Some of the things that we were seeing, that may be an
area, are the ENT physicians. And so, we are looking at what
the local facilities can provide. If there is any lack of
capability there, then those are things we might have a
uniformed person establish there, since there is not an off-
post alternative.
So our teams are looking for that, and we are committed to
making sure we have those gaps identified, and then mitigation
strategies to fill those gaps.
Senator Murkowski. And I appreciate that. I also recognize
that we can have real challenges when it comes to recruiting
the healthcare professionals up into the region. On the
civilian side, as you know, it is an issue.
But again, I think we have some lead time here and if we
have identified where those gaps are, we can be working to try
to address it.
I do not know, General Ediger, if you have anything further
you would like to add to that?
General Ediger. Yes, Senator.
In regards to the mission change at Eielson, we are
tracking the findings of the SATAF and we are working with the
Air Force/A1 and the programmers. So we see the projected
population growth in terms of military population. We are
programming the resources into the Eielson Medical Group to be
able to support the primary care requirements.
We are going to flow bioenvironmental engineers into
Eielson early. They are going to come in during this coming
fiscal year so that they can put the occupational health
programs in place that are associated with the F-35 mission.
We are working with the Army. We work together. We have a
good deal of joint staffing between Army and Air Force
hospitals. Anything that we can do to assist the shortfall that
they may be struggling with, we will look to see if we can
contribute to the solution as well.
Senator Murkowski. Appreciate that.
I have two more questions here before my time is up.
Senator Blunt raised the issue of how we ensure that we
maintain sufficiency when we, perhaps, do not have the volume
of surgical procedures.
We, again, raised this issue in Alaska. The difficulty to
keep or to find a specialist assigned to Alaska to maintain the
currency. That the healthy soldier population in Fairbanks does
not present any medical challenges, as the populations
available to the Army doctors, in some of the larger cities
across the country, face.
There has been a proposal that would allow Army specialists
to consult on Indian Health Service cases, which are a little
more challenging than you might see at Bassett. The question
then presents itself about reimbursement and it seems to kill
off the idea.
PARTNERSHIP REIMBURSEMENT
But given the discussion that you have had today with the
focus on increased partnerships, affiliation agreements to help
maintain sufficiency to really be supportive.
Is this an idea that may now have some currency? Because if
it is just an issue of reimbursement, we have worked, certainly
with the VA and the IHS (Indian Health Service) to figure out
how we can deal with reimbursement.
Is this something that you think we can start exploring?
General West. Yes, Senator.
And I understand now that there are opportunities for the
providers there to actually provide care to that population,
again, on a reimbursable basis. But looking at any ways that we
can increase the workload of our providers to increase their
readiness, we would definitely want to explore.
The one quick concern, I know that the Army had about the
pilots that went on for a period of time without reimbursement
would be difficult to sustain that, to sustain the personnel
and the infrastructure.
That would become an unfunded requirement, which would be
potentially not reimbursed, which would put our funding of our
other facilities, all the facilities, at-risk. We would have to
find a way to cover that unfunded requirement.
But as far as the concept of getting those opportunities to
increase the readiness of our providers; absolutely.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I think it is worthy of further
exploration.
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS RESEARCH--PEER REVIEWED MEDICAL RESEARCH
PROGRAM
Mr. Chairman, you have indicated your support for the Peer
Reviewed Medical Research Program at every one of these
hearings. I bring up the issue of ALS (Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis) and the recognition that ALS has been designated as
a service-connected disease. Our military veterans are twice as
likely to develop ALS as those who have not served in the
military.
I have been a firm advocate of making sure that we can
continue this focus and certainly would encourage the support.
I am not convinced that there is enough research that is being
done right now through this program.
If you disagree with me, I would like to know why you feel
confident that we are making some headway, but would hope that
we would continue to have the level of support focused on this
very, very, very difficult disease.
General West. Absolutely, Senator.
And we really do appreciate the support for this. Our
researchers at the Medical Research and Materiel Command have
actually made headway, made some progress. The $69.4 million
that has been provided since fiscal year 2007, has actually
funded 62 projects for the country's leading researchers. So
this is not just MRMC. This is on multiple fronts with the NIH
(National Institutes of Health).
We actually have four drug candidates which have progressed
to industry-backed advanced drug development. So I believe that
there is some good news and promising results coming out of
this.
Again, the relevance to the military, as you mentioned,
ma'am, is that there is a 60 percent higher rate in those that
have served. Our Gulf War period veterans have shown to be
twice as likely to have ALS as not. We do not know the reasons
why, but that is why, I think, this research is so important.
So we do appreciate it, Senator, that you have been really
advocating for that.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you for your continued focus.
And again, thank you all for your service.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Shelby. Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses today for your service and
for taking our questions.
JASONS LAW/ADDITION RESEARCH/PRESCRIPTION PRACTICES
In 2016, the Congress passed the Comprehensive Addiction
and Recovery Act. In that measure, we included my bipartisan
bill called the Jason Simcakoski Memorial Opioid Safety Act,
now known as Jason's Law, to reform opioid prescribing
practices at the VA and the Department of Defense.
Included within that was enhancing the Pain Management
Working Group of the two departments' Joint Health Executive
Committee on which, I believe, the three Surgeons General
before us today sit.
Specifically, Jason's Law requires the Working Group to
focus on opioid prescribing practices, pain management and
provider training, complementary and integrative health,
concurrent prescribing of opioids and drugs to treat mental
health disorders, transitions between inpatient and outpatient
settings from the Department of Defense to the VA, and the
screening and treatment of patients with substance abuse
disorders.
Jason's Law also required the update, which is now
complete, of the VA/Department of Defense Clinical Practice
Guidelines for opioid therapy to include a greater emphasis on
all of these issues.
Can each Surgeon General please provide me with an update
on the following, your perspective of the Pain Management
Working Group's progress on these opioid-related issues and how
your service is translating the Group's effort into improved
care at the patient and provider level?
Secondly, your service's implementation of the updated
Clinical Practice Guideline, including the methods used to
measure compliance by providers.
May I start with you, General West?
General West. Thank you so much for the question.
I have to say that I am really excited about the pain
management programs that we have within the Army to get after
all of these things that you mentioned. The opioid use, the
opioid prescribing amongst our providers has dramatically
decreased, I think, since 2012 currently.
The opioid use rate amongst our active duty has also
decreased from a high of 2007, it is now about 0.15 percent
versus the national average of 0.9 percent. So we have actually
really decreased that a lot.
We have these interdisciplinary pain management centers at
most of our larger facilities and in some of our smaller
clinics some aspects of it where we use a lot of alternative
therapies other than opioid prescriptions or even medication.
So we have chiropractors within our facilities that we have
actually in some--it is not universal--acupuncture, yoga,
mindfulness therapy, other alternative methods that actually
have shown improvement.
So we have a lot of our wounded warriors that were on a lot
of prescription medications that we were able to decrease the
numbers based upon other things, even like aqua therapy, equine
therapy. So there is a whole range of therapies that we
actually have incorporated into our facilities.
And so, as far as prescribing management, that also has
been something we have stressed to ensure that our providers
use or look at other mechanisms of treating pain other than
prescriptions.
We have our Pharm.D.'s, our clinical pharmacists. We have
hired more that are able to monitor the population and
determine what prescribing practices are amongst populations
and can intervene or make suggestions based upon that.
We also have an ability to look at what our beneficiary
populations are being prescribed. So we can look in databases
to see if we have chronic users, and then put them in more of a
clinical management or practice, case management process to see
if we can wean them off of those medications.
So there is a lot of work still to be done, but I think
that we are getting after it because we realize the concern
with it. And actually, my colleagues and I met with the Surgeon
General of the U.S., Admiral Adams, to determine if there was
something we could do collaboratively to get after this
nationally.
Thank you for the question.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
Admiral Faison. Ma'am, this is an important issue for the
Navy as well. We are very tightly linked with our sister
services to reduce opioid dependence and use amongst our armed
forces.
Our approach has been more to avoid putting these folks on
these types of medications in the first place, and explore
alternatives instead of treating dependence later on.
And so, we have embraced the work of the Work Group. We
have adopted all of our clinical practice guidelines that the
Work Group has identified. We have put in place robust patient
education for our providers that not only is initial education,
but ongoing refresher training as well.
At each of our medical centers, we have established a pain
management consultant group to be able to be a resource for
primary care and other providers in pain management decisions.
We have invested heavily in alternative therapies. We have
educated or trained almost 100 providers in acupuncture, as one
example, in looking at alternative therapies for that.
As a result of that and other efforts that we have done, we
have seen a 38 percent reduction in active duty personnel on
opioid therapy. Our rate of opioid use is very similar to the
Army. It is one-tenth of what we see in the civilian sector;
seven to ten times less.
In addition, I just signed out an instruction that puts
specific guidelines and restrictions on opioid prescribing and
required follow up and assessments to be done for any patient
that got over 90 days worth of opioid therapies.
Then finally, our safety net; last year, I identified and
appointed a two star medical Corps flag officer as the Chief
Quality Officer for Navy Medicine.
Then we have assigned senior O6-level physicians,
experienced physicians, as Chief Medical Officers at every one
of our facilities. Their job is to look at quality and safety,
of which opioid utilization is one factor. So they review, on a
monthly basis, medication profiles of the databases to identify
high uses and get them into case management and alternative
therapies.
We have been blessed with some good work.
Senator Baldwin. Great. General.
General Ediger. Thank you, Senator.
We also have adopted and trained to the clinical practice
guidelines and we also have seen a reduction in opioid
prescribing among Air Force providers.
Senator, you highlighted the fact that part of the DoD
strategy is the increasing use of integrative medicine. We have
made integrative medicine a priority in Air Force medicine over
the past 3 years.
We have trained over 3,000 clinicians on integrative
medicine techniques, and we have built integrative medicine
into our family medicine residency at Nellis Air Force Base,
and we actually have residents going there from other sites to
make integrative medicine skills a standard part of the
armamentarium of an Air Force primary care provider.
In addition, on 1 August, we are going to cut the ribbon on
our first specialized PTSD traumatic brain injury treatment
center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida to treat DoD missions
along the Gulf Coast. It is built on the model of the spirit
centers that the Army and Navy operate under the National
Intrepid Center of Excellence.
The one addition we have made to that capability is that we
have put pain management in there as a featured service within
that center. And so, we are building the staff with a highly
experienced, integrative medicine capability. Then using
telehealth to be able to connect to Air Force medical groups
everywhere and be able to assist them with pain management
techniques to reduce opioid use.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
Senator Shelby. Thank you, Senator Baldwin.
That will conclude today's hearing. I want to thank our
witnesses for your testimony.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Senators may submit additional written questions to the
subcommittee, and we would request your response to them, if we
get them to you, within 30 days.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Lieutenant General Nadja West
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard C. Shelby
uniformed services university of health sciences
Question. Please comment on the value of the Uniformed Services
University of Health Sciences (USUHS) to the Department, particularly
in recruiting and retaining medical professionals.
Answer. The Uniformed Services University of Health Sciences
(USUHS) continues to be a strategic asset for the Army Medical
Department (AMEDD). Beyond recruiting and accessions, USUHS conducts
unique, military-relevant training and improves retention of medical
professionals. USUHS directly supports the Medical Corps (MC), Army
Nurse Corps (AN), Medical Service Corps (MS) and Enlisted Corps (EC).
USUHS provides military acculturation while training, allowing
graduates to ``hit the ground running'' following completion of
studies.
USUHS physician graduates have historically become board-certified
at a higher rate than graduates of civilian medical schools, directly
contributing to quality of care and medical readiness. The two main
sources of MC accession--the Health Professions Scholarship Program
(HPSP) and USUHS--are both highly successful at meeting mission, but
neither is sufficient to produce 100 percent of the AMEDD's needs.
USUHS typically provides approximately 20 percent of the Army's needs.
Because individuals with prior military service are more likely to
apply to USUHS and because of the longer initial training obligation
USUHS graduates undertake (7 years for USUHS vs 4 years for HPSP), a
higher percentage of USUHS graduates stay in the Army until retirement.
Thus, a significant number of senior officers in the Medical Corps are
USUHS graduates.
USUHS Graduate School of Nursing (GSN) students complete over 1800
clinical hours, exceeding the clinical hour requirements for national
board certification. The benefit of this experience is demonstrated in
the 100 percent board certification pass rate of USUHS GSN graduates.
Additionally, USUHS training experiences encompass operational
readiness in changing environments, clinical decisionmaking in the
Federal Health Care Delivery System, and consideration of global,
environmental, cultural and political context. These attributes
directly contribute to quality of care and medical readiness. Advanced
Practice Registered Nurses (APRNs) for the AMEDD are commissioned
through civilian and Federal programs. Both types of programs are
highly successful at meeting mission, but neither is sufficient to
produce 100 percent of the AMEDD's needs. When considering
Perioperative Clinical Nurse Specialists, Family Nurse Practitioners,
and Psychiatric/Behavioral Health Nurse Practitioners, USUHS is
currently training 100 percent, 64 percent and 53 percent of these AN
Officers, respectively. In upcoming academic years, USUHS is projected
to train 82 percent of these populations.
USUHS conducts distinctive training programs for MS Officers in the
fields of Clinical Psychology, Nuclear Medical Science, Entomology,
Environmental Science and Engineering, and Research Psychology. These
programs provide critical education and professional development
necessary to maintain ready medical clinicians and leaders in the
Military Health System (MHS). The AMEDD utilizes the USUHS Tri-Service
Clinical Psychology Program to recruit and train Army Clinical
Psychologists, providing up to 15 percent of the annual accession
mission. USUHS also supports retention by focusing research topics and
clinical care modalities pertinent to current behavioral health issues.
Nuclear Medical Science Officers have opportunities to work with a
nuclear reactor and large amounts of radioactive materials; they also
train on the medical effects of ionizing radiation and radiation
casualty management. These programs and courses are extremely limited
in the civilian sector; thereby increasing recruitment efforts. The
Entomology Officers customize their Master in Public Health and PhD in
Medical Zoology degree projects to address critical research and
operational gaps. USUHS offers a Master of Science in Public Health and
a PhD in Environmental Health Sciences that are accredited by the
Accreditation Board of Engineering and Technology. These programs align
with the core competencies of the Environmental Sciences and
Engineering military career fields. The training provides a unique
perspective to occupational and environmental health education that
many civilian programs lack. The programs expose our officers to
technical and professional situations that will mimic their career
paths, thereby allowing them to analyze and overcome complex problems
related to military service.
The Uniformed Services University College of Allied Sciences (USU
CAHS) has pilot programs for five Enlisted Military Occupational
Specialties, including: Operating Room Specialist; Physical Therapy
Specialist; Medical Laboratory Specialist; Preventive Medicine
Specialist and Nuclear Medicine. Also, CAHS is working with the 68C
Program and the Board of Nursing for the State of Texas to approve an
ASHS degree in Practical Nursing. USU CAHS's degree producing programs
serves as a platform for continuing civilian education, allowing
students to earn a degree in the health sciences ranging from the
Associate Degree level to the Post-Doctorate Degree level. The awarding
of undergraduate credit hours serves as both a recruitment and
retention tool for Army Medicine. USU CAHS places high priority on the
unique training needs of military medical personnel in contingency,
combat, tropical and deployment healthcare.
musculoskeletal injuries and orthopedic health training
Question. As you know our greatest military assets are our fighting
forces. We send our soldiers into harm's way and then assume that they
will receive medical care that is at parity with the civilian medical
system. However, a recent U.S. News and World report analysis found
worse outcomes in 10 common procedures in military surgeries as
compared to the same surgery in a private clinical setting. The report
suggests that since military doctors have fewer opportunities to refine
complex surgical skills and that they are not at the same level as
their private sector counterparts.
To all of the Surgeons General, these concerns date back years. For
the past 2 years, this committee has included report language
encouraging DHA to ensure orthopedic health professionals in particular
have adequate advanced surgical training after learning about the
burden of musculoskeletal injuries in our fighting men and women. What
are you doing to address this?
Answer. The quality of surgical care in Army Military Treatment
Facilities (MTFs) is comparable to, and in some cases better than that
received from civilian hospitals; however, while we perform above the
national benchmark average, we continually strive for improvements to
ensure the best quality care for our patients. We have several
initiatives aimed at providing our surgeons with regular advanced
sustainment training.
The quality of surgical care may vary from individual hospitals.
The American College of Surgeons (ACS) National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program (NSQIP) program is a nationally recognized,
scientifically validated, objective avenue used by U.S. hospitals to
measure the quality of surgical care. This program compares (among
other measures) the morbidity index of all participating hospitals.
Over 600 hospitals (12 percent) in the U.S. participate in this
program; all 19 Army surgical facilities are voluntary participants.
The latest NSQIP Semi-Annual report, indicates that Army facilities
perform above the national benchmark average for all participating
facilities. Additionally, the ACS awards a meritorious award to the top
10 percent participating facilities. Eisenhower Army Medical Center
(EAMC) received this award from 2015 through 2017 and Brooke Army
Medical Center (BAMC) received the award last year.
The need for competent and professional care for our wounded and
injured soldiers is well recognized by the Army. We recently created
the Army Medical Department (AMEDD) Military-Civilian Trauma Team
Training Task Force, under the office of the Medical Command (MEDCOM)
G3/5/7. Its aim is to expand on the current partnership we have with
University of Miami Ryder Trauma Center to other trauma centers across
the United States. The Army currently has two general surgeons and in
2019 will have an orthopedic surgeon embedded at Ryder. These surgeons
work alongside their civilian counterparts treating trauma patients and
facilitate the training of Forward Surgical Teams that rotate though
Ryder monthly for their two-week pre-deployment training. This year,
the Army added Cooper University Hospital in Camden, New Jersey and
Oregon Health & Science University Hospital in Portland, Oregon as
training partners. Beginning in the summer of 2018, surgical teams--
surgeons, nurses and anesthesia personnel--will be embedded full-time
in these facilities. The Task Force is currently seeking similar
arrangements with other civilian facilities.
Last year, the Army created Critical Clinical Training Task Lists
for each of the Medical Corps Specialties. This list delineates
required training, knowledge and experience that medical providers must
possess. This task list includes a minimum case volume as well as a
minimum level of trauma experience. In an effort to increase the
preparedness of our orthopedic surgeons, the Medical Corps has funded
an expansion of the Combat Extremity Surgeons Course to four courses
per year at four locations across the United States--San Diego Naval
Medical Center, Portsmouth Naval Medical Center, San Antonio Military
Medical Center and William Beaumont Army Medical Center. These courses,
hosted by the Army, train tri-service orthopedic, general and vascular
surgeons as well as physician assistants in the care of extremity
injuries in austere environments. Currently, every orthopedic surgeon
attends this course before their first deployment and every 3 to 4
years thereafter.
With regard to advanced training in surgical skills utilized in
garrison practice, such as spine surgery, total joint replacements and
arthroscopic surgery, the Army offers individuals the opportunity to
attend specialty society meetings and other training courses during the
year. The Army remains committed to providing the absolute best and
state-of-the art care to our trauma injured soldiers serving in harm's
way. We recognize the value of having a trained and ready medical force
to support the warfighter. Army Medicine has processes in place to
continue to develop additional training opportunities and will continue
to expand on these in the future.
military-civilian partnerships in orthopedic health training
Question. Lieutenant General West, a recent U.S. News and World
Report analysis found in many instances our soldiers receive surgical
care with outcomes that are worse than in the civilian population.
Lieutenant General Ediger was quoted saying Air Force relies heavily on
military-civilian partnerships to ensure that surgeons perform enough
surgery to stay proficient. Could you please discuss Army's approach to
mil-civ partnerships and whether you are taking advantage of the
opportunities presented to you?
Answer. The quality of surgical care in Army Military Treatment
Facilities (MTFs) is comparable to, and in some cases better than that
received from civilian hospitals; however, while we perform above the
national benchmark average, we continually strive for improvements to
ensure the best quality care for our patients. Army medicine has a
number of agreements in place and is developing new training agreements
with civilian agreements that address surgical skills sustainment and
proficiency.
The quality of surgical care may vary from individual hospitals.
The American College of Surgeons (ACS) National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program (NSQIP) program is a nationally recognized,
scientifically validated, objective avenue used by U.S. hospitals to
measure the quality of surgical care. This program compares (among
other measures) the morbidity index of all participating hospitals.
Over 600 hospitals (12 percent) in the U.S. participate in this
program; all 19 Army surgical facilities are voluntary participants.
The latest NSQIP Semi-Annual report, indicates that Army facilities
perform above the national benchmark average for all participating
facilities. Additionally, the ACS awards a meritorious award to the top
10 percent participating facilities. Eisenhower Army Medical Center
(EAMC) received this award from 2015 through 2017 and Brooke Army
Medical Center (BAMC) received the award last year.
Army Medicine's approach to military-civilian partnerships is well-
established and highly successful with a wide range of thriving
exchanges, agreements and programs with hospitals, companies,
educational institutions and professional bodies. Through several
hundreds of partnerships codified in Memoranda of Agreement , Training
Affiliation Agreements , Medical Training Agreements and External
Resource Sharing Agreements (ERSA), we vigorously pursue cooperative
and complementary services, robust training and enhanced proficiency,
leveraging any opportunity with the public and private sectors.
In your home State, for instance, Fox Army Health Center in
Huntsville has a track record of medical training agreements with
Auburn University and the University of Alabama among others, and
Lyster Army Health Clinic at Fort Rucker has active agreements with 19
distinct universities across several States. Some of our larger Medical
Treatment Facilities such as those at Fort Bragg and Fort Sam Houston
each have hundreds of such agreements. These partnerships bring
together the brightest minds in medicine (in uniform and out),
invigorating current care and adding potential recruiting benefit for
the long-term enhancement of our Medical Corps.
In keeping with the Service's overall approach, surgical care is a
conspicuous component of military-civilian engagements alongside
programs from social work to advanced prosthetic development. Army
maintains arrangements ranging from surgical residency programs up to
ERSA for military use of civilian facilities for surgery and even a
trauma services cooperative agreement between Brooke Army Medical
Center and Bexar County Hospital for shared trauma services
responsibility in the Greater San Antonio region. Much like the Sister
Service you cite, Army uses military-civilian partnerships to the great
benefit of surgical proficiency and overall capability.
medical technology for brain injury
Question. Lieutenant General West, are there any Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-cleared medical devices available today that could
help the military objectively assess the full spectrum of brain injury
in urgent settings which DoD has broadly fielded?
Answer. There are no FDA-cleared devices available today that
assess the full spectrum of traumatic brain injury (TBI), although
there are FDA-cleared devices that assess subsets of the spectrum of
TBI. Computerized tomography (CT) scan remains the hallmark assessment/
diagnostic device within military hospitals. However, there are two
mobile point-of-need devices (Infrascanner 2000, and BrainScope One),
and one emerging hospital-based capability (blood biomarkers), that are
FDA-cleared to aid in the evaluation of patients being considered for
CT after closed head injury; all three capabilities received funding
from the Department of Defense (DoD) for research and development.
BrainScope One has expanded utility beyond assessment of CT positive
bleeds, due to the fact that it includes a series of tests appropriate
to support multimodal evaluation of a concussion/mild TBI. Those tests
include: the Military Acute Concussion Evaluation (MACE), vestibular
oculomotor screening (VOMS), and reaction time/cognitive testing (a
computerized test of cognition).
Fielding: The BrainScope One and Infrascanner 2000 devices are not
``broadly fielded'' at this time. However, since February 2018, the
Army has purchased 132 BrainScope One devices, as well as the
associated disposable headsets. Twelve of those devices are in
Afghanistan with the 1st Security Forces Assistance Brigade (SFAB); the
rest are at Medical Treatment Facilities and operational commands. In
parallel to the initial ordering of BrainScope One and Infrascanner,
noted above, the Army is conducting environmental testing.
Question. A checklist called the Military Acute Concussion
Evaluation (MACE) is used today for screening of warfighters for
potential TBI by medics in urgent settings. Is this the only tool they
have, and how effective is it for such an important and complex with
long-term ramifications for our service members?
Answer. The MACE remains the primary tool available to soldiers to
assess mild TBI. However, it is currently undergoing significant
updates for a September 2018 release that will incorporate the
evolution of recent advances and be used in a complimentary ``low-
tech'' fashion to the new TBI assessment devices. The original MACE
remains relevant because it includes a concussion recognition tool,
inclusive of a history of the injury event; this information is key to
standardized documentation of the injury in a soldier's record. The
revised product, ``MACE2'', will add multimodal assessment capability
for vestibular dysfunction, cognitive/fatigue, cervicogenic pain,
oculomotor dysfunction and history of migraine/anxiety/behavioral
health. These enhancements are driven by the anticipation that earlier
identification of specific causes of symptoms will allow for a targeted
and more effective treatment plan. Therefore, in addition to the MACE2
update, the concussion management tools are under revision to achieve
individualized clinical management/rehabilitation based on information
gleaned from the enhancements of the MACE2. Simultaneous to MACE
updates, the Army is investing in parallel capabilities (the new
``high-tech'' devices: BrainScope One and Infrascanner) to supplement
the MACE.
Question. Are you seeing the adoption of advanced technology using
artificial intelligence and signal processing as seen in our daily
lives (e.g., Google, Waze, or Open Table) to help address the
complexities of traumatic brain injury assessment?
Answer. Yes, the military research & development and the clinical
communities are using artificial intelligence, such as advances in
signal processing, to address the complexities of TBI. Signal
processing is the foundation of many devices and tests of cognition,
balance and eye movements that address the complex and multi-
disciplinary assessment of traumatic brain injury. A few recent
advances in signal processing that improve our ability to identify
brain hemorrhage and injury include innovative use of near-infrared
spectroscopy and novel computer algorithms incorporating clinical and
electroencephalographic signals. These technological advances support
and enhance the clinical evaluation of traumatic brain injury. In
addition to DoD investments, the Army will continue to assesses the
commercial market for emerging technologies that can benefit the
Warfighter.
______
Questions Submitted to Vice Admiral C. Forrest Faison, III
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard C. Shelby
musculoskeletal injuries and orthopedic health training
Question. As you know our greatest military assets are our fighting
forces. We send our soldiers into harm's way and then assume that they
will receive medical care that is at parity with the civilian medical
system. However, a recent U.S. News and World report analysis found
worse outcomes in 10 common procedures in military surgeries as
compared to the same surgery in a private clinical setting. The report
suggests that since military doctors have fewer opportunities to refine
complex surgical skills and that they are not at the same level as
their private sector counterparts.
To all of the Surgeons General, these concerns date back years. For
the past 2 years, this committee has included report language
encouraging DHA to ensure orthopedic health professionals in particular
have adequate advanced surgical training after learning about the
burden of musculoskeletal injuries in our fighting men and women. What
are you doing to address this?
Answer. We share the Chairman's concern about military treatment
facilities (MTFs). We must ensure that our surgeons (and staff) are
provided complex surgical cases that sustain their clinical competency
to meet their readiness missions. In March 2018, the Acting Assistant
Secretary of Defense requested that the President, Defense Health Board
provide recommendation to the Department of Defense in order to improve
policies for managing facility surgical capabilities and surgeon
proficiency. Within Navy Medicine, we have recently identified an
opportunity to expand capabilities within Navy Medicine as the Naval
Medical Center Camp Lejeune is actively pursuing designation as a Level
III trauma center. This effort will result in increased readiness and
skills sustainment for all our providers--particularly our trauma
teams--while providing a valuable trauma response for Marine Corps Base
Camp Lejeune and the local community. In addition, we have implemented
Knowledge Skills and Abilities (KSA)Readiness Currency Development
focused on specialty community supported, data driven metrics and
process that link MTF based clinical practice to deployed clinical
experience. The KSA program provides an evidence-based methodology that
is being applied to assure baseline currency and competency of the
entire expeditionary and combat casualty care team. The KSA effort will
inform sustainment of currency and competency through direct practice
prioritization of high readiness value beneficiary care that may be
augmented by partnerships with civilian health systems when applicable.
This underpins an integrated strategy for assurance of combat casualty
care team readiness by the Military Health System.
Regarding orthopedic services, all Navy Orthopaedic surgeons
complete initial surgical training provided via graduate medical
education (GME) to include Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education (ACGME) accredited orthopedic surgery residency training for
all surgeons, and additional ACGME accredited fellowship training is
offered for the eight surgical subspecialties comprising the field of
Orthopaedic surgery. Additional advanced surgical skills training is
available to all Navy Orthopaedic surgeons via Continuing Medical
Education (CME), funded by Navy medicine, for surgical skills courses
sponsored by numerous Orthopaedic subspecialty societies, including the
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS).
uniformed services university of health sciences
Question. Please comment on the value of the Uniformed Services
University of Health Sciences (USUHS) to the Department, particularly
in recruiting and retaining medical professionals.
Answer. As a graduate of USUHS myself, I can personally attest to
the outstanding medical and military education I received at the
University. It has prepared me exceptionally well for a career in Navy
Medicine. As Surgeon General, I can tell you that USUHS is a critical
and reliable source of well-trained, prepared physician leaders on whom
we absolutely depend to support the Fleet and the Marine Corps. As a
top-tier medical school, admission to USUHS is highly competitive with
more than 3,000 applicants competing for 171 positions. USUHS students'
first-time pass rate on the United States Medical Licensing Examination
(USMLE) exceeds the national average. In addition, USUHS graduates have
a higher board certification rate than their national peers.
Navy Medicine values graduates from USUHS as an important and
reliable pipeline for generating physicians and leaders. These
graduates comprise a segment of all military physicians who understand
the dynamic military environment and the diverse settings in which they
will be expected to lead people and practice medicine. Developing that
combination of valuable qualities cannot be accomplished with the same
consistency and efficiency in the civilian sector. Having a core group
of physicians with that training background provides an element of
stability to the Military Health System. Students who apply to USUHS
are often more career orientated and commit to a longer obligation.
USUHS graduates continue on active duty longer than any other accession
source. Approximately 88 percent of USUHS graduates remain on active
duty at the 12-year mark, and 48 percent of medical officers graduating
from USUHS remain on active duty for at least 20 years. As a result of
higher continuation rates, USUHS trained Navy physicians comprise a
significant proportion of Navy Medicine leadership. USUHS, in
conjunction with our other accession sources, is an important component
of recruiting and retaining our outstanding Medical Corps officers.
______
Questions Submitted to Lieutenant General Mark A. Ediger
Questions Submitted by Senator Richard C. Shelby
musculoskeletal injuries and orthopedic health training
Question. As you know our greatest military assets are our fighting
forces. We send our soldiers into harm's way and then assume that they
will receive medical care that is at parity with the civilian medical
system. However, a recent U.S. News and World report analysis found
worse outcomes in 10 common procedures in military surgeries as
compared to the same surgery in a private clinical setting. The report
suggests that since military doctors have fewer opportunities to refine
complex surgical skills and that they are not at the same level as
their private sector counterparts.
To all of the Surgeons General, these concerns date back years. For
the past 2 years, this committee has included report language
encouraging DHA to ensure orthopedic health professionals in particular
have adequate advanced surgical training after learning about the
burden of musculoskeletal injuries in our fighting men and women. What
are you doing to address this?
Answer. The Air Force relies on graduate medical education to
provide advanced orthopeadic surgical training. All surgeons are
required to graduate from an accredited residency program of 5 years
duration. Furthermore, of the 76 active duty Air Force orthopedic
surgeons, 41 percent of them have completed a fellowship in one of the
various orthopedic sub-specialties to include sports, trauma, hand,
spine, oncology, joint replacement, foot & ankle, and pediatrics. The
fellowship trained surgeon trend has been increasing. Historically,
approximately 2-4 surgeons per year were offered fellowship training,
however, in each of the last 2 years the number of fellowship trained
surgeons has increased to an average of 12 per year. This represents a
trend toward having a much higher percentage of the orthopedic surgery
force fellowship trained in the most advanced surgical techniques.
These fellowships are accomplished in civilian institutions, many at
some of the most prestigious hospitals in the country.
In addition to residency and fellowship training, there are
opportunities for surgeons to attend continuing medical educations
programs both in and outside of the military. An example of this is the
yearly Society of Military Orthopaedic Surgeons (SOMOS)--Arthroscopy
Association of North America Arthroscopy (AANA) Course that is offered
to military orthopedic surgeons. A new opportunity is the newly
developed Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA)--SOMOS Military
Traveling Fellowship which offers up to 4 weeks of a traveling
fellowship to some of the best trauma centers in the country. Air Force
orthopedic surgeons are not limited to these programs, but can apply
for funding to travel to a variety of other courses, meetings, and
conferences, most of which are held by premier orthopedic surgical
societies and associations.
With regards to the US News and Report article, it is true the
surgical volumes at Air Force treatment facilities are significantly
lower than their civilian counterparts. Unfortunately, it is difficult
to ascertain whether this in fact translates into worse outcomes.
Efforts are underway to better capture patient outcome measures as
exemplified by MOTION (Military Orthopaedics Tracking Injuries and
Outcomes Network). This new program is a DoD-wide data driven approach
to musculoskeletal injury and treatment outcomes evaluation. It is
intended to optimize medical readiness and increase both healthcare
value and cost effectiveness.
While Air Force orthopedic surgeons are appropriately trained and
highly skilled, the Air Force would agree that increased case volumes
would improve the proficiency of our surgeons.
uniformed services university of health sciences
Question. Please comment on the value of the Uniformed Services
University of Health Sciences to the Department, particularly in
recruiting and retaining medical professionals.
Answer. The Air Force Medical Service (AFMS) values the diversity
of medical officers who enter active duty through our two main
physician accession sources: the Uniformed Services University (USU)
and the Health Professions Scholarship Program (HPSP). Each year USU
generates approximately 50 Air Force physicians while approximately 300
Air Force physicians are generated via HPSP. The quality of both
pipelines remains strong. The number of candidates for both remain
robust, allowing us to meet our quotas for each. Likewise, each
pipeline has strong GPAs & MCATs at entrance. We have no evidence that
USU produces a stronger (or weaker) physician than their civilian
school counterparts.
There are some differences between the USU & HPSP pipelines. Since
USU students are on Active Duty (with military pay and benefits and
credit towards retirement at 20 years), some students (especially those
with prior military service) are drawn to choosing USU. Other students
are hesitant to accept USU's longer active duty service commitment
(ADSC) of 7 years and prefer the HPSP scholarship commitment of 3-4
years. Thus, the HPSP pathway attracts students who may otherwise be
intimidated by the 7 year commitment, as well as those who do not have
prior military exposure. Others may prefer to attend medical school in
geographic areas other than the Washington DC metro area where USU is
located.
More analysis is needed to determine the return on investment (ROI)
for USU degrees. Determining the ROI requires knowledge of the cost of
a USU education (to include pay, travel to clinical rotations,
``tuition'' costs, supplies, etc.) and the average years of clinical
service post-training. The analysis must also eliminate selection
biases. With approximately 40 percent of USU students having prior
military service, longevity date (serving until a 20-year retirement)
must be reanalyzed to focus on the number of years serving as a
physician. We appreciate the ongoing work being accomplished by the
Defense Health Reform group and the McKinsey group on this topic.
While we value the military-unique curriculum provided at USU, we
also value the diversity of thought that is provided by HPSP students
being trained by a diverse set of high-quality schools. We appreciate
USU's research and Centers of Excellence and we also value the
partnerships the Air Force has formulated with our civilian
counterparts and their commitment to serving our Nation's military
through their research and expertise. While we appreciate USU's
commitment to leadership training, we also value the civilian medical
schools leadership focus as well (some of which offer dual-degree
programs with MBAs).
In summary, the combination of USU and our civilian training
programs have served us well. As USU has not been able to quantify the
cost of their medical school education, it is difficult to objectively
analyze their return on investment. This will hopefully be better
defined by the Defense Health Reform Group's current study.
______
Question Submitted by Senator John Hoeven
military clinicians and the veterans choice program
Question. In your testimony, you mention that partnerships between
the Air Force and Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) give our veterans
greater access to care at Military Treatment Facilities (MTFs) while
also sustaining the readiness of Air Force clinicians. You also share
your concern that due to the implementation of the Veterans Choice
Program, veteran referrals to Air Force hospitals have decreased by 15
percent.
As Congress works to implement the next phase of the Veterans
Choice Program, how can we best leverage the experience and skillset of
our Air Force and military clinicians while ensuring all of our
veterans are able to receive high quality healthcare in a more timely
manner and closer to home in their communities?
Answer. Future VA Choice legislation must address the
prioritization of Veteran care referrals via a mandated Right of First
Refusal (ROFR) process. A legislatively mandated ROFR prioritization
that refers Veteran care first within the VA, then with proximal DoD
MTFs, and lastly with the civilian network through VA Choice would
ensure both timely and quality care for our Veterans, as well as the
right complexities and case mix military providers require.
Through already established Resource Sharing Agreements, Veterans
are currently able to access care at a reduced cost to the VA. The
proposed ROFR process would help ensure both the VA and DoD utilize
existing, paid for systems first. Many Air Force MTFs have seen a
reduction in the use of these Resource Sharing Agreements since the
implementation of the VA Choice Program. Data over the past 5 months
shows approximately 20 percent, or 179,000, specialty care appointments
across the Air Force Medical Service went unbooked. While not all
unbooked appointments are due to VA choice, these appointments
represent missed currency and readiness case opportunities for Air
Force providers.
______
Question Submitted to Ms. Stacy Cummings
Question Submitted by Senator Richard C. Shelby
medical devices
Question. The Defense Health Agency (DHA) runs a significant amount
of IoT (Internet of things) technology--which includes many ip-enabled
medical devices and building equipment, as well as traditional laptops,
desktops and servers--on its hospital networks. These networks roll up
to the DHA Medical Community of Interest (MEDCOI) network. Portions of
DHA including Army MEDCOM and some Naval hospitals have begun to
implement a cybersecurity framework called Comply to Connect* that
combines existing and new capabilities to ensure that every device that
connects to DHA's networks is secure and compliant with the
Department's policies and remains so as long as it is connected. What
approach is DHA taking to secure medical devices on its networks as
part of the MEDCOI migration plan? What are the unique requirements
medical devices have from a cybersecurity perspective? How does DHA
track and account for IoT/networked medical devices? There have been
several instances in the private sector where medical devices have been
hacked and in some instances held for ransom. How is DHA addressing the
challenge of IoT/medical device security in order to ensure that
warfighter care is never interrupted or their health put at risk?
Answer. The DHA Medical Community of Interest (Med-COI) network and
associated Desktop to Datacenter (D2D) program is implementing the
technical components required to allow modern Internet of Things (IoT)
to work properly and securely. Med-COI plays a critical role in
achieving centralized, standardized cybersecurity protections by
providing a standard, comprehensive security architecture. Central to
the approach is a standard ``isolation architecture'' of twelve well-
defined Virtual Local Area Networks (VLANS). Security is a combination
of device hygiene (e.g.: how well the device's design satisfies
cybersecurity requirements) and the network it is connected to. Our
isolation architecture allows devices of various levels of cyber
hygiene to operate with various levels of network ``trust''. The
isolation architecture, combined with DoD Risk Management Framework
(RMF) assessments of devices, and our D2D standard network monitoring
toolset will provide real time visibility of the operational
environment and continuous monitoring of the security of the Military
Health System (MHS). Medical devices, much like ``facilities devices''
such as heating and air conditioning units, security systems (cameras),
and printers have almost all become ``network aware'' or ``network
enabled'' in the last 10 years. Unfortunately, cyber security was not a
driving force in their development. Typically, these devices have
operating systems and software that is vendor controlled, tightly
integrated to the hardware, and unable to keep pace with the security
patching required to stave off today's cyber threats. Our DHA isolation
architecture, combined with DoD RMF assessments of devices, and our D2D
standard network monitoring toolset will ensure MHS systems operate
effectively and safely. In accordance with current policy, DHA tracks
and accounts for IoT/networked medical devices using device inventories
maintained by our Medical Logistics community and local asset
inventories in combination with the results of required scans of our
networks for both known and unknown (or rogue) devices. As discussed
above, DHA will address the challenge of IoT/medical device security
through implementation of Med-COI and our DHA isolation architecture
combined with DoD RMF assessments of devices, and our D2D standard
network monitoring toolset. Further, DHA will continue to work with
Industry partners, as well as device manufacturers, to find effective
solutions to any emerging threats related to IoT/medical device
security to ensure we can secure these devices without compromising
their effectiveness and utility in the patient care setting.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Shelby. The Defense subcommittee will reconvene on
Wednesday, May 9 at 10:00 a.m., to receive testimony from the
Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.
Until then, we stand in recess. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., Thursday, April 26, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene at 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday, May 9.]