- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019
[Senate Hearing 115-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2019
----------
THURSDAY, MAY 10, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 10:05 a.m., in room SD-192, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Jerry Moran (Chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Moran, Collins, Murkowski, Boozman,
Capito, Lankford, Shaheen, Leahy, Reed, Schatz, Manchin, and
Van Hollen.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
STATEMENT OF HON. WILBUR ROSS, SECRETARY
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR JERRY MORAN
Senator Moran. Good morning, everyone, and welcome to our
subcommittee's second budget hearing.
I call to order the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on
Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies for the fiscal
year 2019 budget.
Today, we will hear from the Secretary of Commerce, Wilbur
Ross, about the President's fiscal year 2019 funding priorities
for the Department of Commerce. We welcome you, Mr. Secretary.
You and I have known each other for a while, and I am glad to
see you today, and I look forward to your testimony this
morning.
The Department of Commerce executes a broad range of
activities critical to our Nation, which includes working with
distressed communities to support economic development and job
growth; managing the Federal use of spectrum and utilizing
broadband programs to enhance safety and to promote economic
growth; enforcing trade laws to ensure American businesses can
compete on a level playing field around the globe; operating
weather satellites and forecasting severe storms; conducting a
cost-effective and accurate Decennial Census; and many other
responsibilities under your purview, Mr. Secretary.
I noted in our last hearing, the administration's budget
request was produced before the recently enacted fiscal year
2018 bill was finalized and had become law. The President's
fiscal year 2019 request is $9.8 billion, which is $1.3 billion
below the fiscal year 2018 enacted level. This represents a 13
percent decrease in the Department's overall budget.
Critical to our Nation's competitiveness and growth, the
Economic Development Administration (EDA), within the
Department of Commerce, bolsters the capacity for individuals
and businesses, and the communities in which they live and
work, to maximize local talent and institutions to innovate and
create jobs.
EDA also provides small, but valuable, investments for
economically distressed areas to spur development and support
job creation. EDA's Regional Innovation Program is particularly
popular for those interested in business development in my home
State of Kansas.
Likewise, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's (NIST's) Manufacturing Extension Partnership, the
MEP program, is strongly supported in the business community as
a positive example of a public-private partnership that leads
to innovation and job creation. I represent a rural, yet
multifaceted, State and I continue to support these programs,
which allow States and localities to steer priorities to
address their specific economic development needs.
Directly linked to the programs that support job creation
is the ability to access high-speed broadband capabilities.
Many Members of this subcommittee, many Members of the
Appropriations Committee, represent large, rural areas of our
country. This is a hugely important issue to us and to the rest
of the country.
The Department oversees the Federal use of spectrum and
manages broadband grants through the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, NTIA. There
is concern at home, and in States across the country, that
communities are not yet fully able to access broadband because
they live in either underserved or unserved areas. I am
interested to hear how the Department is currently working to
address this problem and how the fiscal year 2019 budget
request will further support efforts to understand where
broadband access is lacking in our Nation.
Additionally, I would like to know how NTIA is using the
$7.5 million this subcommittee provided in fiscal year 2018 to
update the national broadband availability map and how you are
coordinating with the Federal Communications Commission. I
just, this week, met with Chairman Pai on the topic of maps,
and broadband, and other technology deployments across rural
America.
Effective deployment of broadband resources is completely
dependent upon having the right data that identifies those
unserved and underserved areas.
Mr. Secretary, your Department plays a significant role in
the Nation's trade policies. Recently, you have been at the
forefront of recommending tariffs on certain imports of steel
and aluminum, as well as affirming a preliminary antidumping
duty determination on uncoated groundwood paper.
From the subcommittee's standpoint, I would like to hear
what resources you need at the Department, what you expect to
encounter in fiscal year 2019 to address the increased trade
enforcement activities of your Department.
Furthermore, I would like to convey to you my serious,
significant concerns on the behalf of Kansas farmers and
others--our manufacturers and our aircraft industry in
particular, but those who manufacture automobiles and other
things--in regard to the retaliatory tariffs imposed on
American products. That is particularly true in agriculture
where we are, I would say always and if not, almost always the
target of those retaliatory tariffs.
Kansas is an export State. Mr. Secretary, I told you in
your confirmation hearing and our meeting prior to that, that I
hoped I would be gum on your shoe in regard to exports. You
have mentioned that to me several times, so I appreciate that
the expression has stuck with you, but I want to be gum on your
shoe in regard to this issue of exports. I want to know how the
Department, how you see its role in protecting American
agriculture from those retaliatory tariffs.
Our Nation must be tougher in enforcing trade agreements. I
agree with that, but when we enforce those trade rules, we need
to be mindful of the negative impacts that retaliation can have
on domestic products. Achieving this balance will require
continued congressional oversight, including this subcommittee,
closely monitoring the funding provided for trade activities.
I would tell my subcommittee Members that I requested of
our staff that we begin pursuing an additional hearing with the
United States Trade Representative (USTR) in regard to trade
and their appropriations request as well.
I look forward to hearing more about the Department's plan
to ensure our trade policies benefit our Nation's farmers,
ranchers, and other exporters.
I am pleased to see that the administration requests full
funding for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), the flagship weather satellites, which provides
important data for weather forecasting and to protect our
Nation's citizens. I am only cautiously optimistic, however,
about the cost savings the Department believes will come from
consolidating NOAA's polar-orbiting satellite into a single
program. These satellites contribute more than 80 percent of
the data needed for numerical weather prediction models to
forecast hurricanes and severe storms.
I remember in your confirmation hearing, Mr. Secretary,
this is an issue of great interest to you. And as a Floridian,
I certainly understand why that would be the case. The weather
matters to all of us.
Mr. Secretary, we must ensure that our weather satellites
are adequately resourced in fiscal year 2019 to keep them on
budget and on schedule.
Finally, this subcommittee continues to closely monitor the
Department's activities leading up to the 2020 Census. The
census provides vital data for our Nation that directly impacts
each State's representation in Congress, as well as
distribution of billions in formula-based funding among States
and localities.
There is concern that the increased estimated costs
identified by the Department's independent review, and the need
to scale back the number of sites for the dress rehearsal end-
to-end test, could be indicators of future cost growth.
Furthermore, the resources needed for the 2020 Census
creates significant funding pressures on the Department's
budget overall. The Department must ensure it meets the
constitutional mandate for the 2020 Census, and this
subcommittee wants to be assured that funding requested in your
fiscal year 2019 request will accomplish this task.
Mr. Secretary, I generally try to speak a lot less than I
have spoken this morning, but you have such a wide array of
issue within the Department of Commerce that are so important
to all of us, to our home States, and to the Nation in general.
I thank you for taking the time. I thank you for your public
service and willingness to commit yourself to serving as the
Secretary of the Department of Commerce.
So I appreciate your presence here today and your efforts
to make sure that we have the information necessary to be an
ally on behalf of good things happening at the Department of
Commerce.
I now turn to my Ranking Member, the Senator from New
Hampshire, Senator Shaheen. Thank you very much.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR JEANNE SHAHEEN
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you again, Secretary Ross. We are delighted to
have you here this morning. I know that you have just returned
from a trade delegation trip to China, so I appreciate your
stamina. And I also appreciate your efforts to get tough on our
international competitors, who are continuing to tilt the
playing field in their favor.
I must, however, take this opportunity to say that I hope
we are not going to do that in a unilateral way that causes an
unnecessary trade war with our allies. The Chairman expressed
some of the issues that he has in the Midwest and Kansas, and
we have some similar issues in New Hampshire. I am concerned
that the decision to impose new tariffs on billions of dollars'
worth of goods will have major ramifications for American
consumers and our Nation's 29 million small businesses.
Your budget request for 2019 would reduce funding for the
Department of Commerce by $1.3 billion; that is a 12 percent
reduction below the funding provided in fiscal year 2018.
Now, as a lifelong and very successful businessman, I know
you understand the importance of investing in our communities
to keep them competitive in the global marketplace. I worry
that the President's fiscal year 2019 budget proposes to, once
again, eliminate crucial economic development and manufacturing
programs that are so important to communities across this
country.
The Congress rejected those proposals in fiscal year 2018
and, instead, we provided increases for both the Economic
Development Administration and the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership, among other things.
The budget request also would eliminate more than $400
million in NOAA grant programs to States, academic
institutions, and partners around the country. Programs like
Sea Grant and Coastal Zone Management grants are so important
to the coastal economic vitality of all of the States that
border the oceans. New Hampshire is one of those. We only have
18 miles of coastline, but we are very proud of that coastline
and we want to make sure that it stays as pristine as possible.
In New Hampshire, our fishermen are also struggling after
years of severe limits on the commercial fishing of cod. These
businesses rely on sound, science-based management from the
Department, but NOAA needs to have the sufficient resources to
carry out this mission. And so, part of my goal is to ensure
that that happens.
I fought for more than $10 million in the Omnibus to fully
fund the cost of at-sea monitors on the boats of our fishermen.
It is an issue for Maine, and all of New England, and I look
forward to working with you to get this funding spent wisely.
The Omnibus also provided $2.8 billion for the Census
Bureau. Not only does the Census apportion congressional
representation, but it also directs how more than $675 billion
of Federal funds are spent every year.
So we have to get this right and that is something that I
have heard you say from the very first meeting that we had.
That you understood the census, understand the census because
you actually worked it in at one point in your career. I know
that we all agree that sufficient funds should be there to
increase partnership and communication efforts as the 2020
Census ramps up in the next 2 years.
I will say, I was very disappointed that the Department
decided to include a citizenship question as part of the 2020
Census. I am concerned, given the current political climate,
that some communities will refuse to participate and that this
is going to affect the accuracy of the count, and therefore all
of the programs and funding that depend on the census.
So Mr. Secretary, we have a lot to discuss this morning and
I look forward to that conversation.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Shaheen.
I now recognize the Secretary of Commerce, the Honorable
Wilbur Ross, for his statement. Thank you for being here. And
again, we look forward to hearing you.
SUMMARY STATEMENT OF HON. WILBUR ROSS
Secretary Ross. Thank you, Chairman Moran, Ranking Member
Shaheen, and Members of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss President Trump's
fiscal year 2019 budget request for the U.S. Department of
Commerce.
Thank you especially for enabling the Department to meet
its major strategic objectives of helping the American economy
grow and ensuring our national security. We are accomplishing
this by supporting investment and job creation; by preparing
for a successful 2020 Decennial Census; by bolstering trade
enforcement and export controls; and providing the
observational infrastructure and personnel to develop timely,
and accurate, weather forecasts.
Under my stewardship, our resource allocations in the
fiscal year 2019 budget are centrally focused on helping
American businesses and industries compete globally, while
simultaneously improving the economic conditions and everyday
lives of the American people and their communities.
To that end, the Department of Commerce's fiscal year 2019
budget request of $9.8 billion in funding is a $1.3 billion
decrease from the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus of $11.1 billion.
This does not include the $1 billion that was recently
appropriated to the Department as part of the supplemental
assistance package enacted in the aftermath of severe storms in
Texas, Florida, and U.S. territories. The EDA, the Economic
Development Administration, was provided $600 million of that,
and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was
allocated $400 million.
The fiscal year 2019 budget carries forward key strategic
investments from 2018 and introduces new initiatives that, I
believe, are critical to sustaining the economic momentum we
have established.
Our laser focus remains on helping the American economy
grow. The Department's fiscal year 2019 budget recognizes the
challenges facing American workers and businesses as they
attempt to navigate a rapidly changing, and increasingly
competitive, world.
I believe the budget request is uniquely tailored to
leverage the innovation, talent, expertise, and technological
prowess of the Department's programs, the projects, and the
activities to ensure businesses and the American people are
receiving a good return on their taxpayer investment.
By prioritizing our industries, trade and economic
advantages, and our workforce, we will continue to be an
economic engine, both in the United States and around the
world.
I look forward to working with this Committee, and the rest
of the Congress, to achieve our shared goals on behalf of the
Nation's taxpayers.
I would be happy to answer your questions.
Thank you.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Wilbur Ross
Chairman Moran, Ranking Member Shaheen, and Members of the Senate
Appropriations Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to discuss
President Trump's fiscal year 2019 budget request for the U.S.
Department of Commerce.
Thank you for enabling the Department to meet its major strategic
objectives of helping the American economy grow, and ensuring our
national security. We are accomplishing this by supporting investment
and job creation; preparing for a successful 2020 Decennial Census;
bolstering trade enforcement and export controls; and providing the
observational infrastructure and personnel to develop timely and
accurate weather forecasts.
Under my stewardship, our resource allocations in the fiscal year
2019 budget are centrally focused on helping American businesses and
industries compete globally while improving the economic conditions and
everyday lives of the American people and their communities.
To that end, the Department of Commerce's fiscal year 2019 budget
request of $9.8 billion in funding is a ($1.3 billion decrease from the
fiscal year 2018 omnibus ($11.1 billion). This does not include the
$1.0 billion that was recently appropriated to the Department as part
of the supplemental assistance package enacted in the aftermath of
severe storms in Texas, Florida, and other U.S. territories (the
Economic Development Administration was provided $600 million and the
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration was allocated $400
million).
The fiscal year 2019 budget carries forward key strategic
investments from fiscal year 2018 and introduces new initiatives that I
believe are critical to sustaining the economic momentum that we have
established.
Our laser focus remains on helping the American Economy grow. The
Department's fiscal year 2019 budget recognizes the challenges facing
American workers and businesses as they attempt to navigate a rapidly
changing and increasingly competitive world.
I believe the budget request is uniquely tailored to leverage the
innovation, talent, expertise, and technological prowess of the
Department's programs, projects, and activities to ensure businesses
and the American people are receiving a good return on their taxpayer
investments.
By prioritizing our industries, trade and economic advantages, and
our workforce, we will continue to be an economic engine, both in the
United States and around the world.
I look forward to working with this Committee and the rest of the
Congress to achieve our shared goals on behalf of the Nation's
taxpayers. For more information about the Department's fiscal year 2019
budget, please visit the Department's website at: http://
www.osec.doc.gov/bmi/budget/FY19_CBJ.html.
highlights of the fiscal year 2019 commerce budget request
Census:
The 2020 Decennial Census is the Department's top priority. A
complete and accurate Decennial Census is critical as it informs the
policy making process, governs the apportionment of seats in the House
of Representatives allocated to the States, and helps direct more than
$675 billion annually in Federal funds to local communities to improve
homeland security, education, and infrastructure.
To support this critical endeavor, the Department's fiscal year
2019 budget requests $3.8 billion for the Census Bureau, $3.1 billion
of which will directly support 2020 Census operations. The proposed $1
billion increase from the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus reflects the
Department's commitment to count everyone once and in the right place.
The Census Bureau appreciates Congress' support for the decennial
census and the inclusion of an additional $1.1 billion beyond the
program's estimate for 2018 (including contingency funds) in the 2018
Omnibus appropriations act. These funds will help provide financial
certainty to the program as we transition from fiscal year 2018 to
fiscal year 2019, and represent a down payment on the $3.1 billion
requested in 2019 to continue all preparatory activities and existing
field operations.
Key activities for the 2020 Census will take place in 2019. We will
be making final refinements for all systems to ensure they meet all
requirements, are secured, tested, and are seamlessly integrated. The
field offices and other field infrastructure will be stood up
nationwide.
We will be increasing the number of Partnership Specialists to our
planned level of 1,000. This staff will work throughout 2019 to build
the network of approximately 300,000 census partners who will be the
trusted voices to encourage communities across the Nation to respond to
the 2020 Census. We will also begin the full-scale development and
implementation of all aspects of the Communications Program.
We will conduct the first major field operation: In-Field Address
Canvassing. Approximately 76,000 field listers and supervisors will be
trained and sent into the field to complete this difficult and
important work.
The 2020 Census questionnaire and materials will be finalized. We
will also finalize and secure all operations and systems related to the
use of administrative records and third-party data and ensure they are
working together in preparation for use in the 2020 Census.
Trade:
When President Trump tapped me to serve as the Commerce Secretary,
I vowed to work hard to reduce the Nation's trade deficit. Increased
enforcement of our trade laws has been a major effort in this regard.
Approximately $440 million is requested in the Department's fiscal
year 2019 budget for the International Trade Administration (ITA). ITA
will use the requested funding to hire more subject matter experts and
enhance its trade enforcement and analysis capacity as it relates to
antidumping and countervailing duty and Section 232 investigations.
The fiscal year 2019 budget includes more than $90 million, an
increase of $3 million, for ITA's enforcement and compliance programs.
This funding will enable ITA to conduct robust investigations into
alleged trade violations and aggressively advocate for U.S. businesses
facing tariff and non-tariff barriers abroad. A portion of this would
be specifically allocated to Department of Commerce self-initiation
efforts on behalf of American workers and businesses.
Trade is also closely linked to our national security. Separately,
in 2017, the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) successfully
completed 13 administrative enforcement cases, with total civil
penalties of $692,296,500--the highest annual level of civil penalties
in the history of the Bureau.
To continue building on these important enforcement and national
security initiatives, $121 million is requested in the fiscal year 2019
budget for BIS, a $7.0 million increase from the 2018 omnibus. This
increased funding will enable BIS to hire additional staff to address
the increased workload associated with expanded export controls to
protect our technology and the Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States (CFIUS). The International Trade Administration is also
provided with additional funding for CFIUS to support its ability to
detailed sector reviews required under CFIUS and perform its role as
the Department's CFIUS coordinator.
Weather Satellites:
With its $1.6 billion request for the National Environmental
Satellite and Data Information Service (NESDIS), NOAA will continue its
work to deploy the next generation of weather satellites and
observational infrastructure. The fiscal year 2019 budget includes $878
million for the Polar Weather Satellites, which supports continued work
on the Joint Polar Satellite System-2 (JPSS-2) and allows the program
to maintain the previously scheduled Launch Readiness Dates of second
quarter in 2024 for JPSS-3 and the fourth quarter of 2026 for JPSS-4.
The budget meets this objective, while lowering overall costs, by
combining the current JPSS Program of Record (POR) with the Polar
Follow On (PFO) program into a single program, allowing NOAA to more
efficiently manage the acquisition of these satellites. The JPSS
satellites provide space-based observations that are critical data for
weather forecast models in support of forecasting short, mid- and long-
term severe weather events.
The fiscal year 2019 budget also fully funds ($408.4 million)
continued work on the Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite-R (GOES-R) Series, including the continued development of the
third and fourth satellites of the series, GOES-T and GOES-U. On March
1, 2018, NESDIS launched GOES-S (now known as GOES-17), the second of
the GOES-R Series. GOES-17 will move to a western position to join its
sister satellite, GOES-EAST (GOES-16). Together, these satellites will
provide faster, more accurate, and more detailed data than legacy
satellites to track storm systems, lightning, wildfires, coastal fog,
and other hazards. These satellites will observe the majority of the
Western Hemisphere from the west coast of Africa all the way to New
Zealand.
Space Commerce:
Commerce's fiscal year 2019 budget also emphasizes the Department's
efforts to better advocate for and remove undue regulatory barriers on
the commercial space industry. The fiscal year 2019 budget allocates
$1.8 million to NOAA's Office of Space Commerce and $1.8 million to the
Commercial Remote Sensing Regulatory Affairs Office, up from $1.2
million and $1.8 million in fiscal year 2018. This modest increase will
enable DOC to begin executing directives received from the
administration and the National Space Council to take on further
responsibilities relating to space commerce. DOC will continue to play
a more active role in the National Space Council's recommendations to
advance American leadership in commercial space activities by promoting
a robust and responsive U.S. industry.
The Department will also conduct an extensive regulatory analysis
to inform an updated remote sensing licensing process that will
facilitate continued growth of this critical industry. The
administration has also designated Commerce as the new civil agency
lead for space traffic management and space situational awareness.
Commerce will take on a leadership role for these and other policy
initiatives as the administration works to ensure that America is the
flag of choice for business in space.
streamlining government operations and improving efficiency
The Department's fiscal year 2019 resource allocations are designed
to fuel American prosperity, the national economy, and the Nation's
taxpayers. Difficult tradeoffs have to be made for which Commerce
programs are prioritized.
The fiscal year 2019 budget seeks to transform MBDA into a policy-
focused operation that can better assist minority businesses across
America. Consistent with this transformation, the budget proposes to
eliminate funding for MBDA's business centers.
Instead, MBDA's fiscal year 2019 budget will allot its present 50
positions for this new endeavor, which seeks to ensure minority
entrepreneurs have access to the resources they need to create jobs and
help fuel the Nation's prosperity.
Similar to the Department's budget request in fiscal year 2018, the
fiscal year 2019 budget once again proposes significant savings to
maximize every taxpayer dollar. These initiatives include eliminating
the Economic Development Administration (EDA). These proposals are
consistent with the approach throughout the budget to focus on core
Federal missions and reduce lower priority expenditures, such as
grants.
The proposed elimination of EDA's grant-making functions and
salaries and expenses would result in an approximately $300 million
savings.
We are also once again recommending the discontinuation of Federal
funding for the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership (MEP)
program, which subsidizes up to half the cost of State centers that
provide consulting services to small- and medium-sized manufacturers.
This would result in a projected savings of $125 million. There has
been enough private sector support for this program that we believe it
can function well without the need for Federal money.
NOAA is once again proposing to reduce or eliminate a number of its
external grant programs, which total approximately $493 million.
This includes approximately $76.5 million for NOAA's National Sea
Grant College and Marine Aquaculture grant programs (the fiscal year
2018 omnibus provided $65.0 million for the sea grant program and $11.5
million for marine aquaculture); a $75 million reduction to the
National Ocean Service's Coastal Zone Management and the Regional
Coastal Resilience grant programs; and $65 million for the Pacific
Coastal Salmon Recovery Fund (PCSRF), which provide resources to
restore and conserve Pacific salmon and steelhead.
Finally, NOAA is re-proposing to terminate the Office of Education
for a savings of $$28 million from the fiscal year 2018 omnibus. This
includes terminating the Competitive Education Grants and Educational
Partnership Program with Minority Serving Institutions (EPP/MSI)
grants. The budget further proposes to end the Bay-Watershed
Educational and Training (B-Wet) Regional Programs (a $7.5 million
decrease from the fiscal year 2018 omnibus).
NOAA will continue to provide watershed educational experiences for
students through other programs, including National Marine Sanctuaries.
NTIA BROADBAND AVAILABILITY
Senator Moran. Secretary Ross, thank you very much.
NTIA was provided $7.5 million in funds to supplement the
FCC's work on updating the broadband mapping. That money was
provided in the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus bill that just came
into existence and passed into law about a month ago.
Secretary Ross, how is your Department working with the FCC
to provide the data necessary to have an accurate picture of
where broadband access currently exists and where investments
need to be made? What do you want to accomplish with this
additional data? How can it be used to make a difference?
Secretary Ross. Surely. Policymakers need accurate,
updated, and accessible broadband availability data to make
efficient use of the taxpayer money targeted to areas that need
improved broadband infrastructure. The NTIA National Broadband
Availability Map program would help to improve these funding
decisions.
The goal of this program will be to minimize these known
data quality issues through the use of multiple data sources
and validation, which is especially critical in rural areas
where current census block level data may not accurately
reflect broadband availability in the entire block.
Senator Moran. Thank you for your answer.
Let me turn to the topic that I mentioned in my opening
statement. I would remind you that Kansas is a leader in the
production of beef, pork, wheat, and soybeans. Retaliatory
tariffs have a significant economic harm on my agriculture
producers, and therefore, on the State of Kansas.
We are the largest sorghum producing State in the Nation.
About 50 percent of the sorghum is exported each year and 90
percent of those exports were sent to China. Retaliatory
tariffs announced by China have effectively shutdown the
sorghum export market, meaning that Kansas farmers are feeling
the impact now.
You have an aggressive trade agenda, the administration
does, and much of that is being led by your Department. My
assumption is that this increased activity will require
increased funding. The Department has requested an increase of
$7.1 million over fiscal year 2018 enacted levels for a single
bureau, the Bureau of Industry and Security, BIS. My question
is appropriations budget-related.
How does the Department's fiscal year 2019 request address
the increased resources needed to carry out the
administration's trade agenda? And what bureaus within the
Department do you envision being the most active in carrying
out those trade activities?
CHINA NEGOTIATIONS
Secretary Ross. Well, a couple of questions are in that. As
to the retaliation from China, as you are aware, Ambassador
Lighthizer, Secretary Mnuchin, myself, and some others spent
quite a bit of time last week in China negotiating with them.
The other side was very fully engaged and engaged at a very
high level. Their delegation was led by the Vice-Premier and it
included the Minister of Commerce, the Minister of Finance, the
representatives of the Ministry of Commerce of the People's
Republic of China (MOFCOM), the Governor of the Central Bank,
and the People's Bank of China.
So it was a very high level group that was fully engaged
for roughly 30 hours of negotiations. Their prior complaint had
been they felt we had not been specific enough in our requests
of them.
Prominently included in the written request that we gave
them prior to this trip was the question of agriculture. So I
can assure you that it featured quite prominently in all of the
discussions.
We made some very specific requests, product by product,
quantity by quantity and in a subsequent session, the Chinese
responded in-kind. I do not mean to say ``kindly,'' but in-
kind. And while the gap is wide, it appears as though they will
be returning to the States here in Washington within the next
week or two to continue the discussions.
So the good news is that there is a very specific set of
bids and asks. The other good news is that while there is a
gap, they are coming here to make further negotiations. So I am
hopeful that we will make some further progress with them.
In addition, as I think you are aware, the President has
directed the Secretary of Agriculture to use all of the powers
that his department has to try to protect and help those
industries, particularly agriculture, that are usually the
targets of retaliation.
So we are both trying to deal with that problem in the
sessions and the President has requested specific help from the
Department of Agriculture to try to moderate the problem.
We are all well aware that it is horribly unfair for one
industry to bear the brunt of retaliation in our efforts to
help other parts of the economy. So we will do our level best
to minimize the problem and to maximize the support we can
provide in helping.
FUNDING TO SUPPORT ADMINISTRATION'S TRADE AGENDA
Senator Moran. Mr. Secretary, does your budget request
provide the necessary dollars to fulfill your responsibilities
in this regard at the Department of Commerce?
Secretary Ross. Yes, I think so. The $4.1 billion that we
requested for the industrial base survey and assessment
includes funding for 13 full-time equivalents and subcontractor
support to assist with the increased workloads of the 232
program including the exclusion process and other industrial
base studies.
This subcommittee, I thank you for your approval that we
get an additional funding for fiscal year 2018 through
reprogramming. We will be receiving $3.3 million, which allows
BIS to hire 15 subcontractors to help with this initial surge
of the 232 exemption request on product basis. So I believe we
will be adequately funded with that.
We have, to date, received some 8,700 requests for
individual product exemptions. One individual company,
amazingly, submitted 1,167 of those requests which, on the face
of it, seem like rather a lot. But, in any event, that is what
has come in.
The backlog we have right now of ones not yet dealt with is
around 2,200 all of which have come within the last 12 days. So
we think we have the big influx relatively under control, but
we do hope that the House goes through with the same sort of
support that this subcommittee did. We hope the full Senate and
the House will go along with the monies you are providing us.
Senator Moran. Mr. Secretary, thank you.
Let me turn now to the Ranking Member.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
I want to go back to the concerns that I expressed in my
opening statement about the addition of the citizenship status
question on the census.
The last time this type of question was included in the
short form census was 1950. There is a great deal of concern
that adding this question is going to lead to a drop in
participation, particularly among immigrant communities who
many not understand that census data is not to be shared, and
may be afraid that the data that is gathered will be shared
with other departments within the Federal Government.
Are you concerned, Mr. Secretary, that the addition of this
kind of a question on citizenship status will reduce the
accuracy of the census?
CITIZENSHIP STATUS QUESTION ON THE 2020 DECENNIAL CENSUS
Secretary Ross. Well, this question has actually been asked
a lot more recently than 1950 in different forms.
Senator Shaheen. I understand that.
Secretary Ross. Sixty-one million people, over the years,
have been asked the citizenship question on the American
Community Survey. So it has been quite well-tested. The
declination in response rates is not materially different from
that in many other questions.
So the Census group itself feels that it is a manageable
decline. There will be some decline anytime you add another
question, particularly one that certain parts of the population
might find challenging. There will be a little diminution in
it. But they do not feel that it will be material.
Now, what are we doing to try to make sure that it will not
be a major diminution?
Senator Shaheen. Can I just ask you, Mr. Secretary, I am
sorry to interrupt, but am I correct in understanding that it
is still in the community survey, the longer census survey that
is being done? So that was always intended to be included
there, and the real change is the addition to the short form
census?
Secretary Ross. That is correct. It has been on the
American Community Survey quite regularly and that, as you
know, is not a full census. It is a sample of something like 3
percent of the households on a rolling basis done annually.
So it is the same exact question and the reason we are
using the same exact question is this has now been fully
tested; 61 million people have been exposed to it. Whereas in
the 2010 census, there were only a tiny fraction of that where
the number of households that were used to test an individual
question.
So the other things we are doing, we are making it the very
last question on the census so that those folks who may not be
comfortable answering it hopefully may, if not all of them,
will have answered the preceding questions in any event.
Senator Shaheen. So again, I am sorry to interrupt, but my
understanding was that the end-to-end test that is already
underway in Rhode Island does not include this question. And
so, it would not give us the ability to understand the impact
of the question including it on the short form.
Is that correct?
Secretary Ross. It is correct that it is not being used in
Providence and the reason for that is those forms were printed
long ago before we had made the decision to add the question.
And in some cases, the preparations were made before we even
got the request from the Department of Justice. So that is the
reason it is not on.
But what we are doing, we are spending approximately $500
million on communications programs that will be in multiple
languages. They will stress the confidentiality of the data.
They will stress the extreme penalties of imprisonment and
fines that would go to any person who violated the Title 13
rules about the confidentiality of data.
So we will be communicating extremely vigorously that
people have nothing to worry about that these data cannot be
used for any other purpose at all.
In addition, we are using more languages. We will have
census explanatory forms, how to fill it out, and what it means
in 12 languages. And those languages cover virtually all except
for six-tenths of 1 percent of the population that is not very
well fluent in English.
All the basic forms, of course, will be in both English and
Spanish to begin with, but there will be 12 languages in
instructional forms. And we have set up an elaborate system of
call centers for follow up calls, and those also will be
multilingual.
Finally, we are partnering with all sorts of community
organizations to have them encourage their relevant segments of
the population to try out and fill out the forms. We are even
putting kiosks in post offices.
Senator Shaheen. And so, I asked Attorney General Sessions
about this at the hearing that we had last week, and he
suggested that if people object to that citizenship status
question, they should just not answer.
Do you agree with that? And if they do not answer, what
happens, then, to that survey?
Secretary Ross. Well, as a technical matter, people are
required to answer the questions. Nobody has ever been
prosecuted, to my knowledge, for not answering a question.
We also, this cycle, will be making very extensive use,
more extensive than even before, of administrative records.
Historically, the census has used them and we will be using
them even more extensively.
Part of the reason for asking the question is we found that
in the American Community Survey approximately 30 percent of
the people who are not citizens incorrectly answered the
question in addition to those who just did not answer it.
So in order to get some accuracy, we feel it is necessary
both to do a lot of promotion to those communities and to use
administrative records.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you. My time is up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. You are welcome.
The senator from Maine, Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Secretary Ross.
I want to begin by associating myself with the comments
made by the Chairman and Ranking Member expressing opposition
to the elimination of funding for the Economic Development
Administration, the Manufacturing Extension Partnership, and
the National Sea Grant program. Those programs have been
invaluable in my State.
I would now like to turn to two different issues.
Earlier this year, the Department instituted import tariffs
on certain types of paper imported by the U.S. printing and
publishing industry from Canada. This paper, technically known
as uncoated groundwood paper, but better known as newsprint, is
used by newspapers, book publishers, and numerous other
commercial printers in our country.
These tariffs are being advanced under the principle of
trade enforcement to protect the domestic paper industry. But,
in fact, nearly all of the U.S. paper industry opposes these
import taxes and the result may well be that small town and
rural newspapers go out of business forever because they cannot
afford the higher cost of newsprint.
It is a real problem in my State because there are no
longer any mills producing newsprint in the State of Maine.
Canada is the closest, as well as the most affordable source,
or was, until these tariffs were proposed.
Now, I realize that there is one small mill that brought
this petition and it may well be able to add jobs, but it will
do so at an enormous cost to an industry that is already facing
serious challenges.
The Antidumping and Countervailing Duty trade remedies are
really not equipped to address a situation like this. It is not
that the Department is not following the law. I recognize that.
It is that there is a flaw in the law. What we have here is the
result that the import duties will actually harm the industry
they were intended to protect. This case is very unusual and
has special circumstances.
What I am seeking from you today is a commitment to work
with us on a potential legislative solution that avoids the
unintended negative consequences for secondary industries, as
we are seeing in this case.
IMPORTED TARIFFS ON PAPER
Secretary Ross. Well, we certainly are always prepared to
work with anyone proposing legislation relevant to our
activities. But I would like to give a little bit of
perspective.
Number one, when a party files a legitimate petition, and
there is a finding of harm and there is a finding of subsidy,
we have no alternative but to go forward and come to our
conclusion. So it is not a thing where we can make a subjective
judgment that, in this particular case, there would be an
unusual problem. We are just not permitted to do that.
But to give you a little perspective, we took two papers at
sample to see what is the actual impact that we could calculate
on those papers. So one was the ``Wall Street Journal,'' which
is a big, thick newspaper. Their consumption of newsprint is
around 10.4 cents per copy, so per daily issuance of the paper.
The tariff increase looks as though it would end up being
around 2 cents per day per paper. Not per page, but per total
paper.
We did another one, a local paper in Longview, Washington,
which is ``The Daily News,'' and the reason we picked that is
it is a small, more rural paper and it happens to be right in
the territory where the petitioner filed.
That paper tends to use about 5 cents of newsprint per
copy. So it looks to us as though the increase would be 1 cent
per copy. So it is a number. There is an impact, but I think it
is useful to have the perspective what does it really mean in
terms of each issuance of the paper.
Senator Collins. Mr. Secretary, I very much appreciate
those examples. The statistics in my State are extraordinarily
different for what it would mean for the newspapers in my State
and the commercial printing operations. So I will be forwarding
you some data on that for you to take a look at.
I know my time has expired. I just want to say very
briefly, and I will submit this for the record, that our Maine
lobstermen have long led the way in implementing mitigation
measures to protect whale entanglements. They changed their
gear over and over again in a very impressive way to the point
that NOAA has not observed a single right whale entanglement in
ground lines since these changes were made. And the majority of
injuries to right----
Secretary Ross. I am sorry. I cannot hear you with that
noise.
Senator Collins. I am sorry. The majority of the injuries
after all these gear changes were made have been due to strikes
by ships.
But the problem, and this is what I will submit for the
record, is Canada does not have comparable safeguards. And our
lobstermen are increasingly concerned that their fishery may be
subjected to additional and unrealistic gear restrictions
following the deaths of 17 right whales, which is a tragedy.
But 12 of them occurred in Canada.
So I will submit a question to the record for you on this
issue on what we do to make sure that our Canadian counterparts
play by the same rules and that the American lobster industry,
which pioneered all of these protections, are not penalized for
Canada's failure to act.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, good to see you again.
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE: SERVICES PROVIDED TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
Among the reasons that I voted for you originally were your
commitments to NOAA and the weather enterprise, and your
commitment to a fair, and complete, and accurate census. So let
us start with NOAA.
Severe weather events, again, endangered lives and property
in 2017. NOAA recorded 16 weather and climate disaster events
that cost $1 billion each. The total cost exceeded $300
billion, exceeding a new record. NOAA's weather forecasting
data saves lives and property, but they also help businesses.
We have had a good conversation about the interaction
between NOAA and the weather enterprise, and private business,
aviation, shipping, agriculture, fisheries, tourism, and what
have you.
I would like you to spend maybe a minute on the services
that you provide to the private sector through NOAA and the
National Weather Service.
Secretary Ross. Well, I am very proud that NOAA's accuracy
of forecasts and the amount of lead time that it gave people in
terms of these extreme events is roughly 25 percent better in
2017 than in the average of the prior 5 years. We hope and
think that as we keep getting better technology, more
satellites with more delicate sensing devices, we hope we can
continue to improve that.
We have not yet figured out a way to control weather, but
the best we can do is to try to forecast it more in advance to
give people warning time and more accuracy, in terms of the
forecasting. We are making a lot of progress in that regard and
I feel quite confident that that will continue. It is a very,
very major objective of ours and of Admiral Gallaudet.
CENSUS
Senator Schatz. I sent you a letter last year about the
lack of a Census Director. You sent me a response saying this
was a top priority, but it has been a year since John Thompson
resigned.
Where are we with getting a new Census Director?
Secretary Ross. We have proposed to the White House a
candidate and they are processing the candidate as we sit here.
But meanwhile, I have very good confidence in the two
senior career people that are in the acting positions at this
moment. I obviously did not know them before taking this job,
but I have been very impressed with the thoroughness with which
they approach the task.
This is a daunting task, as you know.
Senator Schatz. Right. I want to follow up on Senator
Shaheen's line of questioning around the citizenship question,
and this is a little awkward because you and I have had
multiple conversations about the census, and I believe in your
commitment to a full, fair, accurate census.
But I think we have to be honest about how this citizenship
question came about. It came from a politico in the Department
of Justice, and the fig leaf that they used is that this is
going to help with enforcement around voting rights.
Simultaneous to that, you have groups that advocate against
immigration and against immigrant groups, and you have campaign
organizations propping up the citizenship question as a
mechanism in a political context, in an ideological context.
And so, this request for a question to be added to the
census comes from DOJ, comes from a political appointee. It
seems to be out of left field, and then is not included in the
field test because of, I guess, the logistics of printing it in
time.
I guess I would like to hear how you respond to, if we were
just sitting down having a cup of coffee, what I would say is,
``Come on. This is what it looks like.''
And so, I understand you are doing everything to mitigate
the impact of this, but I think the provenance of this is not
on the level that DOJ is trying to enforce the Voting Rights
Act and on the level through the normal regular order
interacted in an interagency professional way, but rather this
is a political matter.
And so, how can you reassure me that that is not what
happened or at least reassure me that you are not going to
allow it to be implemented in that way?
Secretary Ross. Well, we obviously have no interaction with
the campaign committees that have, for a brief moment, tried to
use this in their literature. I believe they have stopped doing
that and I think that is a good thing because that just
politicized the whole thing.
We spent a lot of time talking with Justice about the
request. We truly believe that they think that they need it and
they are a qualified party to make that request under the
procedures.
We explored all sorts of alternative routes as to how to
fulfill that request without putting it on the census, and came
to the conclusion that the most effective way to deal with that
individual request was, in fact, to add it to the forms that we
are using.
As to the testing of the question, I think I mentioned
before, some 61 million people have already been exposed to
that question over the years through the American Community
Survey.
Senator Schatz. Sure, and my time is up, but I will just
add that 61 million people being exposed to it over time
through various censuses is not the same as putting it in the
field test. That may be a data point, but that is not the same
as what would happen if you put it in the survey. That is not
what is being tested.
We are testing a survey right now that is not the survey
that will be used, and I apologize for going over time.
Senator Shaheen [presiding]. Senator Murkowski, you are up.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Senator. Thank you, Chairman.
AQUACULTURE LEGISLATION
Mr. Secretary, welcome. Good to be with you. As I promised
to you when we first met prior to your confirmation, I said,
``You are going to hear me talk about seafood.''
Secretary Ross. I am sorry.
Senator Murkowski. Seafood.
Secretary Ross. Yes.
Senator Murkowski. Not seeing food and eating it, but the
stuff that is in the water. So I am going to be true to my word
and speak to the issue of seafood trade.
We are, here in the Senate, taking on an effort to move
towards national aquaculture legislation. We are tracking this
closely. The effort does not include, currently, a provision to
honor States' rights, which would allow States that have laws
on the books that restrict or ban specific types of aquaculture
or to allow them to opt out of that type of aquaculture under
the national plan.
In the State of Alaska, we have a prohibition on finfish
farming. So I have been following this and tracking this, and I
am not going to be in a position to support any kind of a
national aquaculture effort that does not take States' rights
into account.
So I would hope that you would be supportive of allowing
those States with laws that have bans in place on areas of
aquaculture to be able to opt out of a Federal plan.
Secretary Ross. Surely. We are reasonably familiar with the
proposed legislation and are supportive of it.
As you probably know, one of my big peeves is that 80-odd
percent of the seafood consumed in this country comes from
abroad, which seems a bit oxymoronic given the big coastlines
and everything that we have. So one of the things we are
working very hard on is trying to change that.
There are many parts of the aquaculture. Some are seaweed-
type things, which I think you have no objection to. And others
are ones that could interfere with the normal catch in Alaska.
So I understand why individual States might want to take a
little different direction.
But we have a $14 billion a year trade deficit in seafood
and I am quite eager to convert that into a trade surplus
rather than a trade deficit. And that could provide gainful
employment to lots of people.
THREATS TO SEAFOOD PRODUCTION
Senator Murkowski. Well, I know we are absolutely,
absolutely committed to working to reduce that seafood trade
deficit as we work to promote domestic and sustainable
production.
We have some significant opportunities overseas. Alaska has
clearly played its role with that. Some markets have been
closed off to our seafood exports in recent years due to
policies like the seafood trade ban that was implemented by
Russia in 2014.
So the question to you this morning is where are we with
ensuring that NOAA is working with our regional fishery
management councils to really help push out and advance this
seafood export and promotion opportunities?
And then, if you would speak to the Russia ban in terms of
the steps that the administration is taking to work towards
lifting the Russia seafood ban. It has an average annual impact
of about $40 million in Alaska. I hear from my fishermen a lot
about this.
And then, as it relates to the seafood promotion programs,
we have the Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant Fund. I am concerned that
the proposal is to zero this out. When you think about those
efforts to advance and promote our domestic seafood production,
it is Saltonstall-Kennedy that plays such an important role
there.
Secretary Ross. Sure. Well, there are a number of threats
to our seafood production.
For one thing, the aquaculture that produces a lot of the
foreign seafood is conducted under conditions that would not be
tolerated in the United States. So one of our objectives is to
try to get better enforcement against them because those are
not being properly done for the most part.
Second is, I think, also a problem with counterfeiting in
that some of the material, I think some of the king crab,
alleged king crabs coming in from Russia really are not king
crabs at all. So there are problems in that regard.
There is a third problem which is that Canada in its free
trade agreement with the EU got an exemption from the tariff
that the EU imposes on lobster whereas we are subject to
several percentage points tariff. So that is a problem
particularly because that free trade agreement between Canada
and the EU specifies not only that it should be in Canadian
waters, but that it should be in a Canadian vessel.
So it is clearly a discriminatory activity against the
United States. So seafood is this year going to be, I think, a
pretty big battleground.
What we are doing about it is a number of things. There is
grant money that is going out to the States to try to develop
pilot programs of various types.
I spoke at the aquaculture conference here in Washington
some several weeks ago. I have met several times with the
aquaculture industry. So they know we are trying to be helpful
in trying to push things along so that we can compete more
effectively both from a quality point of view in terms of how
the aquaculture is conducted and in terms of the dollar volume
versus that which is going offshore.
So we are pushing very hard on it. It is one of my big
priorities.
Senator Murkowski. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. I
appreciate that. I know that many of us think that the terms of
the Trans-Pacific Partnership could benefit our seafood
industry. I appreciate your focus to it.
I will have questions to submit for the record specifically
related to the Pacific salmon treaty. It is being negotiated.
We have some concerns about the actions that the Department is
looking to address non-fishing aspects of the agreement.
I would ask for your attention to that, as well as the
hydrographic surveys, the charting of our oceans, and the
reality that the survey backlog in the Arctic right now is
about 100 years-plus. I think we can do better on that.
So you can anticipate those questions.
We look forward to working with you on these very important
areas and otherwise, and I appreciate you being here.
Thank you for allowing me to go over, Madam Chair.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Senator Murkowski.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Thank you very much.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary.
NEWPORT NAVAL FACILITY
We are awfully proud to be the homeport of the NOAA Ship
the Henry B. Bigelow in Newport. We also have a significant
NOAA presence in Narragansett Bay. NOAA itself has been
planning, over the last several years, to consolidate their
fleet with better infrastructure and better facilities and
saving money, they hope.
This Committee has been incredibly helpful because they
provided, over the last several years, about $4.5 million for
planning so that NOAA can undertake their plan to consolidate.
Newport offers a superb location, not only the Navy base, but
also the University of Rhode Island School of Oceanography, the
U.S. Maritime Resource Center, which trains all the deck
officers, the uniformed deck officers for NOAA is located in
Middletown, Rhode Island.
We are trying to build off of a model which we used with
the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard was able to work with the
Navy. In fact, even got Navy funding, some funding to
consolidate three buoy tenders into Newport, Rhode Island.
All of this, however, has to be based on an executable plan
from NOAA. And as I am sure you are aware, Mr. Secretary, the
2018 Omnibus required NOAA to produce its plan within 60 days
and that would be May 23, 2018.
Can you give me the status of the plan that we are talking
about? Within weeks the plan will need to be delivered.
Secretary Ross. Well, we are aware about the $2 million
provided in the fiscal year 2018 Omnibus for the Newport
project and the 60-day requirement.
The Navy and U.S. Coast Guard are working very actively
with NOAA to try to put together the full consolidation plan
and they are continuing to review the project and work with the
Navy to finalize all of the assessments.
Meanwhile, while the Newport construction takes place,
there is an existing interagency agreement between NOAA and the
Navy to homeport NOAA's Ship, the Henry B. Bigelow.
Senator Reed. Yes.
Secretary Ross. With which I think you are quite familiar.
Senator Reed. Yes, sir.
Secretary Ross. The Henry B. Bigelow and any other visiting
ships at the naval station in Newport through fiscal year 2022.
So the program is underway. We are working on it, but
meanwhile, we have an interim solution that we think will be
very helpful.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary. Again, we
very much would like to see the plan promulgated pursuant to
the Omnibus appropriations bill and then work with you, and the
Department of the Navy, and the Coast Guard on getting it to
fruition.
I have already had conversations with Secretary Spencer,
the Secretary of the Navy. He is enthusiastic. He is always
enthusiastic. He is enthusiastic about this joint effort, not a
singular effort, but a joint effort.
So thank you, Mr. Secretary.
CENSUS TESTING AND SECURITY
Let me turn now, since as we have noted, Providence County
is the one location for the census test. It is taking place
right now, and we have been involved with it.
One of the observations I would make, even though, as you
rightly point out, the citizenship question is not in the
census test. Because of all the publicity, the perception of
many people in the State is that it is in the questions. So it
might have, unwittingly, an effect on the response.
But one thing, from listening to your response to Senator
Shaheen, can you assure us that none of this data will be, can
legally be used by law enforcement agencies including in
deportation hearings?
Secretary Ross. None of the data is permitted by Title 13
to be used for any other purpose even more benign purposes than
deportation, number one.
Number two, every census employee who has access to the
data takes a lifetime oath not to divulge it.
Third, we have put in all kinds of firewalls and separation
of data as best we can to try to protect against any kind of
cyber security attack that might occur.
We are taking it very, very seriously and are going to work
very hard not only to assure the public that it is the case,
but to make sure that it is correct, and that the data will not
be inappropriately used. We feel very, very strongly about
that.
I am happy to say that since Title 13 was passed, to the
best of my knowledge, there has never been a single violation
of it with respect to any census data. And that is now quite a
few years, quite a few couple of decades, in fact.
So we are very cautiously optimistic that we can continue
that.
And as you know, the penalties are severe. Someone who
violates it can be fined up to $250,000 and/or up to 5 years in
prison. I think most people would find that a pretty big
deterrent.
Senator Reed. Just one very, very quick comment. Having
seen the rollout, and this is the only one in the country,
there are efforts to involve organizations like public
libraries.
Secretary Ross. Yes.
Senator Reed. Because there is the Internet self-response.
My sense from the field, if you will, is that there could be a
lot more effort to publicize and bring in public libraries and
other centers so that you can have a higher response rate
because many people do not have access to a computer unless
they go to a library.
So if you could look at that, Mr. Secretary, I would
appreciate it.
Secretary Ross. We are and I am happy to say that the
initial response rates in Providence are very, very close to
our ultimate target. We are hoping eventually to get a self-
response rate of about 47.2 percent. We are already at 45
percent. So it is pretty clear that the efforts are working
pretty well.
And as you know, we experimented, and it looks successful
with putting kiosks in, I think it is, 30 of the post offices
around.
Senator Reed. Yes.
Secretary Ross. And that has proven to be very good,
because people go pretty frequently to the post office in an
urban setting.
We now, yesterday, started the non-response follow up. We
have 900 fieldworkers in the field working to get those folks
who had not already responded either by Internet, or by mail,
or through the kiosks, or whatever, or by phone to dig them out
and get responses.
So we also are engaging a very large number of community
organizations, as you have mentioned.
Senator Reed. Yes.
Secretary Ross. And thus far, that cooperation seems quite
good.
Senator Reed. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your very
thoughtful answers. Thank you.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Senator Reed.
Senator Lankford.
Senator Lankford. Thank you.
TARIFFS
Secretary, good to see you again. Let me ask you a couple
of questions on tariffs. I know this is going to surprise you
because this is a topic that probably does not come up very
often at all right now.
Secretary Ross. I am sorry.
Senator Lankford. The tariff question is one more question
to come at you as well.
There have been around--the best figures that I have, you
probably have better figures than I have--about 9,000 different
requests for exclusions for American products. These are
American products that there is a unique type still coming
internationally that they either use in the product or are a
part of a larger product that they manufacture. Those requests
have gone in.
It is my understanding, of the 9,000 that are out there, we
are about 60 days in with a 90-day deadline to get them
complete.
How many of those are done at this point of those requests
for exclusions from American companies requesting some of these
exclusions?
Secretary Ross. Well, the backlog is around 2,200 as I
understand it, virtually all of which are ones----
Senator Lankford. Is that for companies or products?
Secretary Ross. Pardon?
Senator Lankford. Is that by company, or 2,200 companies,
or 2,200 products?
Secretary Ross. Product inquires, product inquires. We
measure it by product inquiry rather than by company. And, in
fact, some companies have put in an enormous amount. One
individual company put in a request for 1,167 product
exclusions, which kind of boggles the mind, but we will see how
warranted they are.
So we are very fully engaged with processing it. A number
of companies and trade associations have come in and logged in
as well. So now that the comment periods are starting to run,
you will be starting to see approvals and denials come out.
Senator Lankford. Do you think that will be within that 90-
day window? That you are going to make that 90-day window that
was described?
Secretary Ross. Well, I think we can, assuming that the
full Senate goes along with the budget requests that you
fellows approved, the three-point-three, so we get 15 more
employees to work on it. Assuming we get that approved very
quickly, both by the Senate and the House, I am quite confident
we can deal with it. But if we do not, that is going to be a
stretch.
Senator Lankford. Are you talking about reprogramming
authority here?
Secretary Ross. Yes, yes.
Senator Lankford. Okay.
Secretary Ross. The reprogramming.
Senator Lankford. Okay. So not additional vote, but just
reprogram.
Secretary Ross. No, no. It is reprogramming.
Senator Lankford. Let me ask about the retroactive nature
of those applications because the applications themselves are
retroactive back to when Commerce actually posted the
application on it.
Secretary Ross. Yes.
Senator Lankford. That is the time period rather than
typically be either when it is submitted or when the tariffs
started entirely, rather than just waiting on when the team
posted it.
So is there not a better way to be able to do it to make it
a clear spot?
Secretary Ross. Well, the reason we did it in terms of when
it was posted is to make sure that people would completely fill
out the form and fill it out properly.
The concern was if we did it to the date of filing, they
have no particular incentive to correct errors in the form. And
because we want to get this whole thing over with as quickly as
possible, it was important to us to incentivize people if there
is an error, to get it corrected quickly so we can post it.
That was the reason for it, sir.
Senator Lankford. But if there is an exclusion that is
determined for them, as needed, why not just do the date when
the tariff begins? It is their responsibility to be able to get
all the paperwork in to be able to actually enjoy the benefits
of that exclusion. Why not just do it on the date when the
tariff began, and if they get any exclusion, it starts and it
is retroactive?
Secretary Ross. Well, this is what we felt was the best
balancing of the needs of the respondents and the needs of the
Customs and Border Patrol because they need a finite date.
There are a whole bunch of considerations that we had to take
into account.
Senator Lankford. Okay, well, we will tray to follow back
up. Let me ask you a little bit about census.
There is a group of us in a bipartisan group that, from
Homeland Security, met with census leadership including Acting
Director Jarmin just about three weeks ago or so, asked a
series of questions on that. Those questions from myself, from
Senator Harris, and from several others, we have not received a
response back to those yet, and I would say, just look forward
to getting some response on it.
CENSUS AND OTHER AGENCY COLLABORATION
One of the things that I had asked about, and we have
talked about before as well, is looking not towards 2020
because it is too late now, but towards 2030 and starting the
process of asking a simple question.
How can we work with IRS and with Commerce--knowing that
IRS obviously interacts with every American as well in April,
and so does Commerce every 10 years to do that--to be able to
find a way to be able to put those two together? We spend
billions of dollars doing census, when IRS every single year
interacts with every American on that. How we can actually pull
the two together?
Can we get a time for our staffs just to be able to sit
down and visit, and to be able to talk through the logistics of
that, and how it might be possible?
Secretary Ross. Yes, we are making much more extensive use
of administrative records this time than ever before including
we are getting some of the social safety network data from
individual States. And about half the States have already
agreed to provide us varying forms of that data because while
most people are, in fact, involved with the IRS, there is a
segment that is more dependent on the social safety network.
Senator Lankford. Right.
Secretary Ross. So we are trying to maximize the use of
them. My hope is that if that works out as well as we think it
will, it will greatly reduce the need for physical enumeration,
which is the very expensive part of the census.
I think that there is so much in the way of administrative
data available that we really should maximize the use of that
for two reasons.
One, to make sure we get it correct. But also to make sure
it is complete because if we can get access to all the social
safety network, plus Social Security, plus IRS, plus
Immigration Service, plus State Department for visas, at some
point we will have enough of a database that you really will
know pretty much everybody who is here.
When we supplement that with the location analysis, the
Local Update of Census Addresses (LUCA) is our acronym, working
with the States and localities to correct addresses, to make
sure that we have the right addresses. And we already have
coverage of way over 90 percent and way higher than we had at
this point in terms of the 2010 census.
So we are pushing very hard to maximize the use of
administrative records.
Senator Lankford. Terrific, thank you.
Senator Shaheen. Senator Leahy. Sorry, Senator Van Hollen,
he outranks you.
Senator Leahy. Senator Van Hollen, I appreciate the
courtesy.
Secretary Ross, good to see you again and I am going to ask
you a couple of questions.
CITIZENSHIP QUESTION ON CENSUS 2020
You announced in March your decision to add a question to
the Decennial Census on citizenship status. Ever so
controversial, 18 States are now challenging it in court and,
among other things, any late changes to the content of the
census, especially at the Bureau, has not been adequately
tested. We know the risks involved.
The end-to-end test underway does not include a question on
citizenship status. It is being only tested in focus groups. It
does not provide statistically significant findings. But we
also know that even a 1 percent decrease in response rate will
cost the taxpayers tens of millions of dollars as census costs
increase.
Now, you have the authority to add questions at the last
minute, but the millions of dollars it is going to cost the
taxpayers and what it might do on the results, I do not think
that is really a responsible or advisable way to go. So let me
ask you this question.
The Bureau has a history of cost overruns. Given that,
combined with the likelihood that dropping a controversial
question onto the census will decrease response rates, will
drive up census costs.
What justification is there in adding a question this late
in the cycle when you do not have time to test its impact on
response rates? I mean, I know the administration says it wants
to cut Government spending, but does this not dramatically
increase government spending?
Secretary Ross. Well, there are several questions in that.
Let me try to address them.
The Census Bureau career management has posted on their
website, as of a few days ago, the basis on which they felt
that it was not going to be any material negative impact on the
census. That is the career people.
Senator Leahy. How did they reach that conclusion and what
kind of a test did they have?
Secretary Ross. Well, their feeling was that since they
have seen the response rates to this question, which in its
identical form to the one that we are including in 2020, that
identical question has been asked for some several years on the
American Community Survey.
There is not a material declination in response rates on
that survey to that question as worded relative to the decline
in response rates in other questions.
Senator Leahy. Do you think the response rate will change
in any way because of including this question?
Secretary Ross. We think it may go down some.
Senator Leahy. What is ``some''?
Secretary Ross. Well, their estimate is 1 percent.
Senator Leahy. And that would be how many?
Secretary Ross. That is their estimate.
Senator Leahy. Well, that would be well over 1 million.
Secretary Ross. Pardon me?
Senator Leahy. That would be over 1 million.
Secretary Ross. Well, we have provided in our budget
request, they were assuming, the career people were assuming
that there would be a 60.5 percent overall response rate pre-
the-physical enumeration.
In order to allow for any kind of contingencies we, for
budgeting purposes, took it down to 55 percent. The existing
budget----
Senator Leahy. Do you have data on that?
Secretary Ross. Pardon me?
Senator Leahy. Do you have data on that conclusion?
Secretary Ross. Well, it is not a conclusion. It was a
safety valve that we put to protect against a cost overrun. So
unless the career people are off by a multiple of five in their
estimate of what will be the impact, we should be very well
covered by the existing budget.
Senator Leahy. And they have based their results on some
data, I assume.
Secretary Ross. Well, they base their results, the two
senior career people each are more than 20-year veterans.
Senator Leahy. But do they have any data to base their
result?
Secretary Ross. They did it based on their normal
estimation process.
Senator Leahy. Will you share that data with us?
Secretary Ross. I will be glad to ask them for whatever
they have in writing.
Senator Leahy. Well, you are the boss. You can ask them and
you can share it, if you want. And you have also marketed the
citizenship question as necessary to enforce the Voting Rights
Act. The Justice Department has not brought any voting rights
cases since the President took office. They do not seem to see
a problem out there.
All the voting rights advocates I have spoken with oppose
including the question. They say it is going to have the
opposite effect and will bring about severe underrepresentation
of those who they are trying to protect. And why this sudden
interest in that when the Department is supposed to enforce
violations and does not see any problems.
Secretary Ross. Well, the Justice Department is the one who
made the request of us.
Senator Leahy. When did they make that request?
Secretary Ross. Pardon me?
Senator Leahy. When did they make that request?
Secretary Ross. I think it was in January or February of
this year.
Senator Leahy. Do you have a copy of the request?
Secretary Ross. Oh, surely.
Senator Leahy. Will you send it to us, please?
Secretary Ross. Well, as you know, this whole thing is in
litigation. The full administrative record of it will be made
available when we respond to the litigation that has been
brought.
Senator Leahy. When will that be?
Secretary Ross. I am just looking that up now.
Senator Leahy. Yes.
Secretary Ross. I believe it is sometime in June 8.
Senator Leahy. So we will have it on June 8. Will it be,
will it have a copy for Congress?
Secretary Ross. Well, it will be a public filing.
Senator Leahy. Of course. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you very much.
Thank you for being here, Secretary Ross. We appreciate
working with you on a number of issues and your staff does such
a great job.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION
One of the things that has been important in Arkansas has
been the Economic Development Administration. They have done a
great job acting as a catalyst. And as a result, have helped us
preserve the jobs that we have, attract new jobs, and have been
beneficial in helping to move Arkansas forward.
One of our concerns is that that particular program has
fallen into disfavor in the sense that the proposal is to zero
it out.
Can you talk to us a little bit about that?
Secretary Ross. Yes. I agree with you that it has been a
useful program. I do not think there is much doubt about that.
But in a period of budget stringency, we have had to make some
very hard decisions and this one of the more difficult
decisions to make.
So it is the kind of thing that you would rather not do,
but when you have a budget limitation and a budget stringency,
you do have to make difficult decisions.
Senator Boozman. Well, thank you, and hopefully, we can
work with you on that and perhaps give you, myself and others,
how it has been helpful in our States so that we can perhaps
move that in a different direction.
Secretary Ross. Well, thank you.
REGULATORY BARRIERS TO BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT
Senator Boozman. The development and deployment of a
nationwide, high speed, 5G network is of great economic
significance, as you know. And I really applaud and support
your race to 5G, which is so, so very important.
However, it is sad that in many of our rural communities,
we are racing towards securing dialup Internet speeds, much
less 5G. Urban and rural areas alike deserve high speed
Internet. It is the crux of competing in our modern economy.
And again, I know that you understand that.
The National Telecommunications Information Administration,
under the Department of Commerce, serves as the co-chair of the
Broadband Interagency Working Group. One of the Group's
functions is to identify and reduce regulatory barriers to
broadband deployment.
To that end, can you please talk to us a little bit,
perhaps, about the progress that we are making on that front?
And explain any additional areas where the Department is
working towards nationwide high-speed broadband deployment?
Secretary Ross. Well, as to the broadband map itself, as
you know, we had requested $50 million in fiscal year 2018 for
the assessment of the current status nationwide.
That request was based on the findings of the President's
Task Force on Agriculture and Rural Prosperity, and was
intended to promote more efficient Federal broadband
investments by identifying existing infrastructure, gaps in it,
and opportunities for more efficient deployment.
We believe that efforts to utilize broadband availability
data sources be on current measures are especially critical in
rural areas because those are the places where current data at
the census block level may not accurately reflect broadband
availability within the block itself.
Therefore, the problem is that the Consolidated
Appropriations Act provided only $7.5 million to NTIA through
2019 for this effort. So we are currently evaluating its
options to ensure that the money that is being appropriated is
efficiently used.
The main thing we will lose, as a result of less funding,
is validation. In 2009, NTIA received over $290 million funding
to create the National Broadband Map, and that was part of the
stimulus program. That map was last updated in March of 2015.
In May of 2015, the FCC took over that responsibility when
Congress stopped appropriating funds to NTIA.
So that is where we stand at the moment, sir.
Senator Boozman. Okay, we will be glad to work with you on
that, and I am glad that you brought that up. I am sitting by
Senator Capito from West Virginia and she has been a real
leader on this, and we appreciate her leadership.
Secretary Ross. We are quite eager to get broadband going
everywhere.
Senator Boozman. Good.
Secretary Ross. And toward that end, I might add, FirstNet
is proving to be very, very successful; all 56 States and
territories have signed up. We are launching the service. So
far, it seems on schedule and on budget. And some of that
infrastructure can also be used to facilitate broadband on a
much broader basis.
So we are doing what we can do within the fiscal
constraints to facilitate it.
Senator Boozman. Well, again, hopefully we can help you
with that, and we appreciate the fact that you realize the
importance.
One of the things that really brings it home, you travel in
rural Arkansas, or rural West Virginia, wherever, and you will
see the young people sitting out on the bed of a pickup doing
their homework in the evening or on the weekends simply because
there is no connectivity there.
Then you translate that to our communities and trying to
grow their communities. And if it is not there, it just simply
does not work.
So thank you very much and we do appreciate your efforts in
that regard.
Secretary Ross. So we are keenly aware of the need and we
are doing what we can with the budget available.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, sir.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Senator Shaheen.
Welcome, Mr. Secretary.
I want to start by associating myself with the comments by
Senators Shaheen, and Leahy, and Schatz with respect to the
census.
I want to pick up on something Senator Boozman said with
respect to the EDA because I raised this with you last year,
same hearing, mentioned the good work done by the EDA in
promoting economic development.
At that time, the President's daughter, Ivanka Trump, had
actually visited an entrepreneurship center in Baltimore City
that had been established with a partnership of the National
Urban League and was set up with a $300,000 grant from the EDA,
and has resulted in generating more business and spinoff. In
fact, Ivanka Trump hailed it and pointed to it as an example of
the good work that the EDA could do.
I raised that last year because you zeroed it out. The
administration zeroed out in its budget. I had hoped, given the
positive aspects of the program, that you would have put it in
here. So I am looking forward to working with my colleagues to
restore it.
But I have to say, it is part of a pattern. Your budget
also cuts $24 million from the Minority Business Development
budget and you intend, in this budget, to close the centers
including, I will say, four in Maryland that would be shutdown.
In other parts of the administration's budget, you zero out
funding for CDBG, Community Development Block Grants. You zero
out funding for the Community Development Financial
Institutions (CDFI), which, as you know, are tools that people
use to promote economic development.
I have to say, it rings a little hollow to say these
decisions are made because of budget and fiscal stringency when
we just added close to $2 trillion to our national debt as a
result of the tax cut, and that is CBO's number. And as of
today, I am told the number of stock buybacks as a result of
that has hit $408 billion.
So a lot of wealthy stockholders are doing well, while the
budget is cutting things like EDA and these important
investments.
SOLAR TARIFFS
Speaking of jobs, let me ask you about the solar tariffs
specifically.
Secretary Ross. Ask about what, sir?
Senator Van Hollen. The solar, the tariffs on solar panels
because, as you know, the solar industry in the United States
has been growing quite rapidly.
It has been the source of many new jobs across the country,
including in my State of Maryland. In 2017, Maryland had 720
megawatts of solar installed and 5,400 Marylanders were
employed in the solar industry.
According to the Solar Energy Industries Association, as a
result of the tariffs just since they were imposed, Maryland
has lost 784 solar industry jobs.
And so, my question is, have you seen an analysis that
demonstrates that the number of American jobs gained by these
solar tariffs are going to exceed the number of American jobs
that we will lose?
Secretary Ross. I think that is a very complex question. As
you know, there have been some foreign providers of solar
material that have now announced that they will be opening
facilities here in the States, and that had been one of the
President's objectives in putting the tariffs on.
I also saw an estimate from one of the solar groups that,
while the growth rate will slow probably this year, they are
still forecasting something like an 11 percent growth year over
year. What makes it complicated is there were some tax benefits
that expired last year. So you had a whole series of activities
that were driven by trying to get in under the deadline.
Senator Van Hollen. Yes, I understand there can be some
positive job growth, but the question is what is the net? The
net so far in Maryland is we are over 700 jobs down and the
projection, again, from industry associations that nationally,
we are going to see a net loss of 23,000 jobs this year. So I
just question that as a mechanism to increase jobs given the
job loss.
EXIM BANK CHAIR
My last question relates to the Export-Import Bank of the
United States (EXIM) Bank, and I know it is not directly under
your jurisdiction, but I believe you have been a supporter of
the Bank. And at a time when we are trying to increase exports,
I would hope that we would have a sort of full contingent
onboard.
I join many of my colleagues in asking the President to
appoint a new chairman that can be confirmed by the Senate. The
first nomination has been opposed on a bipartisan basis, I
should say, in the United States Senate. We do not have a full
time director there. They are not able to approve deals above
$10 million in the current configuration.
So my question to you is, can you help us urge the
President to appoint a new nominee to chair the EXIM Bank so we
can get on with the business of the bank?
Secretary Ross. Well, it is out of my range to get into
individual personnel decisions, but I do feel, and have said,
that one of the ways that China is competing against us,
particularly in the less developed countries, is with the
financing from the AIIB, their export bank and other things.
And so, I am keenly aware that the absence of a functioning
EXIM Bank that can make decisions more than $10 million on a
loan is an important thing.
USAID is helping some with that. The Overseas Private
Investment Corporation (OPIC) is helping some with that as
well. So we are trying to do what we can with the funding that
is available.
Senator Van Hollen. I thank you, Mr. Secretary. I hope we
can work on a bipartisan basis to expedite this process
because, as you indicated, it is like fighting with one hand
tied behind your back when you do not have a functioning EXIM
Bank.
Senator Moran [presiding]. Senator Capito.
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Secretary Ross. It is great to see you.
I am not going to repeat what Senator Van Hollen and
Senator Boozman said on the EDA, except to reinforce to you,
and you and I have talked about this, the good things that EDA
does for smaller projects, certainly in a State like ours. I
think that I would encourage us working together to try to keep
that, I think, very valuable program.
Also on the Internet, you and I have also talked about
this. I know you worked on this in Florida in terms of
deployment to the unserved and underserved areas.
Part of what I worked on in the last Omnibus bill was to
expand EDA's ability to reach in for underserved and unserved
areas, and be a part of this. We really need all hands on deck.
We do not want to leave the rest of the country out. So that is
my comment on that.
NOAA HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING
I did want to bring up the important work that is being
done at the NOAA facility in Fairmont. It is the Continuity of
Operations Plan (COOP) site for NOAA and also the consolidated
backup facility for the critical Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellite (GOES) satellite series.
They are doing groundbreaking work also in supercomputing,
but this budget proposes cuts to high performance computing. We
have invested considerable resources on new satellite programs
to collect massive amounts of data. I am not sure why we would
cut the very tools we need to take that information and derive
more meaningful information from that data.
So I have conveyed to the leadership at NOAA, and I convey
to you, that the people in Fairmont in West Virginia stand
ready to expand their capabilities to meet the needs of the
Department and NOAA to fulfill its stated mission.
So I do not know if you have a comment on the
supercomputing question.
Secretary Ross. Well, NOAA and I both share your interest
in the supercomputing capability within the Fairmont facility.
There is a slight reduction to the contract support for this
facility in the fiscal year 2019 budget, due to the need to
make some of the tough choices that have affected us elsewhere.
But we remain committed to providing and sustaining support
for this facility and for the other work in Fairmont.
Earlier this week, NOAA leadership held a successful COOP
exercise there and committed to sustaining support for the
facility, and we will continue to partner with local
universities on professional development programs for members
of the local community.
Senator Capito. Great. That is good and we would encourage
that.
CFIUS: CHINA INVESTMENT IN WEST VIRGINIA
The last question I had, I noticed in your statement that
you had asked for increased funding for the BIS to do with
expanded export controls to protect our technology and to help
the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
(CFIUS) process.
As you and I have talked about as well, when on the trip to
China, I think it was early in November, the Chinese and the
State of West Virginia entered into a preliminary agreement of
investment, of Chinese investment into our State.
Secretary Ross. Yes.
Senator Capito. I am interested in how the interplay of
increased funding for CFIUS might help us move these projects
along in West Virginia with the assurances that after
investigating all of this that we are on firm footing here to
pursue these.
Secretary Ross. Well, when I was over there last week, that
was one of the topics we discussed. As you know, I am a very
big supporter of that project.
Senator Capito. Right.
Secretary Ross. And I did not get the impression that they
are backsliding at all on it. Have you had any implication that
they are backsliding?
Senator Capito. No, no. I have not had any indication. I
mean, we have not seen an investment yet, but I guess my
question really goes more towards the CFIUS process that will
be occurring. I assume it will occur on something of this
magnitude?
Secretary Ross. Yes. Well, CFIUS, the real target in CFIUS
is militarily sensitive activity. I would be very, very
surprised if the activities that would be from the West
Virginia venture would be deemed as falling within that.
Senator Capito. Yes, I doubt that also.
Secretary Ross. We want to export those products. The
Chinese want to import them.
I have not heard any indication from the President or from
the Chinese that there is any opposition to that project.
Senator Capito. Thank you very much.
Senator Moran. The Senator from West Virginia, Senator
Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you.
And to follow up on my colleague, we are very much
concerned about this. First of all, EDA and ARC, Appalachia
Regional Commission kind of go hand in hand. A lot of them work
together. With EDA being, however you want to say it, being cut
completely, it is going to affect the ARC.
We are afraid because, I think it has been recommended
before, that ARC will go down. We are the only State in the
Nation that has all 55, my entire State, between Senator Capito
and I, our entire State has all 55 counties in it, sir. So we
are very much concerned, the Fairmont supercomputer, all of the
different things that we are doing, WVU, is all tied into this.
I hope that you will look at it, especially in rural
States, it really affects in a disproportionate way. I do not
know how we are going to be able to continue to give the
services we were depending so much on EDA loans coming through,
ARC to do the jobs around the State.
I am going to switch over because everybody has been asking
about that and everybody is concerned about the funding being
cut.
TARIFF AND TRADE POLICIES
I want to talk to you about tariffs and trade policies. My
thing on the tariffs, first of all, I agree with you. I agree
with the tariffs. I know exactly what is happening. I can show
our State of West Virginia has taken a tremendous hit over the
years and these tariffs have just played, I mean, the unfair
advantage of countries being able to come into our markets. You
have seen that your whole life. With China, they are concerned
about a trade war with the other countries.
Have you been able to pinpoint where these tariffs are
going to be implemented and where you have been able to
negotiate either a lower tariff or no tariff?
Secretary Ross. Well, in terms of retaliation did you mean
or?
Senator Manchin. I said have you, have we, as the United
States? I know, at first, it was going to be 25 percent for
steel and 10 percent for aluminum, I believe, and it was a
blanket worldwide. Then we came back and took off Canada. We
have taken off South Korea.
Are you looking at, I guess, where we have surpluses and
where we have deficits in our trade?
Secretary Ross. Sure. Well, Korea has not been let off the
hook. Korea, we negotiated several things with them in the
context, of course. They are accepting the 10 percent tariff on
aluminum and they will not be filing a WTO protest against it.
In terms of steel, what we worked out with them instead of
the 25 percent tariff was a quota system that would yield the
functional equivalent. Namely, we took the average of years
2015 through 2017, their shipments to us, discounted it by 30
percent, which is really more than 30 percent on 2017, and that
is the quota that they have agreed to live with and again,
without protesting.
In the case of Argentina and Brazil, there also are quotas,
not as severe as the one with Korea because Argentina and
Brazil, we are not doing the kind of transship to avoid tariffs
that Korea was doing, but they are agreeing to quotas.
So the main ones that are left are the Canada and Mexico
question; in the aggregate, our trade with them is pretty well
balanced in steel.
In aluminum, we literally do not have enough aluminum
capacity in this country to fill our needs without the support
of Canada. And Canada has not been dumping. Canada is a very
low cost producer because they have a lot of natural gas and a
lot of hydropower.
But those discussions are intertwined in terms of Canada
and Mexico with the whole NAFTA.
Finally, you have the EU. The President delegated to me the
task of negotiating with EU. Ambassador Lighthizer is handling
the country exclusions other than the EU. EU is my
responsibility.
You probably have seen in the press lately EU floating that
they are giving some thought to the idea of quotas. Well, I
talk with Commissioner Malmstrom quite frequently, several
times each week, and I will be talking with her again the
beginning of next week.
I think there is a reasonable chance we will work something
out, but you never have a deal until you have a deal on
everything. So it is a work in progress at the moment.
Senator Manchin. Well, may I have some considerations maybe
go a little bit longer because I think it is important and I do
not see any of my colleagues waiting right now. Mr. Chairman,
if you would be so kind? Can I ask him?
Trade policies, I have always been very concerned. I truly
am one who thought that the United States made horrible trade
deals and I have said that because I have seen some of the
deals that we have made, multilateral deals and some of the
countries we put into multilateral deals, some needed some
helps and certain caveats, if you will, some took advantage of
them.
So I appreciate, I think, you are targeting more on
bilateral versus multilateral. I appreciate that and support it
wholeheartedly. I think it is the way. I want to deal directly
with Mexico. I want to deal directly with Canada; two
completely different markets.
The thing I am saying is that I do not know why we do not
just put reciprocating on trade policies or the trade deals we
do, and I will give you a perfect example.
If we are not able, as the United States companies or
corporations, to own any financial wherewithal or institutions
in China, then China should not be able to come in to buy into
our markets such as the Chicago Stock Exchange.
If we are not able to own natural resources, coal or gas
deposits in China, China should not be able to buy and own that
in our country. If we are not able to control the grid system
or buy the grid system or the distribution, why should we allow
countries that will not allow us the same reciprocation? That
is the most commonsense approach to any trade deal.
Secretary Ross. Well, as I think you are aware, Senator
Manchin, the President is very keen on the notion of
reciprocity.
Senator Manchin. I like where he is going on this, I just
hope you double down.
Secretary Ross. Well, we are trying our best. I promise
you, it was a major feature of our discussions with the Chinese
last week and will continue to be a major feature of it.
SANCTIONS
Senator Manchin. The Iran deal, the sanctions on Iran, are
you able to hammer down on these sanctions to bring them back
into play or are we going to be crippled because the P5 are
allies are not going to go along or right now have not gone
along? And are you negotiating trying to get them to help us
make these sanctions more effective?
Secretary Ross. Well, we would certainly prefer to have the
support of our allies in any activity of this sort,
particularly sanctions.
But because of the prominence of the dollar in global
commerce, even without the help of our allies, these sanctions
can be pretty effective because people are very concerned to
operate through the clearing system of the banks for fear that
they will be punished for doing something inappropriate.
In terms of actual trade with Iran, Europe is really the
one that has much more at risk there than we do, particularly
the French. It has always been much more of a European market,
in my experience, than it has the U.S. So I do not think the
blowback on U.S. trade is likely to be that severe in any
event.
But the real purpose of the sanctions, of course, is not so
much trade based, as it is nuclear treaty.
Senator Manchin. I agree.
Secretary Ross. And the President, that is one of the few
tools that he has to try to modify their behavior in terms of
nuclear and missile.
Senator Manchin. Have they shown any inclination to sit
down and negotiate at all an Iran deal as far as the sanctions?
Secretary Ross. It is early days. As you know, the
sanctions were just imposed.
Senator Manchin. Mr. Chairman, you have been so kind.
Senator Moran. Senator Manchin, thank you very much.
We have votes at noon, so Mr. Secretary, you are soon to be
off the hook. I think Senator Manchin has started the second
round of questioning and I only have one additional question
myself, and then I will give you a chance to tell us anything
you would like for us to know.
SHARED SERVICES
I want to ask a question about some processes at the
Department. Before you took over the Department of Commerce,
this subcommittee worked for the prior administration to
approve the use of shared services. The shared service model
was sold to this subcommittee as a more efficient way for the
Department, and its bureaus, to carry out administrative tasks,
such as hiring, cost accounting services, and IT management.
I think we are still waiting to see the results of these
shared services on the overall Department's administrative
functions and cost. This is particularly the case for hiring
actions, which at NOAA's weather service can take over 18
months to find a hire to hire within certain of its bureaus.
I just was looking for your views, Secretary Ross, on the
shared services model and how do you think it should be applied
at the Department?
Secretary Ross. Sure. Well, the shared services model has
proven to be effective in one area, which is the procurement
area. We have made very good savings by bundling together
routine procurement decisions that are common to all of the
entities within the Department, that those savings are quite
tangible, quite visible.
What has been more complicated is the issue of hiring
people. As you know, we made an arrangement with Accenture, in
effect, to not only do enterprise sharing, but outsourcing of
many of the functions. And unfortunately, that has not worked
out as well as had been expected.
So we have terminated the arrangement with Accenture, and
we have entered into an arrangement with another firm with the
strange acronym of YRCI, which stands for Your Recruiting
Company, Inc. We are hopeful that that will bear better fruit
than the former process.
There were some problems of implementation on the NOAA
side. There were some problems of implementation on the
Advanced Forecasting Corporation (AFC) side. We think we have
learned a lot from them and we are optimistic that we can
greatly reduce the amount of time it takes them to fill a
position.
Now, having said that, the amount of positions that are
vacant, not all of those are positions that NOAA wishes to
fill. The union tends to use a very old table of organization
that was pretty much of the capital investment in efficiency
that has occurred subsequently. So the number of true vacancies
is much smaller than you have seen in some of the press
clippings.
But there has been a problem at NOAA with hiring. No
question. Part of that is because a lot of the amount of the
people they need to hire are very specialized skills, but there
also have been implementation problems. We hope the new
arrangement with YRCI will help resolve that.
Our target is to get down to more normal levels by the end
of 2019 fiscal year.
Senator Moran. Mr. Secretary, let me ask in a direct way.
Do you support the continued shared service arrangement at the
Department?
Secretary Ross. I think shared services is the right way to
go for many functions and for many of the departments.
Whether hiring is one, especially where you have very
specialized needs like the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. We
are having some very extensive discussions with them. Their
needs are relatively unique. So are some of NOAA's needs. So
that is a different thing from where your needs are largely
just clerical positions.
So we are trying to figure out how best to apply the
concept of enterprise services to the Department, and it may
well be that one size does not fit all. That there needs to be
fine tuning.
We are also looking at functions other than recruitment as
possible candidates for enterprise sharing. If you look at the
tables of organization at the various entities within our
Department and others, there is, on the face of it, quite a
little bit of duplication. And so, we are looking at other
avenues for enterprise sharing as well.
Senator Moran. Mr. Secretary, thank you. Thank you for your
testimony.
Let me first say this.
Senator Shaheen, the Ranking Member, is at the Labor
subcommittee hearing this morning where Secretary Azar is
testifying. That is where I was in my absence. We need to work
on our scheduling in the United States Senate.
But I always have the practice of asking my witnesses
before my subcommittees if they have anything they want to say
that they have not been asked or was not included in your
statement. Is there something that we have missed that you want
to make clear to us?
I also have noticed you have a chart in the room that you
have not referenced, and I would hate that no good chart should
go wasted.
Secretary Ross. Well, the charts, I had assumed that there
would be many more questions, perhaps, on trade policy and that
is essentially what these charts are meant to show.
So if you would like, I could spend a few minutes running
you through them. That would warm the hearts of the people who
spent a lot of last night preparing them.
Senator Moran. My suggestion, Mr. Secretary, is there will
be a vote occurring in about 4 minutes. My suggestion is that
you make certain that we have a copy of that chart. We will
make sure that each Member of the subcommittee receives it.
Secretary Ross. Okay, we will be happy to do that. I
promise you, they are very useful charts. You might find them
interesting.
Senator Moran. I, too, expected there to be more questions
in regard to trade, which is why I asked fewer questions than I
had intended.
Mr. Secretary, you are fine with what you had to say?
Nothing to add or to detract from?
Secretary Ross. No, I think you have done a pretty good job
X-raying the Department. So I am comfortable with where the
record stands.
Senator Moran. Very good. Again, thank you for your public
service and for your presence with us today.
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
With no further questions this morning, Senators may submit
additional questions for the subcommittee's official hearing
record.
We request the Department of Commerce's response within 30
days.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross
Questions Submitted by Senator Lisa Murkowski
seafood trade
Question 1a. I appreciate your comments on reducing our seafood
trade deficit and promoting domestic, sustainable production. As we
look at seafood trade, it's vital that promoting our seafood exports is
part of that strategy. There are emerging markets overseas that demand
U.S. seafood products, and we need to capitalize on and improve those
opportunities. For example, the terms of the Trans-Pacific Partnership
would benefit our seafood industry.
What steps is NOAA taking to ensure that its staff and regional
fishery management councils follow through on your goals of maximizing
domestic production opportunities?
Answer. NOAA Fisheries and the regional fishery management councils
are in the process of completing a comprehensive review of existing
regulations as part of the administration's efforts to remove
redundant, outdated, or unnecessary regulations. In fiscal year 2018,
NOAA Fisheries provided an additional $1 million to the regional
fishery management councils to support deregulatory actions. In
addition, we continually review and revise domestic fisheries
regulations to relieve restrictions and expand fishing opportunities.
After careful review of the biological information and public comment,
NOAA Fisheries has opened new fishing areas, increased flexibility in
the use of additional gears, and reduced risk buffers to increase
allowable harvest in many of its domestic fisheries, which are
sustainably managed for optimum yield.
For example, in fiscal year 2018, NOAA Fisheries was able to reopen
fishing grounds that are expected to provide additional tens of
millions of dollars worth of scallops into the market each year. As
another example, NOAA Fisheries has made substantial progress in
completing numerous actions to improve opportunity in the Pacific
groundfish fishery. In particular, NOAA Fisheries created more fishing
opportunities in Oregon by publishing a final rule authorizing a new
recreational fishery for rockfish at midwater depths greater than 40
fathoms. Rockfish are Oregon's largest recreational ocean fishery, and
add more than $14 million to the State's economy each year. The new
fishery aims to increase recreational fishing opportunity, providing
new options for anglers and benefit Oregon's coastal communities. When
deep-water rockfish closures went into place in 2004 to protect and
help rebuild overfished rockfish species, several ports were left
without any viable groundfish fishing opportunities; the new fishery is
expected to provide new recreational fishing opportunity to these
ports.
Additionally, NMFS recently proposed regulations to expand the
lending authority under the Fisheries Finance program to additional
fisheries. Specifically, the proposed rulemaking would allow the
Fisheries Finance Program to finance the purchase and transfer of
harvesting rights in limited access fisheries that are under Federal
management. Finally, expansion of domestic aquaculture continues to be
a focal point of our efforts. We continue to work with our partners to
address identified barriers and support needed scientific research.
We are also identifying the most significant trade barriers to U.S.
seafood exports and coordinating among NOAA, the International Trade
Administration, and U.S. Trade Representative to prioritize them in
negotiations with trading partners.
Question 1b. How are you working with industry and other trade-
focused Federal agencies to advance seafood export promotion goals? At
the same time, how can we make sure that seafood does not get caught up
in discussions about trade barriers to address unrelated issues, like
intellectual property?
Answer. Several bureaus within the Department of Commerce continue
their collective efforts to ensure a strong export environment for U.S.
seafood. This work is further augmented by engagement by the United
States Trade Representative at both the negotiating table for free
trade agreements and the World Trade Organization to ensure that U.S.
industry is treated fairly. Recent efforts include engagement of the
General Administration of Customs China regarding the approval of new
products for import into China from the United States, including
several Alaska rockfish species and fish oil produced from Alaska
salmon processing waste. We are also working to ensure the renewal of
China fishmeal import permits, many of which are held by Alaska
processors, and to increase the annual tariff quotas set by the
European Union for several products exported from the United States.
With regard to the impact on seafood of trade barrier discussions,
the administration is for free trade, but it must also be fair trade.
Addressing unfair trade practices, protecting our national security and
ensuring that global trade is free, fair and reciprocal will have a
significant positive long term impact on the U.S. economy.
hydrographic surveys
Question 2a. While shipping continues to increase as sea ice
diminishes, a shockingly low percentage of the U.S. Arctic has been
charted to modern standards, reported as low as 2 percent in 2017. As
you know, survey work in the Arctic is subject to a shorter operational
season than other U.S. coastal regions. I am concerned we are not
moving quickly enough to mitigate the risks associated with increased
activity in the remote and rapidly changing region. Furthermore, I am
worried that NOAA's desire to conduct hydrographic surveys using the
agency's vessels is preventing the work from being completed as
quickly, and at a reduced expense, as it could with contracted assets.
I believe, as this Committee has stated in the past to your Agency,
that Arctic survey work could be completed more efficiently through the
use of locally available resources and expertise.
The last administration estimated the survey backlog in the Arctic
to be over 100 years. That is absolutely unacceptable. When I met with
RADML Gallaudet last month, he said that this administration would be
working toward providing an updated estimate on a faster timeline. What
is this administration's estimate of how long it will take to complete
the appalling backlog for Arctic surveys?
Answer. NOAA has conducted a preliminary assessment of the highest
priority survey needs within the Arctic and has updated its national
hydrographic survey priorities to include these emerging Arctic
requirements.
The survey backlog you refer to is calculated based on
``navigationally significant waters'' that modern survey data does not
cover. NOAA's actual prioritization of planned surveys incorporates
analysis of current or projected use by vessel traffic and feedback
from users. Following from this prioritization, NOAA plans to build 11
new charts throughout the Arctic over the next 10-15 years. In fiscal
year 2017 almost half of NOAA's 17 hydrographic survey projects were in
Alaska and the Arctic (5 were in Alaska and 2 were in the U.S. Arctic).
Over the past 3 years, NOAA and its contract partners have acquired
nearly 1,500 square nautical miles of hydrographic survey data in the
Arctic.
In fiscal year 2018, NOAA plans to use both in-house and contract
assets for its hydrographic survey requirements in Alaska, including
Southeast, Kodiak Island, the Alaska Peninsula and Point Hope and
vicinity. NOAA is also exploring ways to increase our future
hydrographic survey capabilities. NOAA has been working with private
sector partners and academia to develop and deploy Autonomous Surface
Vessels (ASV) in the Arctic for chart-quality surveys. As of the time
of this response, we are currently updating our Bering Sea charts with
the ASV-gathered data from a collaboration with the Pacific Marine
Environmental Laboratory in 2016, and expanded this effort in 2017 to
five ASVs. We look forward to updating more charts with that data and
further investigating the use of ASVs as an additional cost-effective
survey capability.
Question 2b. Have NOAA and the Department of Commerce heeded the
direction of Congress to facilitate expediting Arctic surveys through
prioritizing outside contracts?
Answer. Yes, NOAA uses private contractors to complement its
hydrographic services mission in the Arctic and elsewhere when the
private sector has the proven technical competence and provides the
best value to the taxpayer. Both NOAA and contractor assets are used to
conduct hydrographic surveys in the Arctic based on yearly requirements
and resource availability. Some contractors may be well suited to
working in the Arctic if they have proven expertise and have
demonstrated success in conducting operations under harsh Arctic
conditions.
In fiscal year 2017, NOAA used both in-house and contract surveys
for several areas in Alaska, two of which are in the Arctic NOAA plans
to use both in-house and contract assets for its hydrographic survey
requirements in Alaska in fiscal year 2018 as well.
pacific salmon treaty
Question 3a. As we near the deadline for negotiations of the
Pacific Salmon Treaty, I am hearing ongoing concerns from my
constituents and those very familiar with the treaty and its
negotiations that the NMFS is placing an exaggerated emphasis on
returning a de minimus number of Chinook to Puget Sound, using ESA as
reasoning, over the socioeconomic value of Alaska's salmon fisheries.
In the process, it is my understanding that the Agency is ignoring the
plethora of non-fishing factors, such as agricultural run-off and other
water pollutants that pose a far greater threat to the survival of
Puget Sound Chinook.
What is the Department's position on the balancing of ESA concerns
with other agency objectives, like facilitating and sustaining healthy
fisheries?
Answer. Both the Department and NOAA are committed to NOAA's
statutory responsibilities under the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery
Conservation and Management Act (MSA) and the Endangered Species Act
(ESA) Regarding the Pacific Salmon Treaty, these two responsibilities
were reflected in the negotiations which were successfully concluded by
U.S. commissioners representing Alaska, the States of Washington and
Oregon, Indian tribes in the Northwest and the Federal Government. The
Agreement reduces catch to conserve salmon coastwide--including
populations listed under the ESA, but also includes an agreement among
non-Federal commissioners to seek funding to help address the economic
impact to communities in Southeast Alaska. The U.S. is hopeful that the
steps taken in this new agreement, similar to those taken under the
Treaty in earlier years, for Snake River fall Chinook salmon will
result in equally positive outcomes for other listed Chinook stocks.
After Snake River fall Chinook salmon was listed under the ESA in the
early 1990s, many Pacific coast fisheries were constrained, including
those in Alaska, as part of a holistic recovery program. Snake River
fall Chinook salmon have not yet recovered to the point of delisting,
but NMFS's recovery program has succeeded in supporting dramatic
improvements to their status in the last 20 years to the point where
they no longer constrain ocean fisheries.
Question 3b. Also, what actions is the Department taking to address
non-fishing impacts to Puget Sound Chinook or to address the impacts to
Puget Sound Chinook from Canadian and Washington fisheries?
Answer. NMFS uses both regulatory and non-regulatory approaches to
address impacts to Pacific salmon species that are not the result of
directed fisheries. In particular, NMFS leverages multiple authorities
(including the MSA; the Oil Pollution Act; and the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act) to direct
funding and technical assistance to high-priority habitat restoration
actions that support and accelerate Chinook salmon recovery.
In Puget Sound, NMFS works closely with Tribal governments, State
and local agencies, other Federal agencies, and non-profit
organizations to align efforts and leverage funding for habitat
restoration to achieve maximum impact. NMFS' authorities under Section
7 of the ESA require the agency to review Federal actions that may
affect listed salmon and their habitat. Through these consultations,
NMFS works directly with project applicants in the agriculture, timber,
hydropower, transportation, and infrastructure sectors to help develop
mitigation measures to minimize project impacts to ESA-listed species.
Where appropriate, NMFS may require actions to ameliorate potential
adverse effects.
In addition, because fisheries, particularly in Washington State
and Canada that are under the Pacific Salmon Treaty, significantly
affect ESA-listed Puget Sound Chinook, the new agreement includes
conservation measures directed at increasing Puget Sound Chinook
abundance and resiliency.
arctic research office
Question 4a. For the last 2 years, I have requested that the Arctic
Research Program be established as its own funding line in the NOAA
budget. In my view, we should be looking for every way to increase our
research into a region that is changing as drastically as the Arctic.
Given that NOAA has one of, if not the biggest set of
responsibilities in the Arctic, why doesn't the Agency want to elevate
a Program that has a clearly growing urgency?
Answer. NOAA agrees that it is important to emphasize Arctic
research in light of the rapid changes occurring in the region. It
believes it can continue to support cross-cutting Arctic research
without generating another budget line within the President's budget,
which presents additional complexities in regard to budget execution.
Question 4b. How are we going to meet our needs in the Arctic
without better information from the Arctic Research Program?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2019 budget prioritizes
national security and economic growth. It also identifies the savings
and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible fiscal
path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be made,
including the elimination of the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
Research (OAR) funding for climate research in the Arctic. However,
this is not a termination of NOAA's larger Arctic program. NOAA's other
line offices will continue to conduct their Arctic activities, which
cut across every NOAA mission area from weather and sea ice forecasts
to navigation services and fisheries management. As such, NOAA will
continue to support safe Arctic marine transportation and related
maritime operations, such as emergency response. With local, State,
Federal, Tribal, private, and international partnerships, NOAA will
continue to develop and apply technology and data in innovative ways to
better provide Arctic residents weather and climate services, sea ice
forecasting, nautical charting and other navigation services, natural
resource management, and oil spill preparedness and responses. For
example, the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory has two Unmanned
Surface Vehicles on an Arctic mission that are gathering valuable
information on marine life, ocean conditions and seafloor mapping.
saltonstall-kennedy grant fund
Question 5. It would seem to me that a big piece of the original
intent of the Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant fund, despite being largely
unfulfilled intent, is development and marketing of domestic seafood
products. Supporting this program and using it for its intended
purpose, and promoting domestic seafood production, marketing, and
innovation, seems like a logical path toward bridging the seafood trade
deficit.
Why then, has this administration proposed to zero out funding to
SK and continually used the fund year-after-year to meet internal needs
that do not meet the underlying goals of the fund?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2019 budget prioritizes
national security and economic growth. It also identifies the savings
and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible fiscal
path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be made.
The fiscal year 2019 request transfers all the funding available (after
accounting for sequestration) from the Department of Agriculture in the
Promote and Develop account to the Operations, Research, and Facilities
(ORF) account, which leaves no funding for the Saltonstall-Kennedy (S-
K) Grant Program. The funding transferred to the ORF account supports
critical data collection, data management, and fisheries stock
assessment production within the Fisheries Data Collections, Surveys,
and Assessments PPA, which includes Expand Annual Stock Assessments,
Fish Information Networks, Survey and Monitoring Projects, and
Cooperative Research activities. Without this transfer NOAA would
require additional appropriation funding. This work is part of NMFS'
core functions to provide accurate and timely assessments of fish and
shellfish stocks that support commercial and recreational fisheries.
NOAA knows that demand for this kind of research is increasing, and
we've made strides with our funding opportunities. These investments
support our efforts to build resilient communities, ecosystems,
economies, and businesses.
national weather service staffing
Question 6a. The NWS Alaska Region recently had 12 weather service
offices across rural Alaska. Beginning in 2009, the NWS began reducing
hours and services at these WSOs and by 2016, Alaska offices had a 30
percent staffing shortage with over 20 positions eliminated throughout
rural Alaska. The NWS now plans to close all remaining Alaska WSOs in
the near future. These staff reductions mean that each of the three
Weather Forecasts Offices (WFOs) must forecast for an area
approximately the size of 10 forecast offices in the lower 48, while
having little to no increase in staffing. Instead, there has been an
operational staffing shortage at Alaska WFOs of 20-30 percent for more
than a year, due to positions intentionally being left unfilled.
What steps is NOAA taking to address the hundreds of operational
vacancies that remain unfilled at the National Weather Service,
especially in rural Alaska?
Answer. NOAA has an enormous investment in the State of Alaska, and
our dedication to serving the State of Alaska is evident in the
staffing, facility, and programmatic investments NOAA has made. As
such, the NWS has no current plans to close offices in rural Alaska.
The reduced staffing at NWS offices across the Nation are primarily the
result of inefficient hiring processes. Over the past few months, NOAA
believes the hiring process has become more efficient and staffing
levels are increasing. As of November 1, 2018, there were 5 of 11
Weather Service Offices (WSOs) across rural Alaska with staffing
deficiencies (i.e., offices with empty billets that the Alaska Region
does not have sufficient personnel available to be temporarily filled
by qualified employees). To fill these vacancies, NOAA has relocation
and retention incentives it employs to recruit staff to Alaska and
other areas where positions can be more difficult to fill. NOAA will
continue to use these incentives to build a stronger workforce in
Alaska. Assuming no resignations occur prior to year's end, staffing
deficiencies at each of the eight WSOs will be resolved.
Question 6b. How does NOAA, while ramping down staffing in rural
Alaska, plan to maintain and improve its weather forecasting and its
communication and involvement in the communities it serves around the
State?
Answer. As stated above, the NWS has no current plans to close
offices in rural Alaska. However, the major duties and responsibilities
at rural Alaska Weather Service Offices have changed dramatically over
the past 25 years due to advances in technology and science. One of the
last remaining functions of rural WSOs the launching of weather
balloons. NOAA is pursuing a demonstration project to test automation
of these weather balloon launches. If (i.e., autolaunchers). If this
demonstration project is successful and the use of autolaunchers is
implemented, these autolaunchers would allow the region to
strategically reposition personnel to fill staffing gaps frequently
experienced in rural Alaska. Positions currently launching or
supporting the launch of weather balloons will have new
responsibilities to fill the gaps in mission demands in Alaska
including:
--Weather, water, ocean and sea ice, and climate support needs in the
Arctic.
--Adding capacity and filling existing service gaps to improve
Impact-based Decision Support Services to core partners across
the State.
--Meeting the Federal Aviation Administration requirements for
increased Terminal Aerodrome Forecasts to serve the aviation
community in rural Alaska.
Autolaunchers will allow the NWS in Alaska to improve our science
and service delivery to the whole State.
fish disaster funds
Question 7a. This year, fishing allocations for the Pacific cod
fishery in the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) were cut by 80 percent due to steep
declines in the stock. Communities like Kodiak, home to a significant
portion of the GOA cod fleet, felt acutely the impacts of this
reduction, with increases in unemployment and general economic stress
on local businesses and families. Because of the Pacific cod's life
cycle, we can expect this low biomass to persist for at least three
consecutive fishing seasons. Alaska's Governor and Lieutenant Governor
recently requested a disaster designation from Secretary Ross in order
to begin the process of providing our fishing communities with some
much-needed relief from what is essentially a slow-moving fishery
disaster.
What steps is the Department currently taking to address Alaska's
Pacific cod fishery failure, which Alaska is beginning to feel the
strong repercussions from and is expected to increase in 2019 and
beyond?
Answer. The State of Alaska has requested that the Department of
Commerce determine a commercial fishery failure due to a fishery
resource disaster for the 2018 Pacific cod fishery in the Gulf of
Alaska. To do this, NOAA Fisheries analyzes commercial fishery revenue
loss data for 2018 as compared with the previous 5-year average
commercial revenue loss, consistent with the NOAA Fisheries Disaster
Policy (Policy). This requires information about the amount of fish
landed as well as the price. Since prices can fluctuate, NOAA Fisheries
typically waits until the fishing year is over to make commercial
fishery failure determinations. NOAA also uses the Policy to determine
if there was a fishery disaster due to an allowable cause (e.g. unusual
storms, changing ocean temperatures, harmful algal blooms).
Question 7b. How does the Agency view this disaster, because unlike
many disasters, it has been requested by the State before the majority
of effects have taken place?
Answer. The Secretary of Commerce has received requests for fishery
disaster determinations in the past before the end of the fishing year.
For some of these requests, the fishery reopened later in the fishing
year and landed catch commanded substantially higher prices at the
dock. For this reason, NOAA Fisheries typically waits until the end of
the fishing season and uses commercial fishing revenue loss data to
make a determination of a commercial fishery failure due to a fishery
resource disaster. NOAA Fisheries views the request from Alaska for the
2018 Pacific cod fishery consistent with other disaster requests made
before the end of the requested fishing year.
afsc staffing
Question 8a. NOAA dedicates a significant amount of its physical
assets and operational capacity to Alaska, through fisheries science
and management, hydrographic charting, weather forecasting, ocean
observations and monitoring, and coastal assessment. We have a world-
class fisheries research laboratory located in Juneau that is currently
staffed at about 55 percent, while its larger parent-laboratory, the
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, is located in Seattle. Other research
assets like the NOAA vessel Fairweather are dedicated to serving Alaska
but reside outside the State. Alaska and the Nation are best served
when the staff engaged in the research and management of our ocean
resources are located in their study region.
Why hasn't NOAA taken specific action to station AFSC staff in
Alaska or staff Juneau's research facility to full capacity?
Answer. The AFSC staffing at Juneau has seen a net loss of two
Federal positions from 2013 through 2017. This represents a 3 percent
decline in total positions at fiscal year 2017 levels. During that same
time, the AFSC staffing at Seattle has seen a net loss of 28 Federal
positions. This represents a 12 percent decline in total positions at
fiscal year 2017 levels. NOAA will continue to prioritize staffing
positions in Alaska and, as a result, we expect the relative proportion
of staff in Juneau and Alaska as a whole to increase.
Question 8b. With the departure of the region's Science Director
who has been based in Alaska, it looks as if the Agency is opening the
position up to be based either in Alaska or Seattle. This is
unacceptable to me and my constituents. What is the Agency's position
on stationing its Regional Science Directors within the region they
serve?
Answer. Although the Science Director position was advertised with
the duty station in either Juneau or Seattle to maximize recruitment
efforts, NMFS agrees that it is preferable for Regional Science
Directors to be stationed within the region they serve.
stock assessments
Question 9a. Fisheries surveys and stock assessments provide
foundational estimates of available biomass that allow us to
sustainably harvest our marine resources. In Alaska, other vital NOAA
missions are at risk of being cut due to underfunded surveys and
assessments. Additionally, and possibly in part due to underfunded
survey priorities in the North Pacific, my State is facing another
proposed fishery disaster for Pacific cod that demands a clear
understanding of how many fish are available and where those fish are
located. Many fishermen and scientists believe that the cod stock
simply moved due to warming waters in the Gulf of Alaska, and because
of underfunded surveys, this was unable to be confirmed. As a result,
the quota for the 2018 cod season was reduced by 80 percent. I remain
concerned with the process in which the Agency funds stock assessments,
as these assessments are a critical part of our rigorous fisheries
management regime under the Magnuson-Stevens Act.
How does NOAA plan to prioritize its survey and stock assessment
obligations while ensuring that other aspects of its mission retain
necessary support?
Answer. Both the Department of Commerce and NOAA are strongly
committed to our critical stock surveys and assessments obligations. In
each region, NOAA Fisheries science centers work with regional fishery
management councils and other management partners to prioritize science
activities (including stock assessments and surveys) in an annual
process. To support these regional processes, NOAA Fisheries released a
national assessment prioritization protocol in 2015. This protocol uses
information on each stock, including their importance to commercial and
recreational fisheries and the ecosystem, as well as relevant
biological attributes to prioritize stock assessment schedules. Within
each region, the prioritization framework is being used to determine
the stocks that are top priorities for assessment each year. For
surveys, NOAA Fisheries is allocated a certain number of days on NOAA
vessels, and then each science center ranks its priorities and needs
across a spectrum of survey categories, and this information is used in
a national process to prioritize and allocate days-at-sea on NOAA ships
for regional surveys.
NOAA Fisheries also recently released a strategic guidance document
entitled Implementing a Next Generation Stock Assessment Enterprise
that targets specific areas of NOAA Fisheries' stock assessment process
for improvement. The plan revises the stock assessment prioritization
process to not only facilitate stock assessment scheduling, but also to
determine stock-specific data gaps.
Question 9b. What can be done to modernize the way in which surveys
are conducted to adapt with climate change and other changing factors
in Alaska that are causing fish stocks to rapidly move year-to-year?
Answer. NOAA Fisheries recognizes the challenges that climate
change and shifting stocks are presenting to fisheries management and
data collection. Recent strategic planning documents, including the
National Climate Science Strategy [1], Ecosystem-Based Fisheries
Management Road Map [2], and Implementing a Next Generation Stock
Assessment Enterprise [3] highlight this issue and provide
recommendations and strategies for adapting to climate effects.
Furthermore, the Alaska Fisheries Science Center is taking a number
of steps to adapt research efforts to help resource managers respond to
potential shifts in fish distributions due to climate change and other
environmental effects. A few examples include (1) examining survey
designs for optimal frequency, spatial coverage, sampling density, and
type/number of survey platform; (2) engaging in research and
development on advanced sampling technologies; and (3) new modeling
techniques that better account for species distributions in estimating
population abundance. It is important to ground truth and fully
operationalize new approaches and advanced technologies. To do this, it
is essential that NOAA maintain long-term surveys in the Gulf of
Alaska/Aleutian Islands and eastern Bering Sea, and more consistently
survey the northern Bering Sea. The time series of data collected
through these surveys will enable tracking of fish stock abundance
trends and distribution shifts while continuing to provide resource
managers with the scientific advice needed to set annual fishing quotas
and ensure sustainability of fish and crab stocks. Once a new
technology is deemed ready to ``operationalize,'' several (3-5) years
of data from the new and old techniques are required to ``calibrate''
the two methods and ensure that the new technique adequately reflects
that status and trends of all of the major commercial species being
assessed. Thus, progress is slow, but steady to make surveys more
efficient and less costly, without the loss of accuracy and precision.
usarray
Question 10. Alaska is the most seismically active State in the
Nation. We have a system of earthquake monitors, called the USArray
Transportable Array, which is currently operated by the National
Science Foundation (NSF). The monitors are slated to be decommissioned
at the end of this year, but I know that the U.S. Geological Survey and
NSF have begun discussions on transferring the stations from NSF to the
USGS. I understand that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) uses data from the USArray network--some of which
is used by the National Tsunami Warning Center--but that NOAA has been
hesitant to commit to retaining and/or maintaining the network.
Please provide a detailed explanation of:
Question 10a. What data NOAA uses from the USArray network in
Alaska;
Answer. NOAA/NWS uses atmospheric and pressure observations data
from USArray for meteorological purposes and to support our tsunami
program.
Question 10b. How much data NOAA uses from the USArray network in
Alaska;
Answer. When available, NOAA uses all the meteorological and
seismic data from the USArray network in Alaska.
Question 10c. How NOAA uses data from the USArray network in
Alaska;
Answer. The USArray network has 268 stations, of which 150 have
meteorological sensors. Data from these meteorological sensors are
incorporated into Numerical Weather Prediction models and these data
are used by meteorologists to assess weather conditions. The NOAA/NWS
National Tsunami Warning Center uses data from the USArray seismic
components to help analyze local earthquakes to determine if the
earthquake could generate a tsunami.
Question 10d. What reports, forecasts, and warnings are informed by
data from the USArray network in Alaska; and
Answer. NOAA uses the meteorological data from the USArray in its
Numerical Weather Prediction models and as a way to maintain
situational awareness of weather conditions in rural Alaska. Though the
meteorological information from USArray is not a NWS requirement, the
network provides data from areas where the NWS Alaska Region has gaps.
USArray data are also used by the National Tsunami Warning Center to
monitor local earthquakes when determining whether to issue tsunami
warnings.
Question 10e. The market value of the data that NOAA obtains
through the USArray network in Alaska.
Answer. At this time, we have no way to measure the market value of
the USArray data NOAA uses.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Susan M. Collins
right whale protections
Question 1. The Maine lobster industry is renowned for its
responsible, science-based stewardship of our ocean resources. The
conservation efforts of Maine lobstermen--including self-imposed
regulations such as tossing back egg-bearing females--are driven by the
desire to ensure the stock and the ocean environment remains healthy
and sustainable for generations to come.
The industry's stewardship extends beyond lobster to all marine
life in the Gulf of Maine, as Maine lobstermen have long led the way in
implementing mitigation measures to prevent whale entanglements. In
1997, the industry instituted a weak rope link requirement that allows
gear to break away and let the whale swim free. In 2009, the industry
replaced vertical rope between lobster traps with sinking groundline,
which resulted in more than 27,000 miles of floating line being removed
from the water column. Since this change, NOAA Fisheries has not
observed a right whale entanglement in groundlines. And in 2014, the
industry removed nearly 3,000 miles of buoy lines from the ocean as a
result of gear reconfiguration.
Right whales have been afforded significant protection by U.S.
fishing and shipping industries under the Endangered Species and Marine
Mammal Protection Acts. Unfortunately, comparable protection has not
existed in Canada. Despite these legal protections and sustained
mitigation efforts by the industry, Maine lobstermen are increasingly
concerned that their fishery may be subject to crippling restrictions
following the deaths of 17 right whales in 2017, 12 of which occurred
in Canadian waters.
I am encouraged that Canada announced whale protection measures for
its Gulf of St Lawrence snow crab fishery and a few measures for that
area's lobster fishery. Unfortunately, Canada has not addressed its
lobster or snow crab fisheries outside of that small area. As long as
our Canadian counterparts do not implement equivalent right whale
protections, the population will remain at risk and the American
lobster industry will unduly bear the burden of Canada's inaction.
Mr. Secretary, can you discuss the steps NOAA Fisheries is taking
to ensure that Canadian fisheries implement equivalent right whale
protections for fixed gear fisheries in all areas and that the
industries who have pioneered these protections in America are not
penalized for Canada's failure to act?
Answer. NOAA is actively collaborating with Canada on the science
and management gaps that are impeding the recovery of North Atlantic
right whales in both Canadian and U.S. waters through ongoing bilateral
negotiations.
In March 2018, Canada adopted regulations on its commercial fishing
and maritime shipping industries to minimize gear entanglements and
ship strikes in advance of North Atlantic right whales migrating into
Canadian waters. Given these actions and the ongoing bilateral
negotiations, it is too early to tell if these measures, collectively,
are adequate to prevent further right whale deaths. Furthermore, in
response to the 2017 right whale deaths, NOAA is currently reviewing
and may revise its own regulatory program. NOAA will continue to
evaluate the effectiveness of Canada's regulatory program for the
applicable Canadian commercial fisheries through March 2021 per the
existing regulatory requirements and timeline for comparability finding
determinations.
NOAA has consulted with Canada's Department of Fisheries and Oceans
to identify priority fisheries, and elements of a comparable regulatory
program within the framework of Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA)
import provisions. NOAA met in October to discuss Canada's List of
Foreign Fisheries and Canada's compliance efforts under the MMPA import
provisions. Continuing our bilateral engagement and implementation of
our respective regulatory regimes will ensure that the United States
and Canada are fully complying with the MMPA and eliminating the risk
of North Atlantic right whale entanglements in fisheries while ensuring
sustainable fisheries and trade.
seafood trade deficit
Question 2. Mr. Secretary, I am encouraged by your comments in
support of reversing America's seafood trade deficit and appreciate
your commitment to this goal. In Maine, countless coastal communities
and thousands of hardworking families rely on strong international
seafood markets. Fisheries in Maine, especially our iconic lobster
fishery, continue to face increasing global competition as other
nations make progress on new trade agreements, leaving American
fishermen at a disadvantage.
For example, the recently implemented Comprehensive Economic and
Trade Agreement (called CETA) between Canada and the EU has eliminated
tariffs on live Canadian lobster and will eliminate tariffs on frozen
and processed Canadian lobster over three and 5 years, respectively.
With NAFTA negotiations in flux, and as other agreements move forward
without our participation, fishermen in Maine and across the U.S. are
increasingly worried that their inability to access international
markets will set them further behind competitors and only exacerbate
our seafood trade deficit.
Mr. Secretary, can you explain the Department of Commerce's efforts
to address our seafood trade deficit and achieve your goal of making
America a net exporter of these products?
Answer. The Department of Commerce has been clear about its goal of
reducing the trade deficit in seafood products. That said, many of the
dynamics that drive our seafood trade balance such as U.S. consumer
preferences, the volume and composition of U.S. seafood production, and
global seafood demand lie outside of the Department's control. In any
case, the Department of Commerce intends to shift the balance of trade
and increase the value and volume of U.S. seafood production by
supporting increased investment in, and productivity of, the Nation's
aquaculture industry, reducing regulatory burden, where appropriate,
and promoting free, fair, and reciprocal trade within the global
marketplace.
The Department is completely committed to increasing the value and
volume of U.S. seafood production and improving the competitiveness of
U.S. seafood production, from staff-level efforts within its bureaus to
achieve the objectives described above to my own engagement of key
trading partners at a Secretarial level.
aquaculture
Question 3. Mr. Secretary, the Department of Commerce's Strategic
Plan for 2018-2022 identifies ``Increasing Aquaculture Production'' as
a method for strengthening U.S. job creation, which is goal #2 in your
Strategic Plan. It is heartening to see the Department embracing
aquaculture, an industry that is steadily growing in Maine and across
the country. I am concerned, however, that the President's budget
proposes to eliminate the Sea Grant program, and with it the Marine
Aquaculture Program which has been one of the few--and most effective--
sources of Federal aquaculture support.
The U.S. has the second largest exclusive economic zone in the
world and has the strongest fisheries management record, yet we rank
14th for production of farmed seafood, behind producers in Asia,
Europe, South America, Canada, and Africa. In fact, half of the fish
eaten in the United States comes from farms--but not from American
farms. American aquaculture (both marine and freshwater) meets only 5-7
percent of U.S. demand for seafood. In your Senate nomination hearing,
you said you ``would like to try to figure out how we can become much
more self-sufficient in fishing,'' and I fully agree with that goal.
I understand the Department is taking bold steps towards overcoming
regulatory hurdles currently impeding U.S. aquaculture development. Can
you provide any detail regarding the administration's activities on
aquaculture?
Answer. NOAA supports U.S. aquaculture to promote domestic seafood
production and create jobs. Consistent with the Department of
Commerce's 2018-2022 Strategic Plan, NOAA is working to reduce
regulatory burdens and drive aquaculture research to ensure the
continued growth of this industry.
To reduce regulatory burdens, NOAA is working with other Federal
agencies and coastal States to streamline Federal marine aquaculture
permitting. In addition, NOAA invests in regulatory efficiency measures
and public-private partnerships to jump-start production. Last year,
NOAA led a six-agency Memorandum of Understanding to streamline
regulatory processes for aquaculture operations in the Gulf of Mexico.
To drive research, NOAA works in collaboration with industry to
support research that advances commercial-scale marine aquaculture
production. NOAA is the largest provider of Federal funds to support
the marine and Great Lakes aquaculture industry and provided $19.6
million in aquaculture grants in fiscal year 2017. fiscal year 2018
research grants will support 22 projects that address major
constraints, barriers, or hurdles limiting aquaculture production in
the U.S. Aquaculture research funding addresses issues identified by
industry and the public such as feeds development, hatchery
technologies, and siting tools to reduce conflicts with other coastal
users.
drug pricing
Question 4a. Mr. Secretary, prescription drug spending is the
second fastest growing segment of healthcare expenditures in the United
States. Among seniors, approximately 90 percent take at least one
prescription drug each month. Many factors contribute to the price of a
medication, but, for generic drugs especially, the cost of
manufacturing ingredients can make a big difference. It has been
estimated that 80 percent of the active pharmaceutical ingredients used
in drugs sold in the United States come from outside the country, with
China and India being the largest providers.
On April 3, the administration announced a proposed 25 percent
tariff on Chinese-manufactured products, including ingredients used to
make vaccines, insulin, epinephrine, and other important medicines and
medical devices. At a time when Americans are clamoring for relief from
the high cost of prescription drugs, how can we protect American
innovation while also protecting our access to lower cost generics and
biosimilars?
Answer. USTR and the Section 301 Committee have carefully reviewed
the public comments and the testimony at the three-day public hearing.
In addition, in accordance with the President's direction, USTR and
other trade experts in the administration have carefully reviewed the
extent to which the tariff subheadings in the April 6, 2018 notice
cover products involving industrially significant technology, including
technologies and products related to the ``Made in China 2025''
program.
Based on this review process, the Trade Representative has
determined to narrow the proposed list in the April 6, 2018 notice to
818 tariff subheadings, with an approximate annual trade value of $34
billion. Pharmaceutical products and low-end medical devices were
removed from this list.
follow up
Question 4b. Last month, Bloomberg reported that Federal Trade
Commission attorneys are looking for more cases to challenge companies'
anti-competitive conduct. FTC shouldn't have to look very hard to find
examples in the drug pricing arena, whether it be mergers, market
consolidation, pay-for delay settlements, or patent thicket strategies.
For example, in a recent speech, FDA Commissioner Gottlieb suggests
that the biosimilars pipeline is not as robust as it ought to be. He
points out that litigation contributes in part to the problem--an issue
I have highlighted in the area of rheumatoid arthritis--but that ``the
industry's rebating and contracting practices combine to raise another,
perhaps even more insidious barrier to biosimilars taking root in the
U.S., and gaining appropriate market share.'' What do you see as the
greatest barriers to pursuing more aggressive activity in the area of
pharmaceutical price competition?
Answer. The Department of Commerce is focused on foreign price
controls and foreign reference pricing as key concerns in the area of
pharmaceutical pricing competition. Around the world, price controls
and associated ``free-riding'' on U.S. pharmaceutical spending has
become much worse over the last two decades. The administration's
recently released 'Blueprint to Lower Drug Prices' highlights
addressing ``foreign freeloading'', and the related issue of unfair
foreign price controls, as one of four priority challenges. We are
working with USTR to respond to the President's charge to make
addressing foreign price controls a top priority. This includes
ensuring that trading partners maintain robust levels of intellectual
property protection and enforcement, as well as fair and transparent
pricing and reimbursement systems.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jeanne Shaheen
Question 1a. The fiscal year 2018 omnibus includes $10.3 million to
cover the full cost of monitoring this year as well as $2 million in
new research funding so we can work to better understand the impact of
changing climactic conditions on this fishery.
Do I have the commitment of the Department that NOAA will cover the
full At-Sea Monitoring costs for the Northeast Multispecies Groundfish
fishery this year?
Answer. With fiscal year 2018 funds, a new cooperative agreement
will be established with the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries
Commission (ASMFC), and NOAA can reimburse fishermen for all at-sea
monitoring costs for fishing year 2018 (May 1, 2018, through April 30,
2019).
Question 1b. Will NOAA reimburse fishermen for the full amount of
At-Sea Monitors dating back to the beginning of fiscal year 2018, in
October 2017?
Answer. For costs prior to May 1, 2018, using the remaining funds
on the existing ASMFC cooperative agreement, NOAA will be able to
reimburse industry for the majority (approximately 85 percent) of at-
sea monitoring expenses, leaving less than $60,000 in costs paid by
industry for fishing year 2017.
Question 1c. How do you expect NOAA to utilize the additional $2
million for groundfish research to best improve our understanding of
the challenges facing this fishery?
Answer. NOAA's Northeast Fisheries Science Center (NEFSC), through
the Northeast Regional Action Plan (NERAP) plans to use the $2.0
million provided to better understand the impact of changing climatic
conditions on the New England groundfish fishery. The following types
of projects identified in the NERAP-focused on groundfish-will be
funded: continue development of stock assessment models that include
environmental terms; increase social and economic scientist involvement
in climate change research through multidisciplinary work; improve
management of living marine resources through an increased
understanding of spatial and temporal distributions, migration, and
phenology; work with NOAA Oceanic and Atmospheric Research and academic
scientists to develop short-term (day to year) and medium-term (year to
decade) living marine resource forecasting products; conduct research
on the effects of multiple climate factors on living marine resources
with a goal of improving assessments and scientific advice provided to
managers; and maintain ecosystem survey effort in the Northeast U.S.
shelf ecosystem. Projects will include both NOAA scientists and
academic partners.
Question 1d. What additional actions do you believe can be taken to
ensure the long term viability of this fishery?
Answer. NOAA and the New England Fishery Management Council
(Council) are working to help ensure the long-term viability of this
iconic fishery. For example, we are working to improve accountability
and catch monitoring in the groundfish fishery. Accurate catch data
underpins this quota-based fishery. Working closely with fishermen and
stakeholders, NOAA and the Council continue to focus on creating
additional fishing opportunities for healthy groundfish stocks,
increasing business flexibility, and maximizing revenues through
innovation and increased emphasis on seafood marketing. In addition,
sustaining waterfront infrastructure is necessary for a viable fishery.
Finally, NOAA also invests significant resources in the science that
underpins management and is placing renewed emphasis on industry
engagement to improve science and increase stakeholder buy-in and
trust.
Question 2a. In your testimony, you stated that 2020 Census is the
Department's top priority.
If you expect any decreased participation or accuracy is that
enough to justify not including the citizenship question? After all the
decennial census is Constitutionally-mandated for the purpose of
congressional apportionment, and there are other ways of getting this
information. For instance the American Community Survey or ACS--which
replaced the long form Census--already includes a citizenship question.
Answer. March 26, 2018 publicly-available decision memo fully lays
out his rationale.
Question 2b. Will the 2020 Census require more funding to complete
because of the inclusion of this question?
Answer. The Census Bureau has previously predicted a self-response
rate of 60.5 percent, but the Lifecycle Cost Estimate also included
contingency funding to accommodate for a self-response rate of 55
percent to be prepared for self-response rates below the predicted
levels, whatever the reason. I am confident that this contingency will
be sufficient.
Question 3a. The fiscal year 2018 CJS Appropriations bill included
$2.8 billion for the Census Bureau, more than a $1 billion above the
President's request, to ensure that agency has sufficient resources for
communication and partnerships. This amount will also help to smooth
the needed funding increase over the next two fiscal years as field
operations really start ramping up.
How have the Census Bureau's operational plans for fiscal year 2018
changed in light of the additional appropriations?
Answer. The innovative structure of the Consolidated Appropriations
Act of 2018 provided the Census Bureau an opportunity to reduce risk
and address preliminary findings from the 2018 End-to-End Census Test.
In addition to the increases to the Partnership and Communications
Programs described below, the Census Bureau was able to accelerate into
fiscal year 2018 hiring of staff for security compliance and active
cyber-defense activities originally planned for fiscal year 2019,
accelerate activities to ensure that systems supporting the 2020 Census
are ready, and advance activities to recruit staff for the 2020 Census.
It also accelerated the establishment of a mature logistics management
program that will ensure materials and equipment needed by 2020 Census
field staff are efficiently and effectively distributed throughout the
country during major field operation in fiscal year 2019 and fiscal
year 2020 and accelerated work on risk mitigations and geographic
support contracts leading up to the Address Canvassing operation. All
of these changes will reduce risk in critical areas in the 2020 Census
and provide a smoother transition between fiscal years.
Question 3b. In the omnibus, Congress included specific directive
to increase communications and partnership activities similar to what
occurred in the 2010 Census. What was the level of funding for the
communications campaign in fiscal year 2008?
Answer. For the 2010 Census, the Census Bureau spent over $26
million on communications and partnership activities in fiscal year
2008, which in current year dollars is around $31 million. For the 2020
Census, the Census Bureau spent about $46 million in fiscal year 2018.
Question 3c. What specific additional communications and
partnership activities and hiring has the Bureau undertaken, or will it
undertake, in the current fiscal year?
Answer. The Census Bureau has had approximately 40 partnership
specialists in place since January 2017. The Census Bureau currently
has 311 partnership specialists and partnership specialist managers and
will further increase the number of partnership staff to over 1,500 in
fiscal year 2019.
These partnership specialists and partnership specialist managers
are primarily focused on helping States, municipalities, and
partnership organizations to develop ``Complete Count Committees.''
These committees, which will be formed at the State and local levels
across the Nation, are comprised of a broad spectrum of government and
community leaders from education, business, healthcare, and other
community organizations. These trusted voices develop and implement a
2020 Census awareness campaign, based on their knowledge of the
community, to encourage people to respond.
Additionally, funding provided by the fiscal year 2018 Consolidated
Appropriations Act has enabled the Census Bureau to advance early
planning activities for the Communications Contract. The total amount
of spending for the advertising contract for fiscal year 2018 was
already above the spending level in fiscal year 2008. However, the
Census Bureau, in collaboration with the communications vendor, Young
and Rubicam, moved planning activities from fiscal year 2019 into
fiscal year 2018 so that the planning and overall strategy will be
substantially completed before the purchase of advertising time in
fiscal year 2019.
Question 3d. How many partnership specialists are currently working
as part of the 2020 Census partnership program? Are they assigned
nationally, or regionally, or both?
Answer. As of January 2019, the Census Bureau paid 311 employees in
the partnership specialist and partnership specialist manager roles.
The employees are assigned regionally.
Question 3e. How many additional partnership staff (Specialists or
Assistants) will you hire to meet the Committee's directive, how
quickly will they be on board, and where will they be assigned?
Answer. In fiscal year 2019, the Census Bureau plans to have on
board over 1,500 employees in the partnership specialist and
partnership specialist manager roles. The employees will be assigned
regionally in all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.
Question 3f. Last year you commissioned an Independent Cost
Estimate to assess the total needed for the 2020 census. The
Independent Cost Estimate included a 10 percent contingency to overcome
serious issues that inevitably come up. However, the contingency was
not included in the fiscal year 2019 budget request. Why is this the
case?
Answer. The fiscal year 2018 Omnibus included $50 million in
contingency and the fiscal year 2019 Request fully supports the
Independent Cost Estimate, which includes nearly $300 million in
contingency funding. Given the preliminary successes of the fiscal year
2018 End-to-End Census test, we anticipate the current contingency
request will be sufficient to handle the emerging challenges in fiscal
year 2019.
Question 3g. Are you confident that fiscal year 2019 request
provides the required funding for partnerships and communication
efforts that are critical to getting the word out about the 2020
census?
Answer. Yes. The fiscal year 2019 Budget includes $335.6 million
for the partnership and communications programs.
Question 3h. Does the Census have additional need for fiscal year
2019 above what was included in the President's request? For example
the request does not include the $314 million contingency fund.
Answer. No. The fiscal year 2019 budget request fully funds the
Department's Independent Lifecycle Cost Estimate, which supports all of
the operational and systems development necessary to ensure a
comprehensive and accurate 2020 Census, including opening the remaining
field offices and the first major 2020 Census field operation, the In-
Field Address Canvassing operation.
Question 3i. The fiscal year 2019 House CJS bill that was reported
out of the House Committee on Appropriations earlier this month
includes $4.8 billion for the Census, $1 billion more than the
President requested. How would this additional funding be spent?
Answer. The report accompanying the House CJS bill specifies that
the funding provided in the mark represents the remaining portion of
the fiscal year 2019 request not provided in the fiscal year 2018
appropriation and a quarter of the funding required for fiscal year
2020, an approach that is similar to that taken in the fiscal year 2018
Omnibus. The Census Bureau's approach to using the extra funds would be
similar to that taken in fiscal year 2018, that is, most of the
additional funding would likely be carried over to fiscal year 2020 to
ease the transition between fiscal years. If there were targeted areas
where advancing funding and activities into fiscal year 2019 would
reduce risk, the House CJS bill provides a process for accessing that
funding. That process includes congressional notification requirements.
Question 3j. There were nearly 5 million children that went
uncounted as part of the 2010 Decennial Census, many in communities of
color, what is the agency doing to overcome this challenge in 2020?
Answer. The Census Bureau has taken a number of steps to address
this issue. These included updating the language on our mailing to
households to emphasize that ``all adults, children and babies living
or staying at this address'' should be included (the 2010 form just
said ``everyone''); updating the wording of the undercount probe on the
questionnaire to specifically mention ``grandchildren'' and
``unrelated'' children; and updating the help text on the Internet
self-response instrument to provide additional guidance about counting
children. The automated instruments will allow respondents to add
people in real time in response to the prompts, and we are
incorporating messaging about including young children in the training
for our field staff conducting the Nonresponse Follow-up operation.
The importance of counting young children must be woven into all of
the communications messaging and partnership support materials, which
is a principal focus of the communications contracting team. The
Partnership Program also will be building relationships with national
organizations that support children, and local organizations like
hospitals across the country. Continuing to explore opportunities to
ensure a full and accurate count of children will be an important
priority in the months ahead.
Question 4a. In making the case for the steel and aluminum tariffs
imposed by the administration, you have pointed to the relatively low
cost for consumers who might pay slightly more for a can of soda or a
beer. But for small businesses who use significant amounts of raw
materials and operate on thin margins, this can be make-or-break. And,
unlike large corporations who have Washington lobbyists, small
businesses don't have the ability to navigate the complex exemption
process. On top of that, retaliatory tariffs on American products have
already started to hurt small businesses in my State and across the
country. Earlier this month, I heard from a small business in New
Hampshire, Moonlight Meadery, who had a deal effectively killed by
retaliatory tariffs on American wine. This is a deal that would have
doubled their output. They've also been told by their aluminum
suppliers that their canning prices will go up because of the tariffs.
This small business has been forced to lay off six employees as a
cumulative result of this administration's tariff policies.
What do you recommend that I tell small businesses in New Hampshire
like Moonlight Meadery affected by the 232 tariffs?
Answer. The potential loss of any jobs concerns me. To the extent
any retaliatory measures are ultimately imposed that are inconsistent
with international trade obligations, the United States is prepared to
address them under U.S. and international law. On July 16, the United
States launched separate disputes at the World Trade Organization (WTO)
against China, the European Union, Canada, Mexico, and Turkey
challenging the tariffs each WTO member imposed in response to our
Section 232 actions.
The President's Section 232 decisions are the result of a robust
and thorough interagency review coordinated by the White House. It will
take time for U.S. aluminum and steel producers to fully restart idled
capacity and regain long-term economic health. The Department, working
with other agencies, will continue to monitor the impact of the tariffs
and the health and competitiveness of U.S. industry, and the Department
will conduct a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the Section 232
tariffs after they have been in effect long enough to make the results
of that analysis useful. We are also confident that small and medium-
sized businesses can navigate the product exclusion request process and
provide further details on how that is being done below. As of December
17, 2018, the Department has granted 13,809 exclusion requests and
denied 5,231.
Question 4b. Recently, I sent a letter to the SBA's Office of
Advocacy to examine the impact of the tariffs on America's small
businesses. This is the same office that examines the cost of new
regulations on small businesses before they are put in place. Don't you
think this kind of analysis is necessary to specifically determine the
impact to small businesses before the administration imposes tariffs?
Question 4c. Do you have any plan in place to provide small
businesses with assistance with navigating the exemption process? Do
you have a specific guide for small businesses?
Question 4d. The fiscal year 2019 budget request includes an
increase for processing U.S. companies' requests for exemptions to the
Section 232 tariffs. Is this funding sufficient to process the 6,000
expected exemption requests?
Answer. With regard to assistance for small businesses navigating
the process, the Department published procedures for the product
exclusion requests in the Federal Register on March 19, 2018 and
subsequently made them available on the Department's web site. In
addition, BIS established dedicated phone numbers and email addresses
for U.S. industry to seek assistance or ask questions about the
process. These phone numbers and email addresses were included in the
press release announcing the exclusion process and the coinciding
Federal Register notice. BIS has also posted guidance with a step-by-
step visual guide to assist industry, including small- and medium-sized
businesses, through the process and with tips on how to properly
complete the exclusion request forms based on issues identified during
BIS's initial review of submissions (the most common issues being
incomplete forms or bundling numerous requests in a single submission).
The International Trade Administration's Enforcement and Compliance
Unit (E&C) provides technical product support to BIS in the exclusion
process and has assembled a team of 110 analysts (evaluators), many of
whom are knowledgeable of the steel and aluminum industries. As part of
this team, E&C hired contractors under its direction and supervision to
provide research and analysis for E&C's consultative role to BIS. Full-
and part-time staff from other parts of Commerce have also been
detailed to ITA to support the processing of the exclusion workload.
All of these analysts, most of whom have already gone through an
extensive training program, are responsible for reviewing within a very
short timeframe the over 108,470 exclusion requests and objections from
domestic steel and aluminum producers and industrial users submitted as
of December 17, 2018.
Question 4e. Has the Department of Commerce shifted any Federal
employees to process exemptions, diverting resources from other work?
If so, from where are you proposing to divert resources? If not will
you inform the Committee if this changes?
Answer. In addition to contract employees, ITA's E&C is working
with a team of experts that includes E&C staff, as well as staff/
product experts within Commerce on both a full- and part-time basis,
and expertise from other agencies such as the National Institute for
Standards and Technology (NIST) and the International Trade Commission
(ITC). E&C has a long history of adapting to extremely demanding
enforcement needs and deploying programs that successfully accomplish
high level and challenging initiatives. Commerce is prepared to address
this priority initiative without disruption to other programs,
including E&C's primary enforcement mission.
ITA's Global Markets (GM) has provided 45 staff/product experts on
a temporary duty assignment basis to support E&C and BIS on both a
full- and part-time basis. As advisors to U.S. companies on
opportunities in the international marketplace and all trade-related
issues, GM experts are uniquely positioned to provide expertise and
assistance and to acquire a unique professional development opportunity
to strengthen their advisory capabilities.
Question 5a. I was disappointed to see that the budget proposal
again includes a cut to the International Trade Administration's Global
Markets division--which includes the U.S. and Foreign Commercial
Service that provides critical for support for U.S. exporters and
manufacturers who don't have other resources. The Commercial Service
helps small- and medium-sized businesses get access to international
markets and works to bring down trade barriers. Given the
administration's stated priority of reducing trade deficits, I would
think that this would be a top priority.
How do you justify these proposed cuts?
Answer. Significant cuts are necessary in ITA to meet the fiscal
year 2019 President's budget. The budget request prioritizes and
protects investments in core Government functions across Commerce that
benefit small businesses, including enforcing laws that promote fair
and secure trade, and realigning our export promotion and market access
work.
The ITA will strengthen its trade enforcement and compliance
functions to ensure American businesses get fair opportunities in the
global marketplace while enhancing the efficiency of the bureau's
export promotion and trade analysis activities. To complement these
efforts, the ITA is developing and implementing plans to transform its
operations to strengthen outcomes, improve efficiency, and meet trade
and investment priorities. The ITA's transformational actions will be
rooted in maximizing the delivery of the organization's value to
clients, providing timely and actionable information and service to
U.S. business (especially small- and medium-sized enterprises),
eliminating or reducing lower-priority functions and activities,
strengthening higher priority activities, and modernizing information
management.
Question 5b. When is the Department going start filling vacation
positions within Global Markets? I believe there are more than 100
vacation positions right now.
Answer. Global Markets will move forward with additional priority
hiring to fill administration priorities and will continue to backfill
vacancies occurring this fiscal year, pending funding availability.
Global Markets continues to work with ITA to adjust position numbers to
reflect enacted appropriations.
Question 5c. How many rank order register candidates has the
International Trade Administration cleared for entry into the Foreign
Service and why has the agency not followed through on its conditional
offer of employment to candidates, given the loss of 16 officers this
year alone?
Answer. ITA has cleared and onboarded 19 rank order register
candidates. All remaining candidates have been given final offers.
Contingent upon successfully clearing security, medical, and drug
screening, remaining candidates will onboard Summer 2019.
Question 6a. I'm very concerned that this budget request would
eliminate more than $400 million of NOAA grants to States, regional
partners and academic partners. Many of these programs fund critical
coastal science and community resilience partnerships, including Sea
Grant, the Coastal Zone Management Program, the National Estuarine
Research Reserve System and even the NOAA Office of Education. I
believe that having the knowledge and tools to protect our coastlines
is a critical element of our national security.
We know that the climate is changing, and we know that we will
continue seeing the impacts of this change. The NOAA climate research
program helps communities understand and prepare for the effects of
climate change. This includes developing cutting-edge models and
providing data and tools. However, this budget cuts climate research by
nearly 38 percent. How will NOAA continue to help communities prepare
and lead the world on climate research with such a drastic cut?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2019 budget prioritizes
national security and economic growth. It also identifies the savings
and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible fiscal
path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be made,
including reducing competitive research grants to cooperative
institutes, universities, NOAA research labs and other partners.
However, NOAA will preserve priority activities including research at
the Earth System Research Laboratory within OAR; the National
Integrated Drought Information System (NIDIS); long-term observations
and climate records; research and development associated with Seasonal-
to-Subseasonal (S2S) prediction; and legislatively mandated work on the
National Climate Assessment. This will allow NOAA to continue to
enhance predictions of atmospheric patterns, increase understanding of
ocean impacts on climate, improve climate modeling, and expand the
Nation's capacity to prepare for extreme events.
Question 6b. At last year's budget hearing you told us that you are
concerned about the trade deficit when it comes to seafood and that you
are encouraged by the prospect of domestic aquaculture. And yet, the
fiscal year 2019 budget cuts funding for aquaculture both as part of
the Sea Grant program and through the National Marine Fisheries
Service. Why is this?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2019 budget prioritizes
national security and economic growth. It also identifies the savings
and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible fiscal
path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be made,
including terminations and reductions to external grant programs. The
fiscal year 2019 funding request for the National Marine Fisheries
Service (NMFS) includes $9.3 million for Aquaculture, which will be
used to continue work to advance the domestic marine aquaculture
industry, create jobs, provide sustainable seafood, and reduce the U.S.
seafood trade deficit.
Question 7a. I am disappointed that for the second straight year,
this administration has proposed eliminating the Economic Development
Administration that plays a critical role investing in infrastructure
projects around the country, especially in rural communities. This
includes last-mile broadband investments that are imperative to help
rural communities attract new industries and grow local economies.
I know the administration's budget makes tough choices, but you
understand the importance of rural economic development--so how do you
justify eliminating EDA?
Answer. In ``Building a Stronger America,'' the President proposed
a framework to transform how infrastructure is delivered. The package
is designed to help address America's crumbling infrastructure,
including in rural communities. The plan will help attract needed
capital investments, deploy broadband and install transformative
infrastructure that will facilitate economic development. This
infrastructure plan, along with the administration's focus on building
a stronger overall economy is the best path forward for these rural
communities. This administration is trying very hard to balance the
needs of the economy and difficult choices have to be made. The
decision on EDA was one of those difficult choices.
Under the ``Delivering Government Solutions in the 21st Century
Organization Reform Plan and Reorganization Recommendations,'' the
duties and functions of EDA will continue in the Bureau of Economic
Growth under the Department of Commerce (DOC). This plan rethinks how
the Federal Government can drive economic growth in concert with
private sector investments in communities across the country. By
coordinating and consolidating Federal economic assistance resources at
the DOC, taxpayer dollars will receive a higher return on investment on
projects that are transparent and accountable.
Question 7b.The disaster relief supplemental that Congress passed
in February to provide support for communities affected by the tragic
hurricanes, fires, and other disasters last year, includes $600 million
in grants from the Economic Development Administration. Will your
proposal to eliminate EDA delay getting disaster funds out?
Answer. Eliminating EDA will not delay getting disaster funds out
to the communities affected by disasters last year. Under the National
Disaster Recovery Framework (NDRF), the Department of Commerce is
assigned as the lead coordinating agency for the Economic Recovery
Support Function (ERSF). EDA's responsibility under this function is a
result of the Department's decision to delegate it to EDA. The
Department will continue to execute its leadership role under the ERSF
and administer any supplemental funding at the Departmental level.
Of the $600 million appropriated under the Disaster Supplemental,
up to 2 percent of funds ($12.0 million) may be transferred to
``Salaries and Expenses'' for administration and oversight and $1
million is available for the OIG. The remaining $587.0M is available
for grants. Upon EDA's elimination, the Department would assume
responsibility for administration and oversight of the disaster
recovery awards and would draw upon the up to 2 percent appropriated
for administration and oversight. To date, EDA has transferred $4.0M of
the up to $12.0M; the balance of those funds remain available for
future Department administration and oversight activities.
After an expeditious process for developing the Notice of Funding
Opportunity (NOFO) for the Disaster Supplemental Appropriation that
Congress passed in February 2018, EDA began making Disaster
Supplemental awards in June 2018. As of February 1, 2019, EDA had
awarded $119.1 million of these funds. EDA is continually reviewing
grant applications as they are received and will make additional awards
based on the merit of the applications received.
Question 7c. How long until affected communities start seeing these
funds?
Answer. In June, EDA made its first grant award from the $600
million disaster relief supplemental that Congress passed in February
2018. EDA is continually reviewing grant applications as they are
received and will make additional awards based on the merit of the
applications received.
Question 8a. After September 11th, we saw a decrease in tourism
relative to other countries. So Congress came together in a bipartisan
way to address this issue through the creation of BrandUSA, a public-
private partnership that promotes tourism to the U.S. This is a program
funded by the private sector and by foreign visitors who pay certain
fees when travelling to the United States. The investment in BrandUSA
pays off--for every $1 BrandUSA spends, tourists and travelers spend
$28.
I know the administration is focused on reducing the trade deficit.
Do you believe tourism is an effective way to do that?
Answer. Commerce's National Travel and Tourism Office (NTTO) will
be working with the incoming Travel and Tourism Advisory Board to set a
new goal for international inbound travel to the United States that
would be supported by the National Strategy for Travel and Tourism.
For more than two decades, international inbound travelers to the
United States have spent more money visiting here than U.S. outbound
travelers have spent abroad. In 2017, the United States enjoyed a trade
surplus for travel and tourism.
Question 8b. As the Secretary of Commerce is this something that
you're raising with the President?
Answer. I raise a variety of trade policy issues with the
President, including how to address the trade deficit.
Question 8c. The authorization for BrandUSA to receive fees expires
in 2020. Do you and this administration believe that this authorization
should be extended?
Answer. The administration believes in the importance of travel and
tourism to the economy. However, the administration also believes there
are other priorities for the use of funds.
Question 9a. The fiscal year 2018 omnibus provided at least a 5
percent increase for scientific research within NIST and NOAA. However,
the President's fiscal year 2019 budget request would reverse that
progress and more. It proposes slashing the research and development
investment at NIST by 21 percent and at NOAA by 41 percent.
One argument that I often hear from the administration for cutting
government investment in science, is that the private sector will make
up the difference. To me, this argument does not hold water. Given your
vast experience in the private sector do you believe this is the case--
do private businesses invest in high-risk, basic long-term research?
Answer. Maintaining a robust science and technology base requires
contributions from both the Government and the private sector. The
Trump administration is committed to advancing technological
development and conducting research and development (R&D) to ensure
national security, grow the economy, create well-paying jobs, and
improve the lives of Americans across this great Nation. To those ends,
Department of Commerce Bureaus like NIST and NOAA continue to engage in
important research efforts. NIST specifically is central to a number of
critical national priority and emerging technology R&D areas including
quantum science, artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, and advanced
manufacturing. Additionally, NIST, in partnership with the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy, is developing a comprehensive
plan to improve the transfer of technologies from Federal laboratories
to the private sector. By improving this technology transfer, the
Department and NIST will spur economic growth, create new well-paying
jobs, and increase our global competitiveness.
Question 9b. Are you concerned about what will happen to U.S.
competiveness if we pull back as our global competitors continue to
invest?
Answer. Consistent and stable investment in science and technology
is a critical element to the health of high-technology economies like
the U.S. With international competition increasing in critical emerging
technologies areas (quantum science, artificial intelligence, advanced
materials, advanced electronics, etc.) the ability of the U.S. to
dominate and take advantage of the economic and national security
benefits of technological leadership can no longer be taken for
granted. Data collected by the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) and the National Science Foundation highlight
the increasing competitive environment. The U.S. has long been
recognized as a global science and technology (S&T) leader, spending
more on R&D than any other country and accounting for around 40 percent
of total OECD countries' R&D expenditures, but our international
position is being challenged perhaps now more than ever. Other nations,
especially China ($408.8 billion in 2015), are quickly closing the gap
in total expenditures on R&D, and have long been in front in R&D
Intensity Amount of R&D as percentage of Gross GDP. In 2017, China's
President Xi Jinping announced plans to make China the world's biggest
superpower by 2050, fueled in part by large investment in R&D. China's
spending on R&D grew by an average of 18 percent per year between 2010
and 2015, a number that is 4X faster than U.S. spending growth and will
likely surpass U.S. R&D spending within the next 5 years (National
Science Board 2018). (Sources: https://nsf.gov/nsb/sei/ and https://
www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/report/sections/research-and-
development-u-s-trends-and-international-comparisons/cross-national-
comparisons-of-r-d-performance).
Question 10a. Advancements in hydrography and ocean and coastal
mapping benefit the Northeast region, as well as the entire Nation,
with respect to national security, energy independence, and innovation.
Can you characterize the importance of ensuring that our country
remains a leader in this field and the long-term opportunities it
supports with respect to gas/oil exploration and understanding of the
extended continental shelf, as well as oceanographic, biological, and
geological phenomena?
Answer. Our Nation's ability to reap the economic benefits of our
vast undersea resources is dependent on accurate information to define
the ocean space under U.S. jurisdiction, and beyond. Approximately 30
percent of the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) has been mapped to
modern navigational standards. The EEZ serves as the marine highway for
imports and exports, linking the United States to the global economy.
In fact, our Nation's ports are the lifelines of our economy. In 2017,
foreign trades through U.S. ports were valued at $1.6 trillion: $527
billion exports and $1.1 trillion imports were moved by vessels, making
safe navigation in our ports and waterways essential.
Accurate, high resolution bathymetric data is essential for
identification of critical minerals, optimal wind energy siting, a full
understanding of the sources and effects of ocean sound, and proper
characterization and assessment of marine sanctuaries. Even businesses
such as aquaculture farms are being sited offshore due to the promise
of more cost-efficient production.
NOAA recognizes and addresses this critical need through the
Integrated Ocean and Coastal Mapping (IOCM) program and other large
regional mapping campaigns, such as Seabed 2030, the interagency
EXPRESS project with the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and the U.S.
Geological Survey, and the West Coast Deep Sea Coral initiative.
Through these and other interagency initiatives, NOAA and interagency
partners avoid redundant surveys and target our efforts on the most
vital areas. To make the most of this effort, it is vital that the
Nation remains a leader in hydrographic surveying, and that NOAA
maintains and builds on its hydrographic expertise with people, modern
ships and other platforms and advanced technology.
Question 10b. Modern hydrographic data requires an increasingly
broad set of highly technical skills, including geodesy, cartography,
engineering, and computer science while the applications of seafloor
surveying are expanding well beyond chart-making to a range of
biological, engineering, and Earth science applications. As the breadth
of ocean-mapping applications continues to expand, what are the
workforce needs and how does the academic research community, through
partnerships like the Joint Hydrographic Center in New Hampshire,
address these challenges?
Answer. The Center for Coastal and Ocean Mapping/Joint Hydrographic
Center (CCOM/JHC) was founded in 1999 with two main objectives: (1) to
develop tools to advance ocean mapping and hydrography; and (2) to
train the next generation of hydrographers and ocean mappers. To
fulfill these objectives in a rapidly evolving field, research at JHC
is proposed by the university principal investigator based on mission
focus areas identified in the Federal Funding Opportunity Notice. This
approach enables world-class researchers at the University of New
Hampshire to pursue cutting edge research concepts and approaches, and
has resulted in major advances in hydrographic and ocean mapping
science.
These advances are effectively transitioned to operations at NOAA
and elsewhere thanks to the long-standing relationship between the JHC
and NOAA's Office of the Coast Survey. NOAA also has academic
partnerships with the University of Southern Mississippi and George
Mason University to further advance its goals for building capacity in
people and technology.
Question 11. Last month, the Vice President announced that the
Department of Commerce will take a more active role promoting and
monitoring commercial space ventures. I look forward to seeing a more
comprehensive plan of what this entails. But in general, I wish the
Department would focus more on promoting economic development here on
Earth. How to you justify a greater role in promoting business in space
while abandoning development and promotion of businesses on Earth?
Answer. The Department of Commerce promotes job creation and
economic growth by ensuring fair and reciprocal trade, providing the
data necessary to support commerce and constitutional democracy, and
fostering innovation by setting standards and conducting foundational
research and development. Through our bureaus and 46,608 employees (as
of January 31, 2018) located in all 50 States, every U.S. territory,
and more than 86 countries, we provide U.S.-based companies and
entrepreneurs invaluable tools through programs such as the Decennial
Census, the National Weather Service, NOAA Fisheries, and the Foreign
Commercial Service. Among many other functions, the Department oversees
ocean and coastal navigation, helps negotiate bilateral trade
agreements, and enforces laws that ensure a level playing field for
American businesses and workers. Any new efforts to advance commercial
space activities will lead to significant developments in global
economic activity as technology including GPS, remote sensing, earth
observations, weather predictions, and satellite telecommunications
grow increasingly vital to modern business operations.
Question 12a. In February, it was reported that after a Department
review, four political appointees who were operating with temporary
security clearances within the DOC left their posts.
I know that you cannot speak to the specifics of the cases, but how
long were these individuals serving in their roles?
Answer. According to the Department's records, the four employees
were employed during the following periods:
--Employee #1 was employed by the Department of Commerce from 2/7/17-
4/1/17 (Office of the Secretary), and from 4/2/17 to 3/17/18
[International Trade Administration (ITA)].
--Employee #2 was employed by the Department of Commerce from 5/22/17
to
3/17/18 [Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA)].
--Employee #3 was employed by the Department of Commerce from 5/22/17
to
3/17/18 (ITA).
--Employee #4 was employed by the Department of Commerce from 4/18/17
to
3/17/18 [Economic Development Administration (EDA)].
Question 12b. Did they have access to classified information in
their roles?
Answer. Although it was unlikely that some or all of these four
employees would have accessed classified material because of the nature
of their work, their interim security clearances would have allowed
them access only to materials classified up to the Secret level.
Question 12c. Are there other political appointees still operating
with temporary clearances?
Answer. There are no political appointees operating with interim or
temporary clearances at the Department of Commerce.
Question 12d. If so how does the Department plan to rectify this?
Answer. Not applicable.
Question 13. In February 2014 the Department of Commerce set up the
Organization of Scientific Area Committees (OSAC) for Forensic Science
at NIST that incorporated most of the Scientific Working Groups that
were formerly at the Department of Justice. We had concerns about this
move in Congress, but our understanding is that the project is going
well, and needed standards are being created in a collaborative process
with stakeholder engagement. However, we have heard that the Department
of Commerce is reluctant to continue this effort at NIST. What are your
plans and why is NIST seeking to outsource this effort when forensic
science seems to need NIST's leadership and expertise in creating
consensus scientific standards?
Answer. With the funding provided in fiscal year 2018
appropriations NIST will continue its support of the OSAC. NIST has
been and remains committed to participating in the OSAC process to
provide scientific expertise, metrology, and testing expertise to
underpin the development of consensus standards for forensic science.
However, from the beginning NIST has seen its role in supporting the
OSAC as temporary, and considers that the OSAC will be most effective
when it is transitioned to and operated by an independent, private-
sector entity, such as a conformity assessment or accreditation body.
NIST participates in and provides its technical expertise to technical
standards development in many other research areas through open,
consensus-based standards development processes run through
organizations such as the American Academy of Forensic Sciences Academy
Standards Board (ASB), ASTM International, and National Fire Protection
Agency. NIST continues to work with the forensic science community on
developing transitions plans, which would be implemented over a number
of years to ensure a successful.
Question 14a. I have heard from a constituent who has filed for a
number of patents with the U.S. Patent and Trade Office over the years.
He also happens to have a permanent medical condition. This condition
allows my constituent to include with each patent he files a ``petition
to make special,'' which the PTO has granted him for each application
because his medical condition is qualifying. The forms and paperwork
required to grant this petition must be filled out each time my
constituent files for a patent, despite the fact that this
constituent's condition--which the PTO has acknowledged is qualifying--
is permanent. A review of the enabling rules on these petitions
suggests the PTO has no way of recognizing a permanent, qualifying
medical condition. Such a mechanism would spare clients and the PTO
from having to complete or review a petition with each filing when the
PTO has already recognized a client's qualifying, permanent medical
condition.
Has the Patent and Trade Office ever considered creating a process
to recognize clients with permanent, qualifying medical conditions and
to grant these clients some kind of lifetime status?
Answer. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has not
formally proposed a change in regulations to authorize a continuing, or
lifetime, grant of petitions to make patent applications special (in
order to accelerate examination); however, I understand that your
office has made such a suggestion. I have asked USPTO's management to
consider whether such a change is needed and if this would lessen any
burden on such applicants or improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the patent application examination process.
Question 14b. Absent a legitimate reason to require a client to
submit a petition to make special with every filing, will the Patent
and Trade Office make plans to create a process to acknowledge
inventors with qualifying, permanent medical conditions?
Answer. I have asked that the USPTO consider such a proposal, or
consider other changes to lessen any burden on such applicants.
Question 15a. The Nation is facing an increased threat to coastal
and navigable river-based communities, industries, and human and
natural resources from technological and natural disasters. An
essential component of resilience to these threats is disaster
preparedness, response, and restoration to oil and chemical spills and
marine debris impacts.
What role does research and training play in resilience and
disaster preparedness?
Answer. Disaster events can be disruptive to natural resources,
infrastructure, and the economic activities that depend on them.
Actions taken in the immediate wake of a storm or pollution event can
have a profound effect on mitigating the level of injury that occurs to
a resource. Research into the effects of different pollutants, response
actions, and remediation measures enable responders to make more
informed decisions that minimize injury to resources and improve their
prospects for recovery.
Training serves a similar purpose. NOAA serves numerous critical
roles in the aftermath of a disaster. Training improves individual and
group job performance and strengthens working relationships. The more
practiced these various personnel and organizations are at
coordinating, communicating, and accessing important support and
resources, the smoother an actual response will unfold.
NOAA also hosts and supports trainings, to prepare responders from
State, local, and other Federal agencies for future disasters. While
NOAA Scientific Support Coordinators advise the Federal On-Scene
Coordinator for any given event, in most cases multiple offices within
NOAA as well as multiple agencies with different levels of jurisdiction
are responsible for response support and operational decisionmaking.
Therefore, practicing and transferring scientific expertise and
experience to the broadest possible audience promotes more efficient
planning and response.
In the fiscal year 2019 President's Budget, NOAA is requesting a
program increase for the Disaster Preparedness Program (DPP). The DPP's
top priority is developing a multi-year exercise and training program
that improves NOAA's ability to respond to disasters in a manner that
is appropriate to the specific challenges of each geographic region.
DPP will also dedicate resources to continuous improvement, using
lessons learned from previous response events, to make future responses
more effective.
Question 15b. NOAA's Office of Response and Restoration provides
comprehensive solutions to environmental hazards caused by oil,
chemicals, and marine debris. One critical component of this mission is
working with communities to address critical and regional challenges
resulting from natural and technological disasters in order to minimize
impacts and reduce risks to people, the economy, and the environment by
providing scientific and technical support. What are the current
programs that support these efforts?
Answer. After the initial response to an environmental hazard, NOAA
and other natural resource trustees are responsible for determining the
extent of damages to natural resources and for seeking compensation on
behalf of the public for the loss of ecosystem services. The National
Ocean Service's Office of Response and Restoration works with NOAA's
General Counsel for Natural Resources and the NMFS Office of Habitat
Conservation to carry out the NOAA Damage Assessment, Remediation and
Restoration Program (DARRP).
Engagement with affected communities is a critical component of
NOAA's efforts to assess damage and formulate restoration plans that
restore resources to their previous state or otherwise compensate the
public for the damage and lost use. NOAA solicits public review and
comment at all stages of this process. Funds from responsible parties
are reserved for ecosystem restoration and restoration of passive and
active recreational use of the damaged resources, and does not include
third party or private claims for property damage and lost business. In
addition to securing resources for restoration, NOAA also ensures that
protection and restoration are integrated into waste site cleanups to
reduce further injuries and to promote recovery.
Question 15c. How do the Coastal Response Research Center and NOAA
research programs support this mission?
Answer. The Coastal Response Research Center (CRRC), a partnership
between NOAA and the University of New Hampshire, was established with
the goal of reducing the consequences of spills and other hazards that
threaten coastal environments and communities. It serves as a hub for
cooperation among local, national, and international oil spill
responder communities and private industry. CRRC conducts and oversees
research on spill response and restoration, transforms research results
into practice, encourages strategic partnerships, and educates the next
generation of oil spill responders. CRRC's engagement with the academic
community, response communities, and industry enables them to bring
together many different perspectives the science of dispersants, oil in
the Arctic environment, marine debris, and data management for disaster
response and restoration.
CRRC funds projects and hosts workshops on the human dimensions and
transportation of spilled materials. One of the Center's notable
efforts was leading the collaboration that led to the development of
NOAA's Environmental Response Management Application (ERMA). ERMA is a
web mapping application that is now used by the U.S. Coast Guard as the
Common Operating Picture (COP) during responses activities including
oil spills and natural disasters. Scientists who are working on natural
resource damage assessments (including Deepwater Horizon) and the
public also use ERMA to access a wealth of spatial data: operational
clean-up information, environmental sensitivity and species details,
and aerial imagery and remote sensing data.
Question 16a. There has been a resurgence of interest in U.S.
manufacturing, especially advanced technology products. The United
States has long been considered a global hub of innovation and an
economic leader based on the resulting prosperity. However, our trade
balance in advanced technology products declined from a surplus in 2000
to a trade deficit of $81 billion by 20102. Locally, New Hampshire is
in the top quartile of States with respect to high-technology firms3,
and manufacturing is the largest sector of the N.H. economy, accounting
for 19 percent of the State's GDP. In New Hampshire, there are more
than 2,000 small-to-medium enterprises (SMEs) with less than 60
employees, many of which are focused in the aerospace and defense
industries. Providing assistance to these SMEs is critical to their
success and the economic, job creation, and national security benefits
attained. At the Federal level, one of the programs focused on
assisting SMEs is the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership
(MEP) administered through NIST. Yet, the President's budget request
would eliminate this important program.
Small and medium-sized manufacturers constitute nearly 99 percent
of all U.S.-based manufacturing firms. In what ways is it important for
these small and medium-sized firms to have access to partnerships with
universities and community colleges?
Answer. Universities promote a wide range of innovation services
from process improvements to state-of-the-art production, but most
often, research cannot simply be ``transferred'' to manufacturers,
rather, technological advancements most often must be ``transitioned''
to manufacturers. The ability of the manufacturer to adapt new
technology involves many factors, from the manufacturer's capacity and
availability of resources to innovate, to a ready workforce. Small- and
medium-sized manufacturers (SMMs) are particularly challenged to meet
the ever-increasing technological demands of original equipment
manufacturers (OEMs) as part of the supply chain.
Small and medium-sized manufacturers need an intermediary that can
help link them to university research and development (R&D) and
facilitate technology transition, which will enable the manufacturer to
achieve greater productivity and growth.
Additionally, SMMs require a knowledgeable interpreter to help
navigate career and technical education institutions (CTEs), community
colleges, and universities facilitating access for their employees to
career pathways and training opportunities, as well as connecting SMMs
to potential employees through mentorships/internships/apprenticeships.
Question 16b. In December 2016, the Department of Defense announced
the establishment of a new Manufacturing USA institute focused on
advanced tissue biofabrication. The Advanced Regenerative Manufacturing
Institute (ARMI) is based in Manchester, NH and is leveraging $80
million in Federal funding with over $214 million in additional public
and private investment to advance research in tissue engineering.
Please describe the ways in which NIST's Manufacturing Extension
Partnership program can better partner and coordinate activities with
NNMI's like the ARMI to meet their stated objective of transferring
results and knowledge to our Nation's small and medium-sized
manufacturers?
Answer. Beginning in 2017, NIST MEP has invested approximately $17
million for MEP centers to develop and operate partnerships with the
Manufacturing USA Institutes. Through this NIST MEP investment, MEP
centers are embedding staff at each of the 14 Manufacturing USA
Institutes operating around the country, including the Advanced
Regenerative Manufacturing Institute (ARMI) in New Hampshire. The
projects have placed MEP center staff in residence at the Manufacturing
USA institutes to develop ways to cultivate enduring collaborations
among small U.S. manufacturers, the Institutes, and MEP centers for the
benefit of all these entities. Specifically, the ``Embedding MEP into
Manufacturing USA Institutes'' pilot projects are:
--Developing innovative approaches for transferring technology from
the Institutes to small U.S. manufacturers;
--Creating approaches for engaging small manufacturers in the work of
the Institutes through hands-on assistance and services;
--Developing and testing business models by which MEP centers and
Institutes may effectively serve the needs of small U.S.
manufacturers in the technology areas of the Institutes, and
facilitate knowledge and best practice sharing between the
Institutes and MEP centers; and
--Cultivating an enhanced nationwide network of partnerships among
the Institutes and MEP centers.
Specifically, for ARMI, a team of approximately a dozen MEP centers
around the country, led by Massachusetts MEP and New Hampshire MEP, is
partnering with the Institute to embed MEP staff at ARMI and develop
awareness by small manufacturers of ARMI manufacturing technologies and
business opportunities. Business opportunities for small manufacturers
here include identifying and developing small manufacturers as members
of the supply chains that will support the scale production of the
biotechnologies that are the focus of ARMI.
Question 17. Skilled, dedicated stewardship is critical to the
Census Bureau's ability to deliver a successful Census that preserves
cost savings. Are any candidates in consideration for nomination to the
position of Census Director? Is the administration actively looking?
Has it solicited the Department's recommendations?
Answer. I am very pleased that the U.S. Senate confirmed by voice
vote with no opposition Dr. Steven Dillingham to be Director of the
U.S. Census Bureau. He brings a wealth of experience, including
formerly leading two other statistical agencies in his accomplished
career of Federal service. Dr. Ron Jarmin, who was formerly performing
the non-exclusive duties and functions of the director, remains at the
bureau as the Deputy Director and Chief Operating Officer.
Question 18. How does the Census Bureau intend to incorporate
administrative records into decennial Census data? Given the enduring
uncertainty in this area, can you assure us that the fiscal year 2019
budget request will be sufficient to cover, in addition to other
potential needs, cost increases that may result from a determination
that the Bureau cannot validate or move forward with widespread use of
administrative records in the 2020 Census?
Answer. For the 2020 Census, ``administrative records'' and
``third-party data'' are terms used to describe micro data records
contained in files collected and maintained by Federal, State, and
local government agencies (``administrative records'') for
administering public programs and commercial entities (``third-party
data'') providing commercial services.
For many decades, the Census Bureau has successfully and securely
used administrative records and third-party data for statistical
purposes. The Census Bureau obtains administrative records and third-
party data under Section 6 of Title 13 of the U.S. Code, and Section 9
protects the confidentiality of these data, which by law the Census
Bureau protects with the same rigor as data collected directly from
respondents, employing a wide-range of policy, procedural, information
technology, and methodological safeguards. The Census Bureau uses
administrative records to impute information for invalid, inconsistent,
or missing responses. The Census Bureau uses third-party data sources,
such as CoreLogic, to identify vacant or non-existing households, and
to identify the best time to contact households in the Non-Response
Follow-up (NRFU) operation and will continue to do so in 2020.
For the purposes of enumeration, based on the current operational
plan, each nonresponding household will receive multiple communications
consisting of six mailings, including a paper questionnaire on the
fourth mailing, and at least one in-person visit from a Census Bureau
enumerator. If the enumerator is unable to contact a resident, the
enumerator will leave a notice on the door encouraging the household to
self-respond.
The Census Bureau estimates that up to 6.5 million households that
do not respond to the NRFU enumerator will be enumerated using Federal
administrative records, as noted in Federal Register Notice 2018-12365
at page 26646 (published on June 8, 2018). These cases, which represent
less than 5 percent of the approximately 145 million addresses in the
Census master address file, are part of the approximately 60 million
addresses that constitute the expected NRFU workload for the 2020
Census. Administrative record enumeration will only occur in a well-
defined set of circumstances when multiple contacts, including a visit,
have not resulted in a completed questionnaire and where the Census
Bureau is confident that the Federal administrative record data are
reliable.
The Census Bureau has not yet made the final determination on
whether the use of State administrative data, such as program data from
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or Temporary Assistance
to Needy Families, will be feasible. This determination is expected
later this year. The fiscal year 2019 request contains funding to
handle a number of risks, including the risk that administrative
records will not be available for use as originally envisioned.
Question 19. In response to a question about broadband access
during the hearing, you brought up First Net and seems to suggest that
the installation of broadband for emergency purposes in a community
could be used to leverage broadband access for private businesses and
residences. Is this the case? Because we're hearing something very
different in New Hampshire.
Answer. The FirstNet public safety nationwide broadband network is
designed to provide the best service possible to meet the needs of our
Nation's first responders and other public safety personnel. The Middle
Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 permits AT&T, through its
contract awarded by FirstNet, to provide commercial and residential
wireless broadband access on FirstNet's network when that capacity is
not being fully utilized by its primary public safety customers.
FirstNet fully expects AT&T to provide such service across the Nation,
including in rural New Hampshire. As an added benefit, while deploying
the FirstNet system, AT&T is upgrading their commercial network at the
same time, preparing for 5G deployment and lighting up additional
commercial spectrum across the county to meet the demands of their
commercial customers. Additionally, FirstNet will require significant
additional infrastructure to support both network coverage and
capacity. The towers and other infrastructure being deployed for the
FirstNet system could lower the cost of deployment for other carriers
in rural parts of the country. We anticipate that this will allow for
private businesses and residences to take advantage of these upgrades
in New Hampshire and throughout the Nation. The FirstNet regional team
recently met with New Hampshire officials and with other States'
Statewide Interoperability Executive Committees (SIEC) to ensure that
consistent communication continues between FirstNet and all States
throughout the deployment phase of the project. NTIA will continue to
work closely with FirstNet to ensure that public safety receives the
very best system possible.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Dianne Feinstein
Question 1a. On December 12, 2017, Arthur Gary, General Counsel of
the Justice Department's Justice Management Division, sent a letter to
the Census Bureau requesting the addition of a question on citizenship
to the upcoming census. The Justice Department's letter stated in
relevant part that adding a citizenship question to the census was
``critical to the Department's enforcement of Section 2 of the Voting
Rights Act and its important protections against racial discrimination
in voting.'' (Dec. 12, 2017 Letter from Arthur E. Gary, General
Counsel, Justice Management Division, to Dr. Ron Jarmin, Performing the
Non-Exclusive Functions and Duties of Director, U.S. Census Bureau.)
Several months later, on March 26, 2018, you issued a memorandum
directing the Census Bureau to add a question on citizenship status to
the 2020 Census. Your memorandum stated that the inclusion of ``a
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census is necessary to
provide complete and accurate data in response to the DOJ request.''
(Mar. 26, 2018 Memo from Sec. Wilbur Ross to Karen Dunn Kelley, Under
Sec. for Economic Affairs, re: Reinstatement of a Citizenship Question
on the 2020 Decennial Census Questionnaire.)
Prior to receiving the Justice Department's December 12, 2017
letter and request to add a citizenship status question to the 2020
Census, did you discuss the possibility of adding a citizenship status
question with any individual in the Commerce Department (including the
Census Bureau), Department of Justice, Department of Homeland Security
(or any components thereof), White House, or White House Counsel's
Office? If so, with whom and when? Please provide names, titles, and
agency or departmental affiliations, as well as the dates of any such
discussions.
Answer. The documents containing information about Secretary Ross's
decisionmaking process in connection with his decision to reinstate the
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census can be found here:
http://osec.doc.gov/opog/FOIA/FOIA_elibrary.html.
Question 1b. What communications did you or anyone else in Commerce
Department or Census Bureau leadership have with the White House, White
House Counsel's Office, Department of Justice, or Department of
Homeland Security (or any components thereof) regarding the addition of
a question on citizenship to the 2020 Census, both before and after the
Justice Department sent its December 12, 2017 letter?
Answer. The documents containing information about Secretary Ross's
decisionmaking process in connection with his decision to reinstate the
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census can be found here:
http://osec.doc.gov/opog/FOIA/FOIA_elibrary.html.
Question 1c. What communications did you or anyone else in Commerce
Department or Census Bureau leadership have with the White House, White
House Counsel's Office, Department of Justice, or Department of
Homeland Security (or any components thereof) regarding the addition of
a question on citizenship to the 2020 Census, both before and after you
issued your March 26, 2018 memorandum?
Answer. The documents containing information about Secretary Ross's
decisionmaking process in connection with his decision to reinstate the
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census can be found here:
http://osec.doc.gov/opog/FOIA/FOIA_elibrary.html.
Question 1d. Did you or any other official, staff member, or
employee of the Commerce Department (including the Census Bureau) ever
direct the Justice Department to request the inclusion of a citizenship
question on the 2020 Census?
Answer. The documents containing information about Secretary Ross's
decisionmaking process in connection with his decision to reinstate the
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census can be found here:
http://osec.doc.gov/opog/FOIA/FOIA_elibrary.html.
Question 1e. At any point during the 2016 Presidential transition
or since President Trump's inauguration have you discussed with the
President the inclusion of a citizenship question on the 2020 Census?
Answer. The documents containing information about Secretary Ross's
decisionmaking process in connection with his decision to reinstate the
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census can be found here:
http://osec.doc.gov/opog/FOIA/FOIA_elibrary.html.
Question 1f. Before issuing your memorandum directing the Census
Bureau to add a citizenship question to the 2020 Census, did you
consult with career staff at the Census Bureau or within the Commerce
Department about the impact, effects, potential problems, or
advisability of adding the citizenship question? If so, what did career
staff advise with respect to the addition of the question? In directing
the Census Bureau to add the citizenship question, did you disregard
the advice of career staff?
Answer. The documents containing information about Secretary Ross's
decisionmaking process in connection with his decision to reinstate the
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census can be found here:
http://osec.doc.gov/opog/FOIA/FOIA_elibrary.html.
Question 2a. Your March 26, 2018 memorandum stated that the
``Department of Commerce is not able to determine definitively how
inclusion of a citizenship question on the decennial census will impact
responsiveness. However, even if there is some impact on responses, the
value of more complete and accurate data derived from surveying the
entire population outweighs such concerns.'' (Mar. 26, 2018 Memo from
Sec. Wilbur Ross to Karen Dunn Kelley, Under Sec. for Economic Affairs,
re: Reinstatement of a Citizenship Question on the 2020 Decennial
Census Questionnaire.)
Your own memorandum concluded that the Commerce Department could
not determine how the citizenship question would impact census response
rates. On what basis, then, did you conclude that ``the value of more
complete and accurate data derived from surveying the entire population
outweighs'' concerns about the impact of a citizenship question on
responsiveness?
Answer. The documents containing information about Secretary Ross's
decisionmaking process in connection with his decision to reinstate the
citizenship question on the 2020 decennial census can be found here:
http://www.osec.doc.gov/opog/
FOIA/Documents/AR%20-%20FINAL%20FILED%20-%20ALL%20DOCS%20%5b
CERTIFICATION-INDEX-DOCUMENTS%5d%206.8.18.pdf.
Question 3a. Your March 26, 2018 memorandum addressed a number of
considerations that factored into your decision to add a question on
citizenship status to the 2020 Census. With respect to data, your
memorandum cited an analysis in which the Census Bureau addressed
response rates to the American Community Survey (ACS)--which does ask
about citizenship status--to determine the impact that adding a
citizenship question would have on census responsiveness. Your
memorandum also cited input from the survey agency Nielsen. Based on
these analyses, your memo concluded that ``while there is widespread
belief among many parties that adding a citizenship question could
reduce response rates, the Census Bureau's analysis did not provide
definitive, empirical support for that belief.'' (Mar. 26, 2018 Memo
from Sec. Wilbur Ross to Karen Dunn Kelley, Under Sec. for Economic
Affairs, re: Reinstatement of a Citizenship Question on the 2020
Decennial Census Questionnaire.)
Notably, however, your memorandum did not address certain studies
and analyses that concluded the addition of a citizenship question
would be hugely detrimental to the accuracy of the 2020 Census.
According to the New York Times, the Census Bureau's own scientific
advisory panel--the Census Scientific Advisory Committee--released a
statement decrying the ```flawed logic''' behind the decision to add a
citizenship question. That same statement, per the Times, claimed your
analysis was grounded in ```data collected in a different data
collection context, in a different political climate, before anti-
immigrant attitudes were as salient and consequential''' as they are
now. (Michael Wines, Census Bureau's Own Expert Panel Rebukes Decision
to Add Citizenship Question, N.Y. Times (Mar. 30, 2018)) And in a
November 2017 presentation at the National Advisory Committee on
Racial, Ethnic, and Other Populations Fall Meeting, a Census Bureau
researcher flagged concerns--based on pretesting would-be census
respondents and observations of Census Bureau field staff--about ``an
unprecedented ground swell in confidentiality and data sharing . . .
particularly among immigrants or those who live with immigrants.''
(Presentation, Respondent Confidentiality Concerns and Possible Effects
on Response Rates and Data Quality for the 2020 Census (Nov. 2, 2017))
Before issuing your memorandum directing the Census Bureau to add a
citizenship question to the 2020 Census, did you seek input from the
Census Scientific Advisory Committee about the impact, effects,
potential problems, or advisability of adding the citizenship question?
If so, what did the Committee advise? If not, why not?
Answer. The Census Scientific Advisory Committee did not recommend
the inclusion of a citizenship question on the 2020 Census.
Question 3b. At the time you issued your memorandum, were you
familiar with the concerns raised by Census Bureau field staff that
respondents--in particular immigrants and those living in mixed-status
households--were hesitant to share information due to fears of
confidentiality and data sharing? If so, did you take these concerns
into consideration before issuing your memorandum?
Answer. The Secretary's March 26, 2018 decisional memorandum
acknowledges the argument, made by certain stakeholders, that ``fears
that Census responses could be used for law enforcement purposes''
might lead to ``decreased response rates,'' but observes that ``no one
provided evidence that reinstating a citizenship question on the
decennial census would materially decrease response rates among those
who generally distrusted government and government information
collection efforts, disliked the current administration, or feared law
enforcement.'' Moreover, the law is clear that census responses may not
be used for law enforcement purposes or shared with any other agency,
and that doing so is punishable by fine and imprisonment. The
Secretary's full analysis is available in his publicly-available
decisional memorandum.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Jack Reed
Question 1. I sent you two letters for which I have not received a
response. The first was sent on March 8, regarding the status of the
End-to-End Census Test in Providence County. The second letter was sent
on April 25, regarding the inclusion of a citizenship question as part
of the 2020 Decennial Census. I would ask that you respond to those
letters as quickly as possible.
Answer. These letters have been sent. I apologize that those
responses were so slow in coming, we will continue to do our best to
respond in a more prompt manner.
Question 2. As part of the 2018 End-to-End Census Test, the City of
Providence formed a Complete Count Committee, which included the
Providence Community Library, to encourage Providence County residents
to respond to the questionnaire. Considering that public libraries
provide free Internet access and usage assistance to the public, and in
rural communities, often serve as their community's only provider of
free Internet and computing services. How does the Census Bureau plan
to collaborate with public libraries to ensure the 2020 Census is
successful?
What resources will be devoted to this effort?
Answer. Public libraries are some of the most valued and trusted
census partners and they play a critical role in helping people respond
to the census every decade. For the 2020 Census, the Census Bureau has
already established a partnership with the American Library Association
(ALA), which is exploring the possibility of putting an Internet Self-
Response kiosk in every library in America so that people can respond
online. The Census Bureau will continue to work with the ALA and other
organizations that support libraries to ensure that this collaboration
is stronger than ever before.
Question 3a. Public libraries provide Internet access and usage
assistance to the public. What is the Census Bureau's plan to inform
public libraries about the Internet Self-Response option for the 2020
Census?
Will the Census Bureau provide instructional and informational
material for libraries to utilize?
Answer. As mentioned above, the Census Bureau already is working
with ALA, which is well aware of the ability of people to respond via
the Internet. Even if the possibility of installing kiosks in libraries
proves unsuccessful, Internet response will be possible to anyone
online in every library.
Question 3b. Will the Census Bureau provide training and materials
for librarians to help guide respondents utilizing the Internet Self-
Response option?
Answer. Absolutely. The Census Bureau provides support materials to
all partners, including libraries.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Christopher A. Coons
south africa steel and aluminum
Question 1. I heard from U.S. firms operating in South Africa that
they are concerned about how the proposed steel and aluminum tariffs
might impact South Africa. We have 600 U.S. firms operating on the
continent.
Has the administration considered offering South Africa an
exemption from the tariffs?
Answer. We have met with South African officials to discuss the
Section 232 actions. The President's Section 232 decisions are the
result of a robust and thorough interagency review coordinated by the
White House. Decisions about country exemptions are made by the
President, based on his assessment of the factors described in
Proclamations 9710 and 9711.
As of December 13, 2018, there have been 219 exclusions from the
aluminum tariffs and 33 exclusions from the steel tariffs for products
from South Africa.
manufacturing extension partnerships (meps)
Question 2. I am very disappointed that the administration once
again proposed to eliminate Federal funding for the MEP program in its
fiscal year 2019 budget request. It is a program that is highly
effective at helping small manufacturers across the country, especially
in Delaware. With bipartisan leadership from this committee, we
provided an increase in funding for MEPs in the fiscal year 2018
Omnibus.
Given the clear bipartisan support for this highly successful
program that benefits manufacturing, why does the administration
continue to push to eliminate funding for it?
Answer. The President's budget prioritizes national security and
economic growth. This administration is confident that, as Congress
originally intended the MEP program to be self-sustaining, even without
an appropriation, the MEP Program will continue providing valuable
products and services to manufacturers across the country.
manufacturing usa
Question 3a. As you know, the Manufacturing USA Institutes are
public-private partnerships created to grow advanced manufacturing in
the United States. I appreciate the Department of Commerce's continued
support in the fiscal year 2019 budget request for the Manufacturing
USA institute that's lead by the University Delaware--the department's
first institute, which will support innovations in biopharmaceutical
manufacturing. However, I was disappointed that NIST was forced to
cancel plans to issue an award for another institute due to a $10
million cut to the Manufacturing USA.
Do you plan to advocate for opening another Manufacturing USA
Institute under NIST this year or in future years?
Answer. The fiscal year 2019 budget request includes $15.1 million,
which funds the Department of Commerce/NIST National Institute for
Innovation in Manufacturing Biopharmaceuticals (NIIMBL). It also
provides funding for NIST to manage the network of manufacturing
institutes funded by other Federal agencies and its partners. The
budget request does not include funding for additional DOC/NIST led
Manufacturing USA institutes.
Question 3b. How do you plan to support the Manufacturing USA
program in the future?
Answer. NIST will continue to fund NIIMBL and provide network
support for the Manufacturing USA program.
sea grant program
Question 4a. In your testimony, you said that the fiscal year 2019
budget request is centrally focused on helping American businesses and
industries compete globally while improving the economic conditions and
everyday lives of the American people and their communities. Yet, this
budget completely eliminates NOAA's Sea Grant College program, a
program that benefits coastal and Great Lakes economies through an
extension program very similar to agricultural extension at land grant
universities. Sea Grant has bipartisan support because of its focus on
the practical use of coastal resources, such as aquaculture and
tourism.
Given the wide popularity of the National Sea Grant program, its
854 percent return on investment, and its emphasis on creating and
sustaining coastal businesses and jobs, why does the administration
continue to push to eliminate funding for it?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2019 budget prioritizes
national security and economic growth. It also identifies the savings
and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible fiscal
path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be made,
including terminations to certain external grant programs.
intellectual property in trade
Question 5a. I recently organized a briefing focused on the
counterfeiting in the sports industry. The scale of IP theft in that
industry alone is staggering, and writ large for the U.S. economy as a
whole. The estimated loss is between $225 and$ 600 billion dollars.
As the administration seeks to renegotiate trade deals, what are
you doing specifically to ensure that IP is better respected by our
trading partners?
Answer. As you note, respect for intellectual property rights has
been a central requirement of our trade agreements. Potential trading
partners should be prepared to elevate the protections they provide to
U.S. intellectual property, including patents, trademarks, copyright,
trade secrets, and undisclosed data, and our free trade agreements
include detailed provisions on how these intellectual property rights
must be protected and enforced.
In addition, our Federal agencies conduct ongoing interagency
processes, led by USTR, to assess whether countries are adequately and
effectively protecting U.S. intellectual property rights, and to
annually report their conclusions to Congress and to the public. These
annual reporting processes include, for example, the Special 301
Report, and the ``Notorious Markets'' list highlighting online and
physical markets reported to be engaging in and facilitating copyright
piracy and trademark counterfeiting.
DOC participates robustly in these interagency processes, and
issues surfaced in this reporting are routinely raised in country
discussions, including by representatives of the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, International Trade Administration, and the DOC
Intellectual Property Attaches.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Joe Manchin, III
economic development administration
Question 1. How will your department assist coal communities who
rely on EDA support if you do away with this critical agency?
Answer. In ``Building a Stronger America,'' the President proposed
a framework to transform how infrastructure is delivered. The package
is designed to help address America's crumbling infrastructure,
including in rural communities. The plan will help attract needed
capital investments, deploy broadband and install transformative
infrastructure that will facilitate economic development. This
infrastructure plan, along with the administration's focus on building
a stronger overall economy is the best path forward for these rural
communities. This administration is trying very hard to balance the
needs of the economy and difficult choices have to be made. The
decision on EDA was one of those difficult choices.
Under the ``Delivering Government Solutions in the 21st Century
Organization Reform Plan and Reorganization Recommendations,'' the
duties and functions of EDA will continue in the Bureau of Economic
Growth under the Department of Commerce (DOC). This plan rethinks how
the Federal Government can drive economic growth in concert with
private sector investments in communities across the country. By
coordinating and consolidating Federal economic assistance resources at
the DOC, taxpayer dollars will receive a higher return on investment on
projects that are transparent and accountable.
national oceanic and atmospheric administration
Question 2. What were the operational reasons for cutting funding
for the High Performance Computing System (HPCS) in Fairmont, West
Virginia that is so critical to NOAA's overall mission? How will NOAA's
overall capability in this regard be impacted by this decision?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2019 budget prioritizes
national security and economic growth. It also identifies the savings
and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible fiscal
path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be made,
including the eliminations of the supercomputing system and associated
contract support in Boulder, Colorado and reductions to the
supercomputing capability and associated contract support in Fairmont,
West Virginia. The availability and reliability of NOAA's operational
supercomputing will not be impacted, although the reduction impacts
NOAA's Research and Development High Performance Computing System (R&D
HPCS). Major transition projects including hurricane forecast
improvement, the Next Generation Global Prediction System, and storm
surge modeling will need to compete for space of NOAA's remaining R&D
HPCS supercomputing assets, potentially resulting in delays to
implementation of and upgrades to the operational models and
improvements to forecasts and warnings. In the meantime, the R&D HPCS
program will be using hurricane supplemental funding to increase
capacity in Fairmont, West Virginia.
census bureau
Question 3a. What metrics is the Bureau using to decide which areas
are eligible for paper questionnaires and will this list of areas be
made available to the public?
Answer. The Census Bureau has multiple strategies for ensuring that
households without Internet connectivity are included in the Census. In
rural areas, and on many Tribal lands, Census enumerators will either
conduct interviews with every household or walk every street and leave
paper questionnaires on the doorsteps of each household while
simultaneously updating the address list. The Census Bureau will use
American Community Survey and Federal Communications Commission data to
identify households with low levels of Internet connectivity. Those
households will receive a paper questionnaire on the Census Bureau's
first mailing. All nonresponding households get a paper questionnaire
on the fourth mailing. After all the mailings are complete, if a
household still hasn't responded, that household will be included in
the Non-Response Follow-Up operation. That operation will include phone
contacts and sending an enumerator to gather the data in person.
Question 3b. Given that broadband data mapping has been incorrect
in the past, is the Bureau willing to create a petition for State and
local governments to request paper questionnaires for their
communities?
Answer. See previous answer.
Question 3c. The Bureau received a $1.344 billion increase in the
fiscal year 2018 omnibus to ensure the Census remains on track. With
the large increase, does the Bureau plan to use any of this money to
invest in hiring more enumerators or bring back canceled end-to-end
tests like the one in Bluefield, West Virginia?
Answer. The Census Bureau conducted the early operations of the
2018 End-to-End Census Test in three locations that included the very
rural areas of the Bluefield, Beckley, Oakhill region of West Virginia,
and in Pierce County, Washington. The Census Bureau gained valuable
experience in implementing census operations in areas with no Internet
connectivity, and we are currently adjusting our systems and operations
based on what we learned. The Census Bureau successfully implemented
its management systems in these areas, and field staff were able to
receive their assignments and submit their payroll and operational data
at the beginning or end of their shifts when they could connect to the
Internet, but they did not require Internet access while they were
actually doing their work. This is important to the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico, which includes areas with sporadic Internet connectivity
particularly in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria.
The primary goal of the test is to ensure the effective integration
of all of our systems and operations, and the Providence, Rhode Island
site is ideal for that. Moreover, the operations the Census Bureau is
implementing in rural areas, and on American Indian Reservations, are
identical to those implemented in prior censuses, so they are well
established and proven to be effective.
The Census Bureau recognizes the importance of counting people in
rural areas and the unique challenges that represents. The Census
Bureau does recognize that the Internet response option is not feasible
or acceptable to the entire population; alternative modes will be
provided for respondents to complete their 2020 Census questionnaire,
such as the paper methods used in the past. Our self-response contact
strategies include invitation letters, post-cards, and questionnaires
mailed to households. Although the objective is for a majority of
respondents to complete their census questionnaire online, in areas
with low Internet connectivity and other characteristics that make it
less likely that respondents will complete the census questionnaire
online, the Census Bureau offers an Internet Choice contact strategy
where a questionnaire is provided on the first contact, in addition to
information about how to respond online or by phone.
A second step the Census Bureau takes to ensure an accurate count
in rural areas involves an operation the Census Bureau refers to as
``Update/Leave.'' This Operation is designed to update the address
frame in areas where the majority of housing units either do not have
mail delivered to the physical location of the housing unit, or the
mail delivery information for the housing unit cannot be verified. The
purpose of the operation is to update the address and feature data for
the area assigned, and to leave a 2020 Census Internet Choice
Questionnaire Package at every housing unit (HU) identified to allow
the household to self-respond. The choice questionnaire package will
offer occupants two different ways to respond to the census: through
the Internet or by mailing back a completed paper questionnaire.
Households that do not respond will be included in the Nonresponse
Follow-up operation with correct geographic information.
The Partnership and Communications Program also will include
organizations that are focused on rural communities and advertising and
promotion that will reach these areas as well.
The efforts to enumerate Tribal areas are equally strong. The
Census Bureau announced on July 1, 2015, that it would seek input from
tribal leaders for the 2020 Census. The Census Bureau conducted 18
Tribal consultation meetings that started 2 years earlier than those
conducted for the 2010 Census. At these meetings, the Census Bureau
requested input on topics like geography, data collection operations,
and Tribal enrollment. Connectivity issues were discussed in these
meetings, and the Census Bureau continues to explore ways to ensure
that it has measures in place to address them. As the Census Bureau
moves closer to the 2020 Census, the Bureau is working with leaders
from each Tribe to determine the best way to conduct census operations
in their areas. In many cases, the Census Bureau will use the Update
Leave Operation in these areas as well.
The Census Bureau also is working closely with Tribal leaders, as
the Bureau develops the Communications and Partnership program. The
contracting team, led by Young Rubicom (Team Y&R) includes G+G
Advertising. G+G Advertising has been a leader in American Indian and
Alaska Natives (AIAN) advertising and outreach to AIAN audiences for
more than 20 years. The firm also has extensive decennial experience,
having participated in the 2000 and 2010 Census campaigns. Team Y&R,
G+G Advertising, and Census Bureau staff, both at the headquarters and
local level, have been working on two key elements: research and
partnerships. Working in conjunction with the Census Bureau, Team Y&R
recently completed the Census Barriers Attitudes and Motivators Survey
(CBAMS). CBAMS is a quantitative and qualitative research effort, which
includes a survey with a sample of 50,000 households and 42 focus
groups in 14 cities across the United States. The American Indian and
Alaska Native population was a significant focus of this study. In
addition, the Census Bureau is implementing its Community Partnerships
Engagement Program (CPEP). CPEP is an effort that focuses on building
and engaging community or grassroots level partnerships throughout the
United States.
national telecommunications and information administration
Question 4. In my State, nearly 30 percent of West Virginians are
without Internet access. The DOC budget requests $34 million for NTIA
for fiscal year 2019. How does NTIA plan to use some of this funding to
assist rural parts of the country like West Virginia?
Answer. President Trump has made it clear that improving rural
broadband availability is a key administration priority. To do so, we
need accurate, reliable data to properly inform private sector
decisions, to reduce regulatory barriers, and to better coordinate
Federal programs that fund broadband infrastructure. In fiscal year
2018, Congress appropriated funds for NTIA to work with the FCC and the
States to update the broadband map with more diverse and granular data
sources. The goal is to produce a more accurate assessment of broadband
capabilities and provide a tool for policy makers to better target the
funds to broadband. NTIA, on behalf of the Department of Commerce,
requested comment on actions that can be taken to improve the quality
and accuracy of broadband availability data, particularly in rural
areas, as part of the activities directed by Congress in the
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018. Comments were due on July 16,
2018. See https://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/
wv_broadband_enhancement_council_
dn_2018-11483_july_16_2018.pdf.
Additionally, NTIA supports rural communities around the country
that are looking to expand connectivity through its BroadbandUSA
program. BroadbandUSA works with stakeholders to identify resources and
provide technical assistance, and has helped more than 250 communities
to develop public-private partnerships to meet their connectivity needs
and digital inclusion goals.
BroadbandUSA also acts as a convener, holding regional workshops
and webinars on a variety of broadband topics and publishes guides on
specific broadband topics to assist entities seeking to expand
broadband infrastructure and adoption. In coordination with Senator
Capito's offices and your office, BroadbandUSA held a workshop in
Charleston, West Virginia September of 2017. I understand that the team
continues to work with a number of the representatives who attended
that workshop.
NTIA is also leading on another major priority for this
administration--removing barriers to broadband deployment. NTIA is
working to improve Federal coordination around this goal through the
Broadband Interagency Working Group (BIWG), which we co-chair alongside
the Department of Agriculture's Rural Utilities Service. Our efforts
are focused on three workstreams that align with key recommendations of
the president's Task Force on Agriculture and Rural Prosperity, which
released a report earlier this year on improving life in rural America.
The top recommendation of the Task Force was to expand broadband. The
three workstreams including Federal permitting, Federal funding and
leveraging Federal assets.
BroadbandUSA also supports the State Broadband Leaders Network
(SBLN) to facilitate information sharing among representatives from
more than 20 States. Through its events and webinars, BroadbandUSA is
bringing together important voices across the country who can help to
bridge the digital divide.
national institute of standards and technology (nist)'s manufacturing
extension partnership (mep)
Question 5a. Why has NIST's MEP program been slated for
elimination?
Answer. The budget must be about priorities. Even though MEP has
certainly performed a good function, the Budget prioritizes increasing
spending for defense and military to protect our national security,
furthermore we believe any further funding for MEP centers should come
from non-Federal sources. We are in a challenging budget period and
difficult budget decisions had to be made.
Question 5b. If this program does not receive funding for fiscal
year 2019 how will your department assist these small manufacturers who
rely on this important program?
Answer. As intended when the program was established, we believe
that the MEP centers, which work with the small manufacturers, will
transition to non-Federal revenue sources in the private sector. The
MEP centers have key partnerships with local institutions that will
allow the centers to continue to be the go-to experts for small
manufacturers to connect them with needed resources that will increase
competitiveness.
______
Questions Submitted by Senator Chris Van Hollen
Question 1a. ZTE's settlement with the U.S. Government included a
7-year suspended denial of export privileges, which could be activated
if any aspect of the agreement was not met and/or if the company
committed additional violations of the Export Administration
Regulations (EAR). Subsequently, the Commerce Department released
documents produced by ZTE showing the great measures ZTE used to
circumvent American sanctions and provides step-by-step guidelines for
setting up shell companies to circumvent U.S. export controls. Last
month, the Commerce Department activated its denial order of export
privileges. Then the President tweeted that he was going to put this
enforcement action on the table as part of your trade negotiations with
China.
Do you have concerns about ZTE's access to the U.S. market?
Answer. The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) took action
against ZTE for violations of the Export Administration Regulations
(EAR) involving Iran and North Korea, and subsequently for false
statements made to BIS. Concerns about access to the U.S. market by any
foreign company, including ZTE, would be directly addressed by other
laws and regulations.
Question 1b. Did you ever recommend to the President that he offer
to reduce or lift penalties on ZTE as part of the ongoing trade
negotiations with China?
Answer. I cannot discuss Executive Branch deliberations on this
matter.
Question 1c. Did the President consult with you about reducing or
lifting the Commerce Department enforcement actions before he tweeted
``President Xi of China, and I, are working together to give massive
Chinese phone company, ZTE, a way to get back into business, fast. Too
many jobs in China lost. Commerce Department has been instructed to get
it done!''
Answer. I cannot discuss Executive Branch deliberations on this
matter.
Question 1d. Did the President ask you or Secretary Mnuchin to
reduce or lift penalties on ZTE or any Chinese company as part of your
trade negotiations?
Answer. I cannot discuss Executive Branch deliberations on this
matter.
Question 1e. Do you think it is appropriate to modify enforcement
actions that are imposed for national security purposes as part of
trade negotiations?
Answer. Regarding enforcement actions on ZTE, on June 7, 2018, the
Department of Commerce (the ``Department'') reached agreement on the
largest penalty BIS has ever levied. As part of the settlement, ZTE
paid $1 billion and placed an additional $400 million in suspended
penalty money in escrow before BIS removed ZTE from the Denied Persons
List. ZTE will also be required to retain a Department-selected Special
Compliance Coordinator (SCC) and supporting team of subject matter
experts selected by and answerable to BIS for a period of 10 years. On
August 24, 2018, I announced the selection of Roscoe C. Howard, Jr. to
be the Special Compliance Coordinator (SCC). If ZTE commits violations
during the 10-year probationary period, the Department will again be
able to deny it access to U.S. goods, software, and technology and/or
collect the additional $400 million in escrow. The purpose of this
settlement is to modify ZTE's behavior while setting a new precedent
for monitoring to assure compliance with U.S. export control laws. The
SCC will have unprecedented access to enable it to drive and monitor
compliance. Under this arrangement, the SCC will vastly improve the
speed with which the Department can detect and deal with any
violations. This action was an enforcement matter not a trade
negotiation.
Question 1f. What are the implications for other actors being
investigated for violating U.S. laws?
Answer. The implication for other actors being investigated for
violating U.S. export control laws is that severe and unprecedented
penalties will be imposed on parties for violating our export control
laws. These actions against ZTE are the strictest and most punishing
requirements ever imposed in an export case by BIS.
The record $1.4 billion settlement announced on June 8, 2018 allows
the U.S. government to better carry out our law enforcement mission
than if the April 15 denial order was kept in place. The strict and
unprecedented compliance requirements of the settlement enable the U.S.
government to keep close oversight on ZTE. Under the settlement, the
denial order was re-suspended and extended from 7 years to 10 years,
and ZTE was required to retain a team selected by and answerable to BIS
and led by a Department-selected Special Compliance Coordinator (SCC)
for the same ten-year period. The SCC's team has unprecedented access
to ZTE enabling us to keep closer eyes on the company than if it were
to shut down and reconstitute itself as various splintered parts. ZTE
is also required to replace the board of directors and senior
leadership of both of its principal entities.
The compliance requirements of the June 8 settlement are
meaningful, measurable, and significant. For example, within 6 months,
ZTE will publish on its website the Export Control Classification
Numbers for all goods, software, and technology subject to the Export
Administration Regulations (EAR) that ZTE or its subsidiaries or
affiliates sell, supply, produce, manufacture, assemble, export,
reexport, or transfer. This detailed information will give U.S.
officials an unprecedented amount of insight into ZTE's export
compliance. BIS also gained authorization to conduct checks in ZTE
facilities inside China without prior approval from the Chinese
government. The severity of the terms of the settlement sends a strong
message to the export community writ large on the importance of
compliance with U.S. export regulations.
Question 2. In a recent interview with CNBC, you said that you
would look into sending a compliance unit to ZTE in exchange for relief
on its seven-year denial of export privileges, stating that ``if we do
decide to go forward with an alternative, what it literally would
involve would be implanting people of our choosing into the company to
constitute a compliance unit.''
How does Commerce plan on resourcing this endeavor to ensure
compliance?
Answer. As specified in the superseding final order, the expenses
related to the Special Compliance Coordinator (SCC), including the SCC
staff, will be paid by ZTE. The Department of Commerce's remedy
includes BIS selecting the SCC with unprecedented access to monitor and
report on ZTE's compliance with the Export Administration Regulations.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Moran. The subcommittee stands in recess until
Wednesday, May 16 at 2:30 p.m., when we will take the testimony
of FBI Director Christopher Wray.
The subcommittee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., Thursday, May 10, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]