- THE IMPORTANCE OF U.S. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AMERICA
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
THE IMPORTANCE OF U.S. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AMERICA
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
April 10, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-27
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available:
http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-969PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York, Chairman
BRAD SHERMAN, California
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
KAREN BASS, California
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
TED S. YOHO, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinoi
AMI BERA, California
LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JIM SENSENBRENNER, Wisconsin
DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
KEN BUCK, Colorado
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
RON WRIGHT, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia
TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
GREG PENCE, Indiana
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey
STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
DAVID TRONE, Maryland
MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENT
Prepared statement submitted from Chairman Engel.................
2
WITNESSES
Jacobson, The Honorable Roberta, Former U.S. Ambassador to Mexico
and Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs
8
Kerlikowske, The Honorable R. Gil, Distinguished Visiting Fellow,
Professor of the Practice in Criminology and Criminal Justice,
Northeastern University, Former Commissioner of U.S. Customs
and Border Protection, Director of the Office of National Drug
Control Policy, and Chief of Police in Seattle, Washington.....
21
Noriega, The Honorable Roger, Visiting Fellow, American
Enterprise Institute, Former U.S. Ambassador to the
Organization of American States and Assistant Secretary of
State for Western Hemisphere Affairs...........................
26
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
Plan International information submitted for the record from
Representative Cicilline.......................................
49
New York Times article submitted for the record from
Representative Cicilline.......................................
51
APPENDIX
Hearing Notice...................................................
59
Hearing Minutes..................................................
60
Hearing Attendance...............................................
61
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD FROM COMMITTEE MEMBERS
CWS statement submitted for the record from Chairman Engel.......
62
Statement submitted for the record from Representative Rooney....
63
Statement submitted for the record from Representative Sires.....
64
Questions submitted for the record from Representative Sires.....
65
Questions submitted for the record from Representative Smith.....
67
Questions submitted for the record from Representative Spanberger
69
Questions submitted for the record from Representative Wagner....
70
Questions submitted for the record from Representative Houlahan..
72
Questions submitted for the record from Representative Guest.....
75
THE IMPORTANCE OF U.S. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AMERICA
Wednesday, April 10, 2019
House of Representatives
Committee on Foreign Affairs
Washington, DC
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:39 a.m., in
Room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Eliot Engel
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Engel. The committee will come to order. Without
objection, all members will have 5 days to submit statements,
extraneous material, and questions for the record, subject to
the length limitation in the rules.
To our witnesses, welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee.
Thank you for your time and expertise this morning, and welcome
to the members of the public and the press as well.
We are holding this hearing today for one reason, because
President Trump cut the very funding that would reduce the flow
of immigrants from Central America which he says concerns him
so much.
We need to shine a light on this unwise decision and I look
forward to our witness testimony. Because we are short on time
with the upcoming vote series, I am going to enter my full
statement into the record.
But first I want to thank our ranking member, Mr. McCaul of
Texas. His urgency and leadership on this issue helped put it
at the top of the committee's agenda including this very timely
hearing.
So before I introduce our witnesses I would like to yield
to him for his opening comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Engel follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Northern Triangle countries of Central America continue
to face serious economic and security challenges that are
threatening the region's stability and driving illegal
immigration to the United States.
This migration from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras is
exacerbating the crisis on our southern border and straining
the capacity of DHS's Customs and Border Protection.
As a former chairman of the Homeland Security Committee, I
understand the unique challenges we face at our border and am
committed to using all tools at our disposal to address this
crisis.
One of the most effective tools we have for responding to
this is targeted foreign assistance to Central America. This
assistance supports the Northern Triangle countries' efforts to
combat transnational criminal organizations like MS-13 that are
involved in the trafficking of persons and drugs.
U.S. assistance also promotes economic prosperity and
strengthens democratic institutions and rule of law. This
assistance merges as security and economic support to create
stability in the region and address the root causes of illegal
immigration.
The Northern Triangle countries have also responded with
their own initiative called the Alliance for Prosperity to
complement U.S. assistance, demonstrating their commitment to
addressing their own challenges.
Our assistance is having positive results. The chairman and
I went down there to El Salvador. We saw it throughout the
region. USAID programs are increasing, agriculture production
is increasing household incomes, creating jobs--78,000 jobs in
Guatemala alone.
Other U.S. assistance programs funded through State's
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement directly
support police enforcement operations including those by vetted
units like the FBI's transnational anti-gang tag units and
DHS's transnational criminal investigation units.
Both have contributed to the indictment of hundreds of MS-
13 gang members, the prosecution of criminal organizations, and
collection of biometric data in individuals suspected of
terrorism, violent crime, and tracking through BITMAP.
Last month, I traveled again with Chairman Engel to El
Salvador and we witnessed firsthand how our assistance is
driving at-risk youths away from criminal gangs like MS-13 by
providing technical skills and employment opportunities.
During our visit, we had the pleasure of meeting with the
president-elect of El Salvador, who expressed his unwavering
commitment to working with the United States in every way
possible to address the migration crisis.
He also explained China's efforts to increase its presence
in his country but he favors closer engagement with the United
States. Cutting this aid, in my judgment, would create a void
that China is prepared to fill, and we heard that from the
president of El Salvador.
As a representative from Texas, this crisis on the border
is taking place in my back yard and I share the president's
frustration.
However, I acknowledge that more work and time is needed to
fully address Central America's challenges and the continued
migration flows to the United States.
I believe that the decision to cut funding will make the
economic and security situations in Central America worse, not
better, triggering more migration, not less, to the United
States.
I also recognize that Congress has an oversight role and I
made this clear by establishing a process which clarifies that
we have the criteria to address 16 congressional concerns
related to improving border security, anti-corruption, and
human rights.
In short, our trip to Latin America was significant,
meeting with the president of Colombia, meeting with the
president of El Salvador.
I think the chairman and I came back realizing these
programs are highly effective and that cutting these programs
would be counterproductive and make the situation worse, not
better.
And so I want to thank the witnesses for being here today.
I want to thank the chairman for holding this hearing at my
request after we came back.
And I will just anecdotally just share the story of the
president of El Salvador. We were there the day the president
decided to cut the foreign aid and it was quite a shock to an
ally, someone who is pro-United States, wants to be our ally.
I think it is the wrong message at the wrong time and I
think this is ill-advised, it is reckless, and I look forward
to the testimony.
And I yield back.
Chairman Engel. The gentleman yields back. Thank you, Mr.
McCaul, and thank you for your leadership.
We are largely holding this hearing this morning because of
you, because we were so shocked sitting there in El Salvador at
a time when the edicts came down to cut foreign aid.
It is just so illogical that it was the opposite thing that
we should do, not cut aid. We should improve aid. If we want to
make situations where people do not come to the United States
then we need to help them in their own country.
It does not do anything except make the problem worse by
cutting aid. More people will wind up coming to this country
and the President says that is not what he wants. Well,
something you have to figure out is if the cure is worse than
the problem, and I certainly think it is.
So I want to thank you, Mr. McCaul, and we said we would do
a hearing as soon as we could, and I think this is record time
here. But it is largely because of you, and I thank you for it.
This morning, we are joined by a distinguished panel. I am
pleased first to welcome my friend, Ambassador Roberta
Jacobson. Roberta and I have worked together for many years,
and she is truly one of the best diplomats of our time.
Roberta, it is great to have you back. The Ambassador is a
career State Department official, most recently serving as U.S.
Ambassador to Mexico from 2016 to 2018.
Ambassador Jacobson previously served as assistant
secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs. So welcome,
Roberta.
Mr. Gil Kerlikowske is a distinguished visiting fellow and
professor from Northeastern University. From 2014 to 2017, Mr.
Kerlikowske served as commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border
Protection.
Prior to his appointment to CBP, he served as the director
of the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy from
2009 to 2014 and before that was the chief of police of
Seattle, Washington.
Ambassador Roger Noriega is a visiting fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute. Ambassador Noriega previously
served as assistant secretary of State for Western Hemisphere
affairs as well as U.S. Ambassador to the OAS from 2001 to
2005. He has been testifying for many, many years at this
committee and we thank you for it, Ambassador.
And what I am going to do now is I will recognize our
witnesses for 5 minutes each to summarize your testimony and we
will start with Ambassador Jacobson.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MS. ROBERTA JACOBSON, FORMER U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO MEXICO AND ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS
Ms. Jacobson. Thank you, Chairman Engel and Ranking Member
McCaul and members of the this committee. It is a pleasure to
appear before you today for the first time as a private
citizen. It is a different feeling.
But mostly I would like to thank you all for the interest
that you have shown in the subject that we are going to discuss
today and to which I have devoted my professional career.
I have a long paragraph about some of the issues that drive
migration in Central America but I think most of you know
those, and I will let my written testimony stand on that.
But I will say that because of both economic and security
issues in the Northern Triangle countries, decisions by Central
American migrants to leave their countries and attempt to reach
the United States often to join family members who are already
here, even when they are taken by family units with young
children, can be seen as a rational decision when they are
confronted with extreme poverty and violence.
Unfortunately, migration policy by this administration
appears based on the assumption that if one makes things
difficult enough for migrants they will not come.
Whether zero tolerance, family separation, threats to
cutoff aid or close the U.S.-Mexican border, such policies are
wrong headed, needlessly cruel, and, frankly, all but useless
as long as the root causes of migration remain unaddressed.
There is often a misunderstanding of the purpose of U.S.
aid, not by this committee but by our public. It has always
been intended to advance U.S. interests and objectives.
Indeed, within the assistance that the administration
intends to stop are programs carried out by the Department of
Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, Treasury, and on
many issues directly relevant to our national security and
safety.
It is also important to recognize that the vast majority of
our assistance to the Northern Triangle and Mexico does not go
directly to governments.
It is projectized, as we say, or destined for
nongovernmental organizations or very specific projects or
equipments if within government and designed in coordination
with the United States and only for the purpose intended.
Thus, any threat to cut assistance can be seen as reducing
support for our own objectives, and the ranking member
mentioned both the TAG program, the FBI's anti-gang program,
and our biometric programs which do just that.
So the fact is, as a former colleague of mine has said, if
you like the current migration crisis you ain't seen nothing
yet, because if aid is cutoff to the Northern Triangle it is
almost guaranteed that we will see more, not fewer, migrants
attempting to enter the U.S. and they will be poorer, more
desperate, and victims of greater violence than they are with
our aid.
All of the programs that are pending cuts right now have
basically just gotten underway in missions where we had
downsized or eliminated our aid mission.
So if you cut aid for Fiscal Year 2017 or 2018, you would
never really have given an aggressive aid program, as was
developed at the end of the last administration, a chance to be
implemented.
And foreign officials in these countries are confused and
frustrated with the fickle and inconsistent nature of our
policy. The Honduran government expressed irritation with the
announced cutoff and Mexico's national migration commissioner
called it schizophrenic.
But there are other reasons it is in our interest to
continue and improve our assistance. It gives us a seat at the
table to leverage decisions taken by those governments on
issues of direct relevance to national security and because if
others become the partner of choice for these hemispheric
countries, they will do so without any of the conditions or
policy goals that we require of aid recipients.
So, in closing, I would just say that humane policies that
uphold American values do not mean letting in every petitioner.
Economic migrants do not qualify for asylum and they should
understand that for them the perilous journey north will
ultimately be fruitful.
But returning migrants to their home countries more
quickly, while usually one of the most effective ways to
transmit that the journey is for naught requires the
cooperation of those governments.
Here, too, our constantly changing policy and blame game
makes that cooperation more difficult. So I look forward to
answering any questions the committee may have about the
importance of maintaining this assistance because it is in our
own national interest.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jacobson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Engel. Thank you, Ambassador.
Mr. Kerlikowske.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE R. GIL KERLIKOWSKE, DISTINGUISHED
VISITING FELLOW, PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE IN CRIMINOLOGY AND
CRIMINAL JUSTICE, NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY, FORMER COMMISSIONER
OF U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION, DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE
OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY, AND CHIEF OF POLICE IN
SEATTLE, WASHINGTON
Mr. Kerlikowske. Good morning, Chairman and Ranking Member
McCaul and the distinguished. It is a pleasure also to be here
for the first time as a citizen, although I certainly miss the
government service and the work that was done.
When I became commissioner of CBP, I was the only confirmed
commissioner for President Obama's 8 years in March 2014 within
a week I became intimately familiar with what a surge looks
like, and certainly, the ranking member was there many times
with me in McAllen, Texas, which was the primary source of
68,000 unaccompanied children and family units coming into the
United States.
I praise then and I praise now the work of the United
States Border Patrol. The men and women and the Border Patrol
really with very little assistance from other entities of the
Federal Government were able to feed, to clothe, to hold
people, and for all of us that have been in those Border Patrol
stations you know they are designed for a very short period of
time, and yet some of this went on for six and seven and 8 days
with people being there.
I also recognize clearly that we did not have the resources
to deal with this. The Border Patrol had recognized over the
last 2 years that this surge was increased or that these
numbers were increasing. But we did not have any of the support
and backup.
So by the time that surge ended at the end of that summer,
it was very helpful to have purchased a large warehouse,
certainly not the best facility for holding people but,
certainly, something that was needed.
It was important to secure contracts for food, for health
care, for security so that Border Patrol agents could be
returned back to the border rather than doing some of that
work.
But I also saw the humanitarian efforts of those agents as
they brought clothing in from their own children to help take
care of some of these--of some of these kids.
Well, I have spent a career in law enforcement and I am
intimately familiar with what are the important parts of safety
and security, and when people feel safe and secure, if they
have a trust in government just as in the United States, well,
the people in Central America are not going to want to make the
very dangerous trip.
And we worked hard with the State Department to do the
advertisements in a variety of ways in those three Central
American countries to say your chances of entering the United
States without being detained are minimal but the route and the
trek would be incredibly dangerous not only for assault, for
robbery, for homicide, for sexual assault.
And we did a lot of advertising in a variety of ways and it
had very little impact because, as Ambassador Jacobson had
mentioned also, when you are facing economic problems of great
importance to people there, you are facing the dangers, and you
are also facing that inability to get your children a better
quality of life, you are willing to make that dangerous trek.
That is why I am such a strong proponent of what we can do.
We saw the Plan Colombia reduce cocaine. We saw Merida have
significant impacts on the number of people leaving Mexico to
come into the United States, and these new programs that are
really just, in many ways, in their infancy and the three
Central American countries need our support and they need our
recognition.
There is no one single answer to the crisis that is now
occurring on the southern border. But, certainly, eliminating
foreign aid would be, in my opinion, huge mistake.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kerlikowske follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much.
Ambassador Noriega.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ROGER NORIEGA, VISITING FELLOW,
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, FORMER U.S. AMBASSADOR TO THE
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES AND ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
STATE FOR WESTERN HEMISPHERE AFFAIRS
Mr. Noriega. Thank you very much. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Member McCall, other distinguished members
of the committee.
Mr. Chairman, President Trump's decision to cut U.S. aid to
Central America's Northern Triangle countries apparently was a
reaction to data showing over 90,000 inbound migrants in March,
up dramatically from 70,000 in February.
The surge is coming from countries where the police are
outgunned by gangs, where local authorities are bullied or
bought off by narcotraffickers, and where the jobs are
destroyed by flagging economies and costly 2-year drought.
It is not just about how many are arriving but who is
arriving and that complicates enforcement measures.
For example, there is a 370 percent increase in the number
of people arriving in family units in March 2019 compared to
last year. The prevalence of unaccompanied minors or those
applying for political asylum is higher, too.
There is also a great increase in the number arriving in
larger groups. It is clear that criminal smugglers are gaming
our system.
They know that if immigrants arrive in groups of 70 or
more, border authorities are quickly overwhelmed. They know too
that there is a backlog of 850,000 asylum claims that are
pending so that those claims will take time and all of these
factors increase the likelihood of would-be migrants being
released into the United States.
So the surge is not just about the conditions back home. It
has a lot to do with the system that they encounter when they
reach our border.
Nevertheless, treating the root causes of illegal migration
and attacking immigrant smuggling networks can make a
difference in the challenge at the border more manageable.
Mr. Chairman, before President Trump's announcement, the
United States planned to spend about $450 million this year in
the Northern Triangle countries. That sum is less than one-
tenth of what taxpayers will spend this year to deploy border
patrol and military units on the Southwest border.
But $450 million is still a lot of money and since 2016 we
spent about $2.6 billion on programs in these countries. But
the people keep coming.
So it is fair to ask if we are getting an adequate return
on our investment or if we are improving the conditions of
those people who are fleeing Central America. I believe we are.
In at-risk communities in Honduras, for example, policing
and youth programs managed by USAID and the State Department's
INL Bureau are credited with cutting homicide rates in half
since 2011 in Honduras with dramatic improvements in the major
city of San Pedro Sula.
In Guatemala, USAID has supported anti-extortion
initiatives of local prosecutors. These efforts have led to
dramatic increases in the number of successful prosecutions for
extortion, jumping from 41 to 300 in a 3-year period.
USAID's partnership with INL supports El Salvador's
security efforts including--I am sorry, leading to a 45 percent
reduction in the number of homicides in targeted
municipalities.
In neighbourhoods with USAID programs, 51 percent fewer
residents reported incidents of extortion, blackmail, or
murders. INL supports Operation Regional Shield, which has led
to the arrests of nearly 4,000 gang members in the United
States and in the region, produced charges against nearly 300
gang members in Guatemala, for example, and helped dismantle
gang cliques in El Salvador.
USAID also addresses underlying economic instability due to
USAID programs supporting agriculture and natural resources
management. Impoverished rural areas in Guatemala and elsewhere
have seen more jobs and higher salaries.
In El Salvador, USAID programs help micro, small, and
medium enterprises create more jobs and increase productivity.
Mr. Chairman, the American people should know that these
USAID dollars do not go to foreign governments. They support
programs that are earmarked by this Congress, monitored by this
committee, and designed and implemented by State Department and
USAID professionals on the front lines in these countries.
Congress has a pivotal role playing--to play in ensuring
robust funding for foreign assistance programs that serve our
national security interests. It is also not just about aid.
Ten years ago, the United States advocated the CAFTA--the
Central American Free Trade Agreement--to secure market access
and fuel long-term economic growth.
The United States promoted this free trade agreement with
the promise of growing market for American exports and mutually
beneficial investment opportunities.
However, it is fair to say that the Northern Triangle
countries are less competitive than they were before NAFTA. We
have to do better. U.S. stakeholders should work to restore a
broad bipartisan consensus behind free market policies,
representative democracy, and the rule of law as the engines of
growth in Central America.
Mr. Chairman, much of the damage that we see to the
institutions in Central America is driven by narcotrafficking.
It is fuelled by demand for illicit narcotics in this country.
I do not think there is a leader in the region who would
not trade all of our aid dollars for a reduction in the demand
for illicit drugs that decimates their institutions and
undermines their ability to grow as good partners with the
United States.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Noriega follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Engel. Thank you. Thanks to all three of you. I
will now recognize my members for 5 minutes each to ask
questions, starting with myself. All time yielded is only for
the purpose of questioning the witnesses.
So let me start. Ambassador Jacobson, I was struck when I
read your testimony by your discussion of China and to the
extent in which the Administration seems to be opening the door
to the Chinese and other global powers who obviously do not
share our values by cutting off U.S. assistance to the Northern
Triangle countries.
As you know, Guatemala and Honduras are among the 17
countries in the world that maintain a formal diplomatic
relationship with Taiwan over China.
Just last year, El Salvador broke relations with Taiwan and
recognized China. I had an excellent meeting with Salvadoran
President-Elect Bukele when I was in the region and, as you may
know, he has suggested that he will take a fresh look at his
country's policy toward China when he takes office.
I can only imagine what the president-elect and leaders in
Guatemala and Honduras are thinking after President Trump
announced that he would cutoff aid.
So how concerned are you that cutting off U.S. assistance
to Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador will allow China to
fill the void, and second, do you think Russia and other
nefarious actors will also deepen their engagement with these
countries as the Trump Administration disengages? And I hope it
is not too late for the president to reverse his policy on
this.
Ms. Jacobson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am quite concerned about the role that China plays in the
hemisphere. I think what we have seen and what we saw in South
America in particular during the commodities boom in an earlier
decade was China was extremely engaged as a purchaser of those
commodities and that fuelled growth in many of the countries in
the region and there is nothing wrong with that.
So we need to distinguish between economic interaction and
trade on a level playing field, which I think is critical, and
involvement in infrastructure projects or the new Chinese
Development Bank or other things that I think come with serious
harm, potentially, to these countries and certainly could
result in what our military calls becoming partners of choice,
which is not something we want to see.
I am concerned about it because I think they do not bring
the same values, obviously. But I am also concerned about it
because I think we are leaving a vacuum through more than just
our aid.
The Chinese have had the Confucius Centers to teach Chinese
all over the hemisphere while we have, frankly, reduced
engagement in our binational centers and in teaching English.
That is a way of projecting power and gaining influence. The
Chinese have also always made sure they have diplomatic
representation in as many countries as possible.
You said--you talked about El Salvador changing from
recognizing Taiwan. I think the recognition question is less
important than do we make sure to have a robust presence
diplomatically, economically, as well as in assistance and in
financing so that the countries will see us as the partner of
choice, which is their preference, on the whole.
Most countries in the region would prefer to work with us.
So I am concerned about that. And in general, China has been an
economic partner, not a military partner. But that, too, could
change.
In the case of Russia, I do have concerns they tend to
focus more on places like Nicaragua and Venezuela than on the
rest of Central America. But I do think that there are efforts
by the Russians to, if you will, poke us in the eye in our own
hemisphere that we need to be aware of.
Chairman Engel. Thank you.
Mr. Kerlikowske, I think there is a misperception that U.S.
assistance to the Northern Triangle only comes directly from
the State Department and USAID.
And so I appreciate you outlining in your testimony the
extent to which U.S. law enforcement agencies like the FBI and
DEA receive funding from the State Department to operate in the
region.
During our visit to El Salvador, I had the opportunity to
be briefed, as did Mr. McCaul, by the FBI's transnational anti-
gang task force, which trains local law enforcement and then
works closely with them in investigating and taking down gang
leadership structures in the U.S. and Central America.
We thought it was truly an impressive effort by the FBI and
our local partners and their similar task forces in Guatemala
and Honduras as well.
So these task forces are funded by the State Department and
their work will come to an end if the Administration moves
forward with its ill-advised plan to cutoff aid to the region.
Let me ask you this as a former police chief and head of
CBP. Can you please give us a sense of what ending these anti-
gang task forces will mean not only for Central America but
also for communities in the United States and MS-13 in the
United States as well?
So what will be the real-life impact on our constituents if
we were to cutoff aid?
Mr. Kerlikowske. Thank you, Chairman. I think there are
several things that really come into play here. One is that
people, you know, need to recognize that MS-13 has been around
for well over 30 years and the beginnings of MS-13, of course,
resulted--were a result of us bringing people that had been
arrested, that were gang members, predominantly in Southern
California to El Salvador without not even notification, let
along any assistance and, literally, dumping thousands of
criminals into that country that did not have the capacity.
So it shouldn't come as a surprise that MS-13 grew rapidly
there. Since that time, though, I think we have become a lot
smarter. The FBI task force that you mentioned is just one
component.
The ILEA--the International Law Enforcement Training
Center--in El Salvador is another example where law enforcement
professionals who have been vetted or approved attend that
training to improve their forensics, their money laundering,
their investigative skills--all of the things that help.
So it is not just that ability to identify gang members or
criminals. It's also working hard to choke off the money that
supplies these gang members and when that happens we see some
pretty positive results.
We also see a level of cooperation and integration of
information being exchanged among law enforcement agencies at
the Federal level but also that information that is
communicated to us is also passed on to our counterparts at the
State and local level, thereby making counties and cities
especially along the border and the United States safer.
So it would be--disastrous is probably not too strong a
word--to see those programs cut.
Chairman Engel. Thank you.
Mr. McCaul?
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding
this hearing. Our trip to Latin America was very insightful at
a very critical time. I mean, we do have a crisis at the
border. A hundred thousand per month.
But I think it is kind of a two-front war approach, if you
will. I mean, Administrator Kerlikowske, you and I worked on
border patrol issues for a long time and Roberta--Ambassador--
we dealt with the State Department--State and law enforcement
working together. That is always kind of the key, I have always
thought.
And, you know, the chairman and I had actually talked about
before this trip and before the president's announcement sort
of putting the Central American Regional Security Initiative on
steroids.
Now, we saw Plan Colombia work. We saw Merida, you know,
Ambassador Jacobson, have an impact and I do not think you can
ignore the root causes of the problem.
You can be reactionary and build a wall and stop people
from coming into the United States and we can have law
enforcement and border patrol, which is essential.
But you also have to deal with the root cause of the
problem. What is causing this phenomena? I mean, in my--when I
was a Federal prosecutor and chairman of Homeland, I mean, it
went from the 20-year-old male trying to smuggle drugs, maybe
get a job, to these family units. What causes a family to want
to leave their country and come up the long dangerous journey?
And I think a lot of it has to do with conditions--poverty,
violence, gangs--causes this impact. And I think to the
chairman's point, if we withdraw from the region, who's going
to fill it?
China. We know El Salvador, the president said--the
incoming president said the current president wanted to invite
China to take two of their ports, bring their workers in, take
over, and bring their 5G into El Salvador. That is a takeover.
I think this assistance, USAID--we saw at-risk youths that
were targeted that could go to MS-13 get trained to find a job
instead.
We saw the INL program, law enforcement. This is what--from
a law enforcement guy, is most deeply disturbing is that we are
going to cutoff our international law enforcement apparatus in
Central America so FBI and DEA are going to be shut down.
They will not be able to conduct investigations where they
have arrested and indicted MS-13. How does that make the
situation better?
If we cut that--if we cut that program, cut it off at is
knees, how does that make us safer as a nation? I think it
makes it more dangerous as a Nation.
And I--maybe I am pontificating. But, you know, as Roberta
knows, I am very passionate about Latin America. I think we
ignored Latin America for a long time. We got a crisis in
Venezuela. We also have a historic opportunity there as well.
We got to play this one right.
But I think this decision, while it does sound appealing,
you are sending all these people--just cutoff foreign
assistance. I think as a policymaker we have to look at what
the consequences will be. What is in reality going to happen if
we cut all foreign assistance off to these countries?
So I leave that to--as a question, I guess, to the three of
you, if you would not mind responding to that.
Ms. Jacobson. Ranking Member McCaul, thank you, and I think
you and I have worked together on this issue for quite a long
time in Mexico, in Central America, and, frankly, Gil
Kerlikowske was one of the finest public servants I have worked
with. We really were a team when we worked on these issues.
And since I worked for Roger I know that we worked on these
very same issues as well across the aisle as well as across
administrations.
You have--one of the things that really worries me about
reduction of aid is you have governments in these countries of
varying qualities for partnership and I am the first to admit
that.
There are deep and abiding corruption issues. But with our
aid comes great pressure to improve transparency and make sure
that government resources are spent on what they should be and
go to the people and less gets siphoned off not of our aid
money because we are careful with that, but of their own
resources.
We also work with the private sector and one of the most
successful things that we have done over the last couple of
years is create matching programs where the local private
sector puts in at least one dollar for every dollar the U.S.
Government puts in.
What happens to those programs. They won't sustain them.
The local private sectors will not sustain those programs
without our government being part of them. Those have been
critical as well.
So the multiplier effect of a cutoff of aid because of the
local governments not doing what they should with the money and
the local private sector not partnering with us is really quite
dramatic.
Mr. Noriega. May I jump in for 30 seconds on this score and
address several of the issues?
The Chinese could replace all of this aid with the stroke
of a pen and they will send that message to the leaders in the
region that they are--they are their partners.
The Chinese have a very mercantile vision of the world--how
they do business. They will not, for example, when they are
investing to the extent they do in a region have the same
commitment we have in terms of environment or workers' rights--
labor rights that are instilled in the CAFTA agreement.
They will not certainly share our interests and to
inculcate a free market private sector-led economy, and we talk
about these countries now as recipients of aid as if they were
mendicant nations.
But in point of fact, 10 years ago we were talking about
them as economic partners, a natural market for our goods--a
place where our companies could invest and make a fair return
on that investment, build a safer neighborhood as part of an
economic community.
We have lost that in large measure because of the
institutions of Central America being destroyed by
transnational organized crime, caught in a vice between Mexico
where they were making at a certain point effective efforts
against drug trafficking, and Colombia in Plan Colombia, which
pushed these transnational organized crime groups--these dark
trafficking groups into fertile territory where these small--
relatively small countries did not have the capacity to resist,
do not have the strong democratic institutions, do not have the
strong democratic institutions, do not have the accountability
and the commitment to the rule of law to fend off this threat.
And so the demand for illegal drugs from this country has
destroyed those countries and we have a moral responsibility, I
believe, to help them pull out of the--pull out of the dive
caused by that institutional destruction.
We should also think about the--what we can do to restore
the idea of a productive economy. Not just deal with them as
these poor desperate countries that need our help, but insist
that they reform their economies, insist that they deal with
corruption, insist that they deal with the ability of companies
to invest or trade and do so as a good partner.
The announcement that we were summarily and arbitrarily
cutting off aid does not help any to these leaders be a friend
of the United States. It embarrasses them before their own
people. It undermines the confidence that we need to have as
partners.
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Kerlikowske?
Mr. Kerlikowske. Just one quick comment. I would also tell
you that although our demand for drugs is certainly a driver,
every one of these countries has a drug problem within the
countries and they have recognized that, whether it is Mexico
under the former first lady, Margarita Zavala, and many other
countries.
So the problem of the drug trafficking does not exist just
here and fund the narcotraffickers. They also have their own
drug issues and they need to be addressed and we can help them
because in many ways we have made some progress on our own
demand.
Mr. McCaul. Can I just ask you, you as a CBP guy and we
have known each other for a long time, what--if we cutoff INL--
the International Law Enforcement--if we cutoff the FBI and
DEA's operations in Central America to investigate, arrest, and
indict MS-13, I mean, this is the--we can talk about USAID but
the INL piece under State, what are the consequences of that?
Mr. Kerlikowske. So all of these--all of these U.S. law
enforcement boots on the ground in those countries and the
liaisons are covered under, one, the auspices of the State
Department and as a result of that funding.
I do not think there is any of the boots on the ground,
those working law enforcement professionals that are in there
and doing that work--I do not think a single one would tell you
that it is not worthwhile, that they haven't seen progress made
and that the work they're doing there not only improves the
safety and security in that country, it really makes our own
cities and counties safer.
Mr. McCaul. And the chairman and I met with them and saw it
firsthand, and I yield back.
Chairman Engel. Thank you, Mr. McCaul.
Mr. Sires, the chairman of our Western Hemisphere
Subcommittee.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Mr. McCaul.
First, let me say I commend the ranking member for recognizing
the problem of the cutting of the funds.
I represent a district that is about 55 to 60 percent
Hispanic. A lot of those Hispanics are from the Northern
Triangle.
I get firsthand information on what is going on in these
countries and what we have here today is the result of this
country not paying attention to this region for many, many
administrations.
I listened to you very closely, Mr. Kerlikowske, because
you are the first one that has come to this committee and
recognized the fact that for about 10 years or 11 years we were
dumping these MS-13 members in these countries and we were not
even notifying the countries that these people were members of
a gang and the reason they were there--we were just dumping
them.
So what we have today here is a result of our policies over
so many years and now we have a situation where they want to
cut the aid, in my view, for a political purpose to continue
stirring this whole idea about immigrants.
Ambassador, I was happy to hear that you mentioned Russia
in this area, how they want to stir up. I believe--and I told
this to the secretary of State that part of the problem in
Venezuela, part of the problem in Nicaragua, part of this
problem is in an effort to destabilize our back yard. It is an
effort to destabilize the Western Hemisphere, because this does
not happen in a vacuum.
This is all well thought out, in my view, and this idea
that we react by cutting some of the best programs that are
most effective--I was there last year. I was there with Ileana
Ros-Lehtinen, who was a promoter of these programs, and we saw
it first hand. We went from one program to the other and they
were very effective.
But to have a situation now where you are going to just
say, no more money--that this is going to solve this problem,
it is just going to get worse, because I talk to people day in
and day out in my district in my office about the children that
are afraid--that they have a father or they have a mother
taking care of a child in El Salvador or in Guatemala or in
Honduras, and they have no option. No option whatsoever,
because it is run by thugs.
These districts--these barrios are run by thugs. So when
they take off--when somebody gives them some money to take off
to come to America, they see a savings for their families.
So, you know, I do not understand where this policy is
coming from. It is just myopic. It is just putting blinders on.
And you know what? We are going to pay the price years down the
line because we are paying the price now of our policies years
ago where we did not focus on what's going on. And in terms of
China, they just see an opportunity.
I just read an article where the Chinese bought a piece of
property in Panama where they want to become the Amazon of the
Western Hemisphere. I read another article on what they did to
Ecuador. Eighty percent of the oil in Ecuador that is exported
is taken by the Chinese at a lower price and they sell it in
the market because of the deal that they cut to build all these
dams and all these things.
They built a dam in Ecuador that has cracks in it. They
built it next to a volcano. I mean, it is just incredible the
things that go on there and we are letting the Chinese go in.
I had a dinner with one of the presidents of a university
in Colombia. He tells me that in his university the second most
foreign language that is studied is Mandarin. Obviously,
English is still the first.
So we have to wake up because before it is over--before we
know it, it is going to get worse, and these policies of, you
know, beating up on these people, they are a victim, you know.
I came to America because it was the land of the free. I
came at the age of 11, and it has always been in the mind of my
parents, my relatives, everything else that we are still the
country of the free and the country of opportunity.
So I do not know where this policy is going. I hated to see
it being so politicized just because you want to buildup your
base and you want you build your support and there's an
election coming up.
We just better wake up, and I really do not have a
question. I have another meeting. And I thank you for being
here. Always nice to see a Jersey girl come before us, you
know, and I apologize if I am, you know, too strong.
So do you want to say anything, Ambassador?
Ms. Jacobson. Thank you. The only thing I would say is I do
agree that one of the things we did, all of us that served in
government or before, the wars ended in Central America and we
all saw a peace dividend and we did not think as much as we
needed to about young men with weapons in Central America and
no jobs to replace that, and we closed down missions and we
reduced programs.
And Roger is absolutely right. You know, just like the drug
problem has supply and demand issues, so does migration. Yes,
migrants are coming. They are also being manipulated by people
who tell them they can get in even if they can't, and the
smuggling has to be stopped.
But you got to work on both ends of this problem. It is not
going to end unless we work on the root causes not sustainably.
Mr. Sires. Ambassador?
Mr. Noriega. I know your time has gone over.
Mr. Sires. That is all right.
Mr. Noriega. But just make one comment.
Mr. Sires. The chairman is a friend of mine.
Mr. Noriega. Mr. Chairman, I am not surprised to see the--I
am not surprised to see the remarkable bipartisan commitment to
these programs, a recognition by people who understand these
programs, who visit and see for themselves the benefits.
I would hope that you would work together to appeal to
Secretary of State Pompeo and others--Vice President Pence, who
has paid some attention to the region--that the president needs
to do--to reconsider.
We certainly can't just scrap these programs for the year
and then start the next fiscal year. It is an absolutely
unmanageable situation. Our diplomats there without the tools
they need to do their job--it is an unmanageable situation.
So I would hope that you could communicate with these
people directly in a bipartisan way, the highest levels, both
House and Senate, with the president to, you know, press upon
them the need to reconsider his decision.
Chairman Engel. Well, good advice. Thank you.
Mr. Chabot?
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This is a
very interesting hearing and I agree, and I've listened closely
to comments on both sides of the aisle here and I think--for
what they're worth, I think you are all right. I think the
witnesses are all right here, too. This is extremely
frustrating. I think it is for the president as well--one of
these on the one hand, on the other hand things.
I think the president realizes that we have sent a lot of
foreign down to a number of these countries, particularly in
Central America, and there is a--more or less supposed to be an
agreement that the money goes down there, it goes to improve
conditions there, help law enforcement actually enforce their
laws.
It should assist us in reducing illegal immigration, which
is one of the top promises that the president has made to
actually do something about it. Others have talked about it.
He is really trying to do something about it and I think
that--I think that is commendable that the president is trying
to do something.
However, the money apparently either hasn't been
effectively utilized. The caravans are still happening and I
think the president thinks that we are being, you know, used as
a sucker in this thing.
You know, it should be a cooperative effort. There should
be good faith. When we send them money it should be being put
to good use and I think the president's mind set is more--at
this point, he's frustrated. It's kind of tough love, and I
understand that.
I do tend to think that we ought to continue to work with
these nations to assist them in improving the conditions that
cause parents to want to send their young people up here to get
away from the cartels and the drug gangs where it is my
understanding that literally their lives are threatened and
oftentimes they are physically harmed or killed if they do not
cooperate with the drug gangs.
And so it is understandable that they would want to get
their kids out of--away from that sort of thing. On the other
hand, how long does this go on where these countries do not
cooperate in, for example, stopping the cartels? There ought to
be--excuse me, stopping the caravans?
There ought to be some mechanism that we can work on with
them to at least cease these major caravans from continuing to
come to our southern border and Mexico has been sometimes
somewhat cooperative but mostly not cooperative. They could
stop by stopping the caravans from entering into their southern
border. But they haven't been particularly helpful there.
But it is very frustrating. I have been to Guatemala and
Honduras and talked to various groups there and in the very
near future I am going to be in El Salvador and Nicaragua also
and talk to people down there on the ground.
But it is frustrating and I--again, I completely understand
the president's mind set here and I sympathize with it. I do
not necessarily agree with it 100 percent. I do not think I
would say, let us cut it off altogether right now. But I am
getting closer and closer to that if these countries do not
cooperate.
So in espousing that frustration, I see some nodding of
heads on the panel there. So I will just open it up and ask you
to comment in any way that you see fit.
Ambassador Noriega, do you want to go first?
Mr. Noriega. Yes. Before you came in, I made the point
that, obviously, the president is reacting to the fact that the
number had surged to, roughly, 100,000 in March on the
Southwest border up from 70,000 and it is a fact that the
smugglers are gaming our system.
And so but the decision to cutoff aid does not hit the
smugglers. Matter of fact, some of our aid is to dismantle the
smuggling operations. A lot of what we do in terms of law
enforcement and anti-gang work is precisely to go after the
smuggling organizations.
And so there's another issue and that is on the asylum
claims. You know, every two or 3 months I, on a pro bono basis,
do testimony before judges on asylum cases.
Some are better than others, quite frankly, but a good
number of these people clearly do not have a well-founded fear
of persecution and they are here for economic reasons.
But they understand that because we have such a backlog in
the handling of the asylum cases that if they do an asylum
claim by law we just sort of let them go and they're asked to
call back.
Now, if you can reduce the amount of time for having a
hearing, you have a better chance of them showing up and then
you deport the people who are ineligible.
One of the recommendations that the Migration Policy
Institute Andrew Selee has made is allowing CIS--Immigration
Services--asylum officers to make those determinations so we
would reduce the backlog and you get an immediate response and
you start to turn these people back.
You know, we are not hard-hearted people by any means. But
we have to be sort of hard-headed when you think of millions
more Central Americans who are ready to pay $5,000 a person.
They are moving as a family unit to get on a bus to come here
because the smugglers have commercialized the caravans.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. But if I could just say
we absolutely have to in a bipartisan manner change this
ridiculous asylum policy that we have now where people can come
up.
They are told by the cartels the magic words to say. They
say it, then they're cited to court, you know, a year, 2 years
down the road. They disappear into the population, never come
back for their hearing and then they're just here. We have to
do something about that.
Chairman Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
Now I am going to call on Mr. Deutch. But we have had votes
on the floor so we could either finish before or we could come
back, whatever----
Mr. Deutch. I will be quick.
Chairman Engel. OK.
Mr. Deutch. I will dispense with the statement I was going
to make and just ask--Mr. Chabot raises, I think, fairly
succinctly the way this argument is playing out--that we are
just--the president is just administering some tough love--that
we are tired of being played the sucker.
To the points that you made earlier, what would your
message be? What would leadership look like here that
recognizes that we are not cutting off aid that's going to
governments, as you have all pointed out.
We are cutting off aid that actually benefits us and our
security and improves the lives of people on the ground. What
should be done, aside from not cutting off the aid? What would
leadership look like in the region?
What would it look like if the president said, I need
everyone around the table who can make some commitment to help
address this situation? Who would be at the table and what
should be discussed?
Ms. Jacobson. Well, Congressman, I think one of the most
important things is they need to discuss governance and they
need to make commitments to governance, which is one of the
things we demand of those leaders in the region, right, and
that means they need to focus on greater tax--income from tax
evasion so they have funds to support their security forces.
They need to work with us on these specialized units which
help both get rid of and dismantle the smuggling operations and
help us fight gangs and narcotics trafficking.
We need to focus on the things that work best at both ends
and we need to do it in such a way that it is transparent to
the people in their countries and there is no graft, which we
do well where we do it.
We also need to work with the private sectors in those
countries, which have been lamentably slow in committing to
being good citizens on security issues. When President Uribe in
Colombia started with Plan Colombia, he told his private
sector, you have to pay to make the country safe--you who have
funds need to pay your taxes and be part of it.
We haven't seen that in Central America. There was one
effort in Honduras.
The other thing I just want to mention is I am sorry to
have to say this but these countries cannot stop people from
leaving whether in caravans or not. What that looks like is a
Berlin Wall and I do not think that is what we are asking them
to do.
It is people's right to leave their country whether we like
it or not. Mexico just recently announced they are going to put
more people at the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, the narrowest point.
Those are the kinds of things we need to see.
Mr. Deutch. And if--and if we--for our other panellists, if
we want to have those kinds of discussions which would actually
be fruitful and would help us address this, is it--is it easier
or harder for us to convene those meetings when we are cutting
off aid and when we are talking about ending assistance
altogether and closing our border?
Mr. Kerlikowske?
Mr. Kerlikowske. I would certainly tell you that during my
time, we saw incredible success with Mexico. INAMI, which is
their immigration system, and they do not have enforcement
powers--they do not carry firearms, et cetera, yet they put
huge numbers of resources on the border with Guatemala.
Every one of us I think can remember those pictures of the
trains, la bestia, with thousands of people hanging on the
sides and the roofs. They ended that. They stopped that.
They did a variety of important work in cooperation and
they exchanged a lot of good information and, frankly, treating
those individuals in the higher levels of government with the
greatest courtesy and respect I think went a long way to doing
diplomacy and then creating a better system.
Ms. Jacobson. So the short answer is harder.
Mr. Deutch. Harder. And just the last thing I would say, I
want to just--I can't let Mr. Chabot's comments about asylum
seekers simply sent out there.
The idea that the people who are willing risk their lives
to travel to our country, who have a right to claim asylum for
fear of persecution in their own country is to suggest that
somehow all of them are coming here because they have been--
they have been tricked or because they are somehow being used
is not only unfair to them and their families and the risks
that they are taking to be here but it actually challenges the
very nation of the kind of country that we have and want to
have, and I am so grateful for the service that all three of
you have provided and for your testimony today.
Chairman Engel. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
We are getting down to the bottom so I am going to call on
Mr. Yoho for 2 minutes and then Mr. Cicilline for 2 minutes,
and we'll try to make it before the votes are on.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Engel. We do not have to have them come back. We
will have you come another time. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. I would love for you to come back, but I
understand.
Ambassador, Jacobson, you were saying how the root cause of
migration--and I think we know this--lack of jobs, violence,
and everything goes on.
I am a veterinarian and what we do is we look at a sick
animal, we do a diagnostic and then we formulate a treatment
plan. We treat it, but if the treatment does not work, we have
got to change the treatment or reassess the situation.
And since 2008 to 2018, we have put $5.75 billion into
Central America--a minimum of that--and then we have put $2
trillion on the War on Drugs since it started, $2 billion in
Mexico alone. Yet, Mexico is supplying 93 percent of the heroin
coming into the United States. Mexico is.
You can't do that without government involvement and, of
course, we saw the allegations that President Pena was bribed
$100 million by El Chapo.
You can't have legitimate--the narcotrafficking has become
a legitimized business and it has been accepted and what they
have done is they have run their money to legal businesses that
is funnelled--they are funnelling this illegal money that is
coming here.
And so I am not opposed to what President Trump is
proposing because what we have done is not working. And so
without being able to go into this further, I think we need to
look at how we are dealing with this and it has to be dealt
differently.
It is a decay on all societies and it is happening here and
it is not benefiting the people of any of those countries and
it is putting men at risk but it puts our country at risk and
it weakens our economies.
I am not asking for a response. It is just something we
need to look at.
And one last thing. Ninety plus percent of all Latin
American countries are Christian nations, as we are. I do not
think we are following the Christian doctrine of treat others
as you would treat ourselves and I think we need to look at all
that, and I yield my time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cicilline [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Yoho.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. I want to thank the
chairman of our committee for convening this and the ranking
member, and thank the witnesses for their extraordinary
testimony and for their service to our country.
We are here today to discuss the importance of U.S.
assistance to Central America, an issue on which there is broad
bipartisan support across this committee and across the
Congress.
Through assistance and development programs the United
States is able address the root causes of instability and the
drivers of migration to the United States. These are programs
that tackle corruption, promote education, foster democracy,
and counter violence.
They represent an effective investment on the part of the
United States to promote a more stable, more democratic, and
more prosperous hemisphere.
In fact, the vice president himself noted their importance,
and I quote, ``To further stem the flow of illegal immigration
and illegal drugs into the United States, President Trump
knows, as do all of you, that we must confront these problems
at their source. We must meet them and we must solve them in
Central America and South America,`` end quote.
Those are the words of the vice president. Yet, this
administration or actually I can't even say the administration
because this is really the president acting on a whim, yet this
president rashly announced an end to all aid--and end to
programs that help stem migration because he wants to end
migration.
As is typical, this represents the president's penchant for
making up policy on the fly, leaving his own administration,
our diplomats, and other countries surprised, confused, and
scrambling to undo the damage.
I would like now to enter into the record a statement from
Plan International USA based in Rhode Island, which notes, and
I quote, ``The administration must begin to view foreign
assistance for what it is--a way to improve conditions and
strengthen institutions within foreign countries while also
enhancing our own security,`` end quote.
Without objection, it is in the record.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Cicilline. And also I would like to enter into the
record an op-ed by Ambassador Jacobson from the New York Times
in which she describes the disorder of the Trump administration
as seen in her role as U.S. Ambassador to Mexico.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Cicilline. It highlights the alarming disorganization,
lack of foresight, and baffling ignorance of the Trump
administration, and the decision to end aid in Central America
is, sadly, par for the course which is why, in my view,
Congress must exercise oversight.
This country will never be able to address immigration if
we do not address the root drivers of irregular migration.
Those who immigrate to our great country have in many instances
experienced unbearable hardships.
Our assistance programs help to address the underlying
causes of these hardships. Cutting them would be cruel,
shortsighted, and counterproductive and I believe that Congress
must take clear bold action to ensure key assistance programs
are not gutted just because of a Presidential mood swing.
So I want to begin my question, as I mentioned, development
organization called Plan USA is based in my district and has
worked in Central America for decades.
Their field work and their research demonstrate the value
of U.S. assistance to the region for improving people's lives
and preventing migration.
In fact, a Plan survey found that 59 percent of at-risk
youth in El Salvador, as an example, planned to migrate because
of violence and lack of opportunity.
So Plan runs a youth employment program that has trained
thousands of youth for jobs with dozens of companies akin to
the excellent programs run by USAID.
Isn't that fundamentally a better way to address this
problem--a program like that, Ambassador Jacobson?
Ms. Jacobson. It absolutely is. I mean, I think that those
kinds of programs are critical. While, obviously, you still see
migrants coming and, in fact, right now you are seeing larger
numbers, so you can argue over how effective they are.
But the truth is over the last couple of years we do know
what works. Plan USA knows what works. What we need to do is
expand their reach and demand that those governments replicate
those programs, and I would say to Representative Yoho who
talked about things not working, it is true that the smugglers
and the drug traffickers are always going to be more agile than
governments.
So we are constantly going to have to adapt our programs
and that is exactly what we have done over the past few years.
We know certain things work and others were abysmal
failures. But the programs that we are looking at right now
were only just getting started. And so to say that they have
failed is really way too preliminary without a significant
continuation of funding and talking with partners like those
NGO's who know what works.
Mr. Cicilline. You know, and I think in addition to that,
just the very announcement of these proposed cuts has already
damaged U.S. aid programs and really our credibility in Central
America.
PEPFAR has canceled its annual planning meeting for the
Western Hemisphere. USAID has frozen a number of activities and
one person in the region even described it as government
shutdown mode.
So the idea--the difficulties that come with restarting it
when organizations have begun to, you know, make adjustments
for this pronouncement is significant.
Two other quick questions, because I know my time has run
out, but I am in charge so I can have a couple more minutes.
On March 28th, just before President Trump announced that
he was cutting off aid to Central America, recently resigned
Secretary of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen
announced what she called a historic agreement with our
partners in Central America to address the root causes of
migration.
In other words, the U.S. Government got agreement from
countries in the region to what the administration wanted and
the president responded by trying to punish them. It is sort of
baffling.
And my question really is what does the president's
decision to cutoff aid to Central America, despite strong
support from member of his own administration including his own
vice president, say about his approach to foreign policy and
our ability to kind of have a coherent repose to this crisis
and what does it say to the leaders in the region who are
trying to figure this out?
I do not know who might try to answer that.
Ambassador?
Mr. Noriega. I do not think anybody thinks that this was a
well-reasoned decision or announcement. Roberta, as assistant
secretary of State, and I in that same role did annual reviews
of all of our projects with USAID, what is effective, what is
working, what is not, are we prepared to defend them before the
secretary of State, arm wrestle Members of Congress and their
staff, accept the kind of oversight that really enriches the
programs and we did this because we believe that we are
absolutely convinced that this sort of investment is in our
interest.
I will say one thing that I am concerned is we are sort of
treating the symptoms of countries that are in very serious
trouble because their basic institutions have been undermined
by transnational organized criminal organizations that can
bribe or bully or murder to get whatever they want, and this
is--transnational organized crime is a $2.2 trillion.
That is the equivalent of Mexico's GDP, and to suggest that
the country of El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala are on
their own when they are to a certain extent victims of this
demand or illicit drugs I think is not--is not reasonable.
We need the partnerships. We also need, as I said, to do
more than treat symptoms. We need economies growing again. We
need governments tackling corruption, adopting the right
economic policies.
We saw a country of El Salvador, for example, go from civil
war to investment grade in five or 6 years without turning to
multilateral development banks for the resources.
It can be done with the right policies, with the political
will. But we have to be good partners to accompany that
process.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Kerlikowske. During my 8 years in the administration we
do planning and we did not do policy on the fly or on the whim.
There was an incredible amount of cooperation and backup and
support and work that was done.
And also I think all of us worked very hard to break down
silos between the State Department and USAID and CBP or DHS and
on and on, and it took a long time and it was important, and it
was important also that we were not surprised or that we found
out about new policy by reading it in the paper or hearing it.
I did not follow Twitter very well but--and so when I look
at the success in Mexico and I look at those reductions, I look
at the success in those three Central American countries which
I wish I would have had a little time to explain to Member
Yoho. But we have made great progress.
And as Roberta also mentioned, these programs are in their
infancy. I mean, give them a chance to flourish. And then if
they are not working, you know, let us say they are not working
and we need to move on.
Mr. Cicilline. Right. Thank you.
And my final question, you know, there has been a lot of
discussion in this hearing about the level of assistance and us
being taken for suckers and what we are spending.
I think it is important to note that our foreign assistance
to the Northern Triangle makes up just .00035 percent of the
U.S. Federal budget and provides a significant return on
investment by improving security and economic opportunity in
the region.
This small investment has had a catalytic effect. When the
U.S. committed $420 million to the region in Fiscal Year 2017,
Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador committed to more than ten
times that amount--$5.4 billion--to support investments in
their people and to strengthen public safety.
Given the administration's focus on burden sharing, I would
love to hear your views with respect to the proposal to cutoff
U.S. assistance in the region and whether it would in fact end
up undermining Northern Triangle countries' willingness to
continue to make the kinds of investments they have made in
light of the U.S. investment.
Ambassador Jacobson?
Ms. Jacobson. Representative Cicilline, I think that is an
extremely important point. What I mentioned earlier about
multiplier effect of our assistance, there is no place that I
know of in the Western Hemisphere where we have put in more
money than the local government.
In Mexico, I think it was $17 or $18 for every one of ours.
In Central America, you noted--in Colombia, certainly, the
Colombians dedicated massive resources to this.
And what happens when we are unreliable, when we cut aid,
is some of those programs do not continue, because what we are
signalling is maybe it is not such a priority even through the
president, obviously, is speaking out of frustration and
wanting to do more.
These are hard programs. They are hard politically for
these leaders. They are--they are working to get at entrenched
interests both economic and political as well as security, if
you will.
And so to take those risks without our support, without our
backing, becomes harder and harder. It is--the chances grow
slimmer that they will do things we want without our moral
backing as well as financial backing.
But we have also seen that we get much weaker response from
the local private sector--economic elites who can afford to
contribute and who say, well, if the U.S. is not going to be
supporting this we are not going to bother.
So yes, there is a multiplier effect in our cuts.
Mr. Cicilline. Yes, which is why I hope this hearing
communicates to the White House the urgency of reconsidering
their position because these investments are not acts of
charity.
They are investments in the safety and security of the
world, which is in the national security interests of the
American people. And this is about getting to the root of a
problem, which is presenting challenges to our own country and
there is bipartisan understanding that your testimony today
helped reaffirm that, and I, again, will end where I began, by
thanking you for your testimony today and for your
extraordinary service to our country.
And with that, today's hearing is concluded and the
committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:57 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD FROM COMMITTEE MEMBERS
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]