- THE OUTLOOK FOR WILDLAND FIRE AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS FOR 2019
[Senate Hearing 116-306]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-306
THE OUTLOOK FOR WILDLAND FIRE AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS FOR 2019
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
JUNE 13, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-802
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
STEVE DAINES, Montana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Kellie Donnelly, Chief Counsel
Nick Matiella, Professional Staff Member
Sarah Venuto, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
Bryan Petit, Democratic Senior Professional Staff Member
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Manchin III, Hon. Joe, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
West Virginia..................................................
5
WITNESSES
Legarza, Shawna, National Director, Fire and Aviation Management,
USDA Forest Service............................................
7
Rupert, Jeffery, Director, Office of Wildland Fire, U.S.
Department of the Interior.....................................
16
Maisch, John ``Chris,'' Alaska State Forester, on behalf of the
National Association of State Foresters........................
23
Crowfoot, Hon. Wade, Secretary, California Natural Resources
Agency.........................................................
31
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Cantwell, Hon. Marie:
Map entitled ``Significant Wildland Fire Potential Outlook--
Washington State Fire Season 2019''........................
51
CoreLogic:
Letter for the Record........................................
108
Crowfoot, Hon. Wade:
Opening Statement............................................
31
Written Testimony............................................
33
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
105
Legarza, Shawna:
Opening Statement............................................
7
Written Testimony............................................
10
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
67
Maisch, John ``Chris'':
Opening Statement............................................
23
Written Testimony............................................
25
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
91
Manchin III, Hon. Joe:
Opening Statement............................................
5
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Chart entitled ``Significant Wildland Fire Potential
Outlook--June 2019, July 2019, August 2019, September
2019''.....................................................
2
Rupert, Jeffery:
Opening Statement............................................
16
Written Testimony............................................
18
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
83
THE OUTLOOK FOR WILDLAND FIRE AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS FOR 2019
----------
THURSDAY, JUNE 13, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, the Committee will come to
order.
We are here today to discuss the outlook for the 2019
wildfire season. As we know, it is underway. It is certainly
underway in my state. I know it is underway in Washington State
and California most certainly.
Senator Manchin. We are good.
The Chairman. Yes, West Virginia, you are okay right now,
but if you look at that map, that red in the southwest is
something to pay attention to as well.
[Map shown.]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Last week, the National Interagency Fire
Center released its monthly wildland fire potential outlook for
June through September. And despite relief from the oppressive
drought conditions this past winter, analysts predict elevated
wildfire activity in California, Oregon, and Washington, among
other areas in the country.
Some observers believe the stage is set for fire activity
similar to the indescribable damage and the staggering loss of
life that we saw last year in Northern California. We watched
in horror as the Camp Fire engulfed the town of Paradise
killing 85 individuals, some of whom were trapped in vehicles
on rural roads trying to escape the blaze.
So we are back again. Over the past week, we have seen an
uptick in wildfires nationally.
The Oregon Lake Fires back in Alaska continue to burn in
the Donnelly Training Area, this is a U.S. Army range. In
addition to the hazards of fighting the fire, our folks there
are very carefully monitoring and spot-treating the fire as it
moves across DoD land that contains unexploded ordnance--yet
another threat that is out there. I understand that the vast
majority of our fires are lightning strikes, and they predict a
lot more lightning in this next week.
This weekend in Arizona, smoke billowing from the Mountain
Fire at the outskirts of Phoenix suburbs prompted the closure
of a popular weekend campground and marinas in the Tonto
National Forest. So Arizona is seeing it, as Senator McSally
knows.
A fast-moving brush fire in L.A. County triggered a
panicked evacuation of hundreds of families from a crowded Six
Flags amusement park. Some patrons reported that they were
actually on the rollercoaster rides and ash began burning their
eyes.
North of Sacramento, more than 500 firefighters have been
working in triple digit heat to tame the Sand Fire. On
Saturday, 22,000 people were left without power when
transmission lines outside the burn area were intentionally de-
energized as a precaution. But, you know, this is the new
normal out there. If we want to try to deal with some of this
fire threat, what we are going to do is turn off the power.
We have seen time and again how something simple like a
small spark on a breezy day can bring about devastating
infernos. The Mendocino Complex Fire, which was the largest
fire in California's history, was started by a hammer hitting a
metal stake near tall, dry grass. We have all seen the news
accounts of that recently.
Every summer we see our home states erupt in flames. More
wildfires are occurring in the East and in the central states,
while the fires in the West grow larger and certainly more
severe.
There are a number of reasons why our forests and our
grasslands are increasingly susceptible to fire: a changing
climate means dryer and warmer weather; much of our nation's
forest landscapes are unhealthy and overstocked with excess
fuels; and the proliferation of disease and insect outbreaks,
certainly like we have seen in Alaska and elsewhere around the
country, certainly Colorado, but these leave behind large
swaths of hazard trees that are ready to ignite just like a
matchstick out there.
In Alaska, warmer winters have led to a population boom of
spruce beetle across nearly one million acres in just a few
years now. We have communities on the Kenai Peninsula and now
up in the Mat-Su Valley that are just scrambling to remove the
dead and the dying trees from the neighborhoods and along the
highways.
Year in and year out, these factors continue to compound
creating the perfect recipe for longer, costlier, and more
damaging fire season.
In 2018, more than 8.8 million acres burned across the
country, double the average acres-burned in the 1990s. Last
year was also the most expensive wildfire season on record, on
record. The Federal Government spent more than $3.1 billion in
suppression costs.
So this is not only a human catastrophe, but certainly a
financial cost, and an increase that is beyond belief. Just a
few years ago, back in 2015, we had more than five million
acres that burned in Alaska alone, that was truly a
catastrophic year for us.
I suppose the good news for that, if you can see any good
news in five million acres burned, is that very little in terms
of property damage because of where these fires were located.
But we certainly see that with these intense fires in the Lower
48.
Congress has started to respond by expanding the
authorities that federal land managers can use for wildfire
prevention. We have given the Forest Service greater latitude
to partner with their states, local governments and tribes to
reduce hazardous fuels on federal lands near forest communities
and out in the larger landscape; we have streamlined the
federal environmental review process to expedite projects aimed
at restoring our forests to their natural, fire-adapted state;
and we have initiated a $2 billion increase in how we budget
for wildfire suppression--and that change will take effect
later this year at the start of FY 2020. Without delay, we are
counting on the Forest Service and the Interior Department to
utilize its full suite of resources for fire prevention and
active forest management. Here in Congress, we will continue to
work on additional reforms to reduce the threat of wildfire.
So today we have a good panel to discuss the outlook for
the wildfire season.
We have from the State of Alaska, Chris Maisch, who is our
State Forester, but he is testifying on behalf of the National
Association of State Foresters. He has been before the
Committee before, and we welcome you back, Chris.
Mr. Wade Crowfoot is the Secretary of the California
Natural Resources Agency, and he is going to discuss the
wildfire crisis that is facing the State of California.
Representing the Department of the Interior is Jeff Rupert,
the Director of the Office of Wildland Fire.
And we have Shawna Legarza, who is the Director of Fire and
Aviation Management for the U.S. Forest Service. Ms. Legarza is
a longtime civil servant of the Forest Service with over 30
years of wildland fire management experience. She was once a
hotshot superintendent and began fighting forest fires working
her way through college as a young woman. We all know, and we
have had opportunity here in the Committee to discuss the issue
of workplace safety for women in the Forest Service,
particularly those working on fire crews. It has been a
priority for this Committee. I will look forward to your unique
perspective on this issue as well as we are discussing the
issues relating to wildland fires.
With that, I will turn to Senator Manchin for his comments
and then we will turn to the panel.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE MANCHIN III,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I want to thank
you for holding this hearing and all of you for appearing today
to try to help us find the solutions that we all need.
Before I get into my remarks, I would also like to take a
moment to thank all of our firefighters and first responders
who are on the job today and who basically risk their lives
every time they go out to protect us. These men and women
bravely serve our country, day in and day out. They work long,
grueling hours. I think you all know that, and they do so in a
dangerous job for not much in compensation to protect the
livelihoods of people that they will never meet, and for that
we are grateful to them.
So, Madam Chairman, I think the wildfires that we have seen
in the past few years and the aftermath that they leave shows
why this is such an important topic for us to discuss, and I am
eager to learn more from the witnesses today. As Ranking Member
from an Eastern state, I have listened to my Western state
colleagues and continue to learn more about the issues
impacting those states and wildfire has been a repeated topic
of discussion.
Despite the slow start to this year's fire season, I
understand wildfires are increasing in intensity, size and
frequency. They are burning longer, and they are harder to
control than they were just a few years ago.
One of the major reasons for these worsening fires is the
change that we have going on in climate. Just a couple of weeks
ago, I joined Chairman Murkowski, Senator Cantwell, Senator
Barrasso and Senator Whitehouse to see firsthand the effects
that climate change is having on the Arctic and innovative
solutions aimed at reducing carbon emissions and increasing
natural resilience through technology. It was truly
unbelievable to witness the rapid changes occurring in the
Arctic, but as we know with the Committee's work on other
issues, the changes are being felt right here at home,
especially during fire season.
I believe the time for sensationalism is over. In seeking
climate solutions, it seems like so many buzz words get people
fired up. Climate warming, climate change, why can't we just
have climate solutions because we all know we have to do
something. That will bring people together rather than drive
them apart.
Scientists have shown that the warmer and drier weather has
been causing wildfires to burn hotter and faster and for longer
periods. In fact, recent studies show the average fire season
is now 78 days longer than it was in 1970. Experts are also
saying that as global temperatures continue to rise, the
wildfires that we all experience in the United States will
continue to worsen.
Research from Headwater Economics has shown that a global
temperature increase of one degree Fahrenheit will result in 35
percent more acres burning in wildfires and a doubling in our
firefighting cost. Obviously the effects of climate change are
only beginning and have been made worse by our decades-long
history of suppressing all wildfires, even the good fires, and
by the lack of timber harvesting in our forests which is
something, I am sure, that we are going to talk about today.
Now communities across the country are being confronted
with increasingly dangerous blazes. Last year, over 18,000
homes were lost to wildfires. That is one in every 7,000 houses
in the United States. Think about that. 18,000.
As we continue to have these important conversations about
lowering carbon emissions and increasing resilience in
mitigation, wildfires will need to be part of those
conversations.
I am going to say it again because I think it is worth
repeating. I am seeking climate solutions that will bring
people together rather than solutions that drive people apart.
Fortunately, I believe that addressing wildfires is a
bipartisan issue. Wildfires do not discriminate. They don't
care whether you are Republican or Democrat. They don't care
what household that is. If it is in their way, they are going
to get burned. They have severely impacted communities of both
red and blue states equally.
Every one here supports giving our brave men and women the
best tools available to do their jobs. I know that Senator
Cantwell and Senator Gardner have both shown great leadership
in getting language included in the Public Lands bill to ensure
that our firefighters have access to state-of-the-art
technologies.
I also want to take this opportunity to thank Senator Wyden
for his leadership on his Wildfire Funding bill that was
enacted last year. That bill will make an additional $2 billion
available, beginning next year, to the agencies for
firefighting. I, along with many of the members of this
Committee, was a co-sponsor of Senator Wyden's bill because of
how important the bill is to my State of West Virginia.
Each year when the Forest Service ran short of its
firefighting funds, it would raid the accounts of the eastern
national forests, like the Monongahela National Forest in West
Virginia, in order to pay for firefighting; and we understood
that.
In addition to not being fair, the fire borrowing practice
was terribly disruptive to the proper management of these
forests, like the Monongahela, and it directly harmed the
surrounding communities that depend on our national forests.
So the fire borrowing legislation was a great start, but
there is more work to be done. We need to be looking at new,
innovative solutions because these are very complex problems
without simple answers.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses about the
approach that we are taking this year so that our country does
not have to repeat the devastation that we experienced just
last year.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and thank you to our witnesses. I
look forward to this hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin. I appreciate you
raising the issue surrounding our trip to the Arctic. I have
been attending the Arctic Council Meetings for a dozen years or
so. I have been on the Arctic Parliamentarians. We all had an
opportunity to visit with the Arctic Parliamentarians when we
were in Ottawa.
For the first time on the list of priorities of the Arctic
Council as well as the Arctic Parliamentarians and all of the
Arctic nations, one of those issues that we need to deal with
is the issue of wildfire, wildfires in the Arctic.
We are not going to resolve that one today, but it does
speak to what we are seeing in different parts of the world
that we really have not been as concerned about because the
winters are cold enough that they kill the bugs, the beetles
that would destroy the trees. But as we are seeing increased
drought, even in areas where you don't have big trees, you can
still have fires. I think we recognize that.
Senator Manchin. Can I say one thing?
The Chairman. Senator?
Senator Manchin. Let me just say one thing about what I
took away from the trip that we had--which was the most amazing
trip. I think we all have seen things that we had only read
about before or studied about, but to see it firsthand, up
close and personal, was really moving.
The thing I walked away from the Parliament in Ottawa,
where the Parliamentary Arctic nations were all represented.
And in those countries, they have more than just two parties,
or systems, like we do. And all the parties and all the
discussions, not one Arctic nation . . . not one Arctic nation,
except the United States of America, allows a discussion of
climate, climate change, climate solutions, climate warming . .
. to be a political divide. They all agree because their
existence depends on something being done. And we all can agree
that it needs to be done. It is just a matter of agreeing on
what needs to be done and how we do it but something must
happen.
So thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Let's go to our panel.
I have introduced each of you, I think, to an order that
folks know the value that you bring to the discussion whether
through the USDA Forest Service, Interior, state level as state
foresters and to the individual states.
Let's begin with Ms. Legarza. We welcome you to the
Committee and look forward to your testimony. We would ask you
to try to limit your comments to about five minutes. Your full
statements will be included as part of the record.
STATEMENT OF SHAWNA LEGARZA, NATIONAL DIRECTOR, FIRE AND
AVIATION MANAGEMENT, USDA FOREST SERVICE
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and Ranking Member and members of
the Committee for having me here today. I'm going to speak
today a little bit about the 2019 remainder of the fire year
lookout and talk a little bit about what we're doing for
information technology in our agency and then look at some of
the different fire program managements at the different levels
of the national, regional and state.
So, as you know already, this winter and spring we've seen
a little bit wetter than normal conditions across the south
central, central America and on the West Coast, but it's
starting to dry out right now. Arizona, New Mexico, Idaho,
Alaska, even Canada, we're sending firefighters to Canada. And
we know that our predictive services is showing that it's going
to start to increase, that we could have a very significant
fire year again this year in California and the Pacific
Northwest. All those grasses are going to be drying out from
the heavy rains and snowpack, and with that will come large
fires. So we must continue to be prepared.
We know that in the past several years we've seen every
year record breaking fires, every single year in addition to
what we saw last year, the devastation.
So, how do we continue to be prepared for this like a
continuous state of emergency that we have across America, not
in just the Forest Service but all the agencies, federal, state
and local?
And so, as you know, all the things that come into
firefighting is the fire environment. The main things that
affect the fire environment is your fuels, your weather and
your topography.
One of those things that we can control, everybody here in
this room, is the fuels, the fuel loading that we have across
America on the landscape. There's not a lot we can do on
topography, and we've seen what we've seen with the weather
with abnormal weather events that come in. So what can we do in
this fire triangle of fuels, weather and topography?
We know right now in the Forest Service, we have 80 million
acres that are at moderate to high risk, 44 million homes
adjacent to the wildland urban interface. So we must continue
to use some of the different authorities that I'm very grateful
are coming to our agencies to continue to work on the fuel,
fuels leg of the triangle.
When we work on the fuels leg of the triangle, we will
eventually reduce exposure for our firefighters that are
working in the wildland urban interface to get in there and
attack the fires and for the public to be able to get out of
that area. There's less fuel loading and the fire can get
knocked down quicker.
In addition, I think about 86 percent of the fires, 86
percent of the fires in America are human-caused fires, 86. And
that means 86 percent of the fires could be prevented. We do
know we have more fires on the East Coast than we do on the
West Coast; a large percent of your smaller fires are on the
East Coast, big fires happen on the West Coast.
So how do we continue to work together on these fire
emergencies that we have? The different fire emergencies
include mobilizations of management of command, of aviation, of
vehicles, mechanized equipment of logistics and communication,
all across the country. We should be very proud in America. We
have one of the best systems for wildland fire response. In
fact, we go to other countries too and hear about their stories
of year-round fire in other countries and we help talk about
the system that we have in America so we can shadow that.
At the national level we work continuously with a shared
stewardship, good neighbor authorities and continue to push and
roll out the authorities that you've given us in the 2018
Omnibus bill, the '14 Farm bill, '18 Farm bill and the recent,
the Dingell Act.
In about two weeks we're having our first ever Information
Technology Day, week actually, a couple days in Boise, Idaho,
because there's overwhelming response of the public and vendors
that want to come help us have a real time common operating
picture for firefighter accountability and safety across
America.
At the local level, down at your district offices, there's
continuous pre-season fire meetings where we come together. We
look at our different authorities. We look at our agreements.
We review our fire management plans and land management plans
that we have.
We talk to the communities about if not, when, if, not if,
but when a fire is going to come into that area and how we're
going to deal with it in that community. So, we have pre-
preparedness plans.
We're working on the new Omnibus bill for mapping, for
looking at those communities at risk. A pilot study coming out
soon in Washington that we hope to work for, for looking at
those areas and planning preparedness on that.
I think the last thing I would like to say is just is we
need to continue to improve the state of the nation's forests
and national grasslands. We've got to continue to work on the
work environment in the Forest Service.
We believe that the values of duty, respect and integrity
is a must. No harassment, no discrimination at any level in the
Forest Service. And we know that we're working on some
initiatives in fire and aviation management and with the agency
but we know we have to do more for the future to help change
that situation.
And that concludes my statement. I look forward to any
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Legarza follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Legarza. We look forward to
the discussion.
Mr. Rupert, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JEFFERY RUPERT, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF WILDLAND FIRE,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Mr. Rupert. Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Manchin, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear this morning to discuss the 2019 wildfire outlook and
the Department of the Interior's Wildland Fire Management
Program.
When I spoke to you last year at this time, I said that the
year ahead would be a challenging one. 2018, in fact, proved to
be much more than that. It has been a trend now for many years
that the fire season is, in reality, a fire year with our
nation facing larger, costlier, more damaging wildfires.
We ended 2018 with the destruction of entire community in
California. We lost 85 lives and billions of dollars in
economic losses. It's hard to imagine a repeat of this
experience, but this is the potential reality that we face
again this year.
So it's difficult for me to sit here before you this
morning and say that a challenging year is ahead of us because
the wildfires that we're now experiencing are consistently more
destructive than they've ever been and, if we're lucky, this
fire year will simply be a challenging one.
So far in 2019, we're seeing fire activity across the
Pacific Northwest, California and along the southern border.
Increased potential is expected in these areas well into the
summer. In July, increased potential is expected to develop in
Washington, Idaho, Northwest Montana, along the Canadian border
and it's expected to last through September. Most of Hawaii
will also experience above normal wildfire potential through
September. And the rest of the country will see normal large
wildfire potential for most of the summer. And to be clear,
this doesn't mean that there's no risk of wildfire in other
areas. It just means that there's a normal risk of wildfire in
the other areas.
While we've yet to see the really large, costly wildfires
that our Canadian neighbors are experiencing in Canada right
now in Alberta, we can expect to see them soon.
I can tell you that we're vigilant in our readiness. We'll
be effective in our response, and we're prepared for 2019.
The success of our wildland fire management efforts is
largely dependent on the collaborative work with many partners.
For example, Executive Order 13855 and Secretarial Order 3372
on reducing wildfire risk, integrate wildland fire management
with land management objectives across Interior to set clear
direction for more collaborative landscape and community scale
land investments that reduce real fire risk. Through more
active management we can reduce the threat and negative impacts
of large and costly wildfires. Our partnerships continue to
grow. We're finding new opportunities to get work done more
effectively.
The Interior is working with the Department of Homeland
Security to invest in wildfire mitigation projects along the
southern border. These are joint leveraged efforts that help
address resource goals as well as help border patrol meet their
security objectives.
And collectively, all of this work supports a vision where
our landscapes are healthy and vigorous and wildfires help to
restore rather than destroy those landscapes. We've made
considerable progress in our efforts, but we also recognize
that substantially more needs to be done.
In 2019, we'll continue to grow our use of technology to
support these efforts and protect wildfires. Over the next
several years, we're equipping 700 engines with satellite
tracking terminals. We also see new opportunities to improve
operational efficiencies by expanding the use of unmanned
aircraft systems (UASs) for aerial ignition on both prescribed
fires and wildfires where it makes sense to do so. This has the
potential to improve the safety and reduce costs by limiting
the use of helicopters and other resources in potentially risky
and challenging situations. UASs have become a critical tool
for firefighters, for mapping, for monitoring, for detecting
hot spots, planning escape routes, helping to quickly obtain
critical information without putting lives at risk. This past
year the Department has doubled the number of UAS flights that
we made in 2017, over 1,500 flights on over 200 fires, and we
expect that to continue to grow.
As we look to 2019 and beyond, we'll continue to build new
partnerships, remain committed to active management on our
nation's public lands and continue to grow the use of
technology.
This concludes my statement. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rupert follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Rupert.
Mr. Maisch, welcome.
STATEMENT OF JOHN ``CHRIS'' MAISCH, ALASKA STATE FORESTER, ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF STATE FORESTERS
Mr. Maisch. Ah, yes, thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Murkowski and Ranking Member Manchin
and members of the Committee.
My name is Chris Maisch, State Forester and Director of the
Alaska Department of Natural Resources, Division of Forestry
and member of the National Association of State Foresters
(NASF). I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today.
NASF represents the directors of the state forestry
agencies in all 50 states, eight U.S. territories and the
District of Columbia. State Forestry agencies contribute a
significant portion of the overall wildland fire suppression
effort nationally in terms of resources, personnel, capacity
and funds. Collectively, states reported spending $1.9 billion
on fire suppression, prevention and mitigation in 2018 with
$1.4 billion spent on suppression alone.
In 2018, there were 8,080 state personnel mobilized through
the National Interagency Coordination Center. Of these state
personnel, nearly 75 percent were mobilized to federal
wildfires. State and local agencies were responsible for
responding to 78 percent of the reported wildfires in all
jurisdictions.
NASF applauds Congress' hard work and dedication to achieve
a bipartisan wildfire suppression funding solution to
permanently end borrowing against non-suppression forest
service accounts, including state and private forestry
programs.
The State Fire Assistance and the Volunteer Fire Assistance
programs are the fundamental federal programs that states and
fire departments use to increase capacity and response
capabilities. They provide crucial financial and technical
assistance to support fire management activities including
preparedness, planning, training, hazardous fuel treatments and
the purchase and maintenance of equipment.
In FY 2018, the SFA program provided over $28 million in
funding for hazardous fuel treatments benefiting over 1,000
communities in the wildland urban interface. This funding led
directly to the treatment of nearly 50,000 acres of hazardous
fuels which leveraged partner funding to treat 185,000 acres.
Combined, SFA and VFA trained over 119,000 firefighters in 2018
and assisted over 15,000 communities with increased suppression
capacity.
Attacking fires when they are small is the key to reducing
fatalities, injuries, loss of homes and cutting federal
firefighting costs.
There are two additional programs critical for supporting
the capacity of state and local agencies; the Federal Excess
Personal Property Program and the Firefighter Property Program.
These two programs are critical to rural communities and for
many small fire departments as federal excess equipment may be
the only affordable equipment available to them. Continued
federal investment is needed to assist communities at risk to
prepare for and mitigate the hazards associated with wildland
fire.
A situation that needs improvement is coordination and
planning between federal and state agencies with regards to
cross boundary fire management. Wildfires that begin on federal
lands can cross onto state and private lands. Forest Service
incidents, a cost share program, is negotiated with the state
at the time of the incident. It would be preferable to have in
place an agreement on how fire cost be allocated preseason
between jurisdictional agencies.
In Alaska, the entire state has a fire plan that identifies
fire protection levels, and if an initial attack will occur
there's also recognition of the role that fire plays in the
various ecosystems and jurisdictional agencies can allow fires
to burn as managed fires. If the agency makes this decision,
they are financially responsible for the entire cost of the
incident, even if the fire leaves agency land. And that's a key
point.
Lastly, I'd like to bring to the Committee's attention the
need to address a critical issue preventing the efficient and
the adequate national mobilization of state firefighting
resources due to a liability issue related to forest fire
compacts. Today there are eight forest fire compacts in the
United States and Canada representing almost all the U.S.
states and Canadian provinces and territories. However, only
four of these forest fire compacts contain language providing
for liability coverage for resources sent from one compact to
another. This fact hinders the movement of critically needed
resources between compacts when states are dealing with
responses to wildfires.
NASF and the Alliance for Forest Fire Compacts are urging
Congress to enact a new national legislation related to this
liability issue for resource changes between compacts. Enacting
legislation would provide the states the option to accept the
federal language without requiring them to change local/state
statutes. The provinces would use their provincial process to
accept the terms as well. This legislation would not affect
existing state legislation related to liability but provide an
option for states that need this additional protection when
sharing resources between compacts.
Thanks for your attention, and I look forward to answering
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maisch follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Chris.
Mr. Crowfoot, welcome.
STATEMENT OF HON. WADE CROWFOOT, SECRETARY, CALIFORNIA NATURAL
RESOURCES AGENCY
Mr. Crowfoot. Thank you very much for the opportunity to
testify here today.
I came directly from the Western Governors Association
meeting, and I can report that wildfire is a grave concern for
governors across the West. And your priority that you're
placing on this in the Senate and Congress is much, much
appreciated.
I lead an agency that has really pointed the spear for
forest land management and wildfire protection and it includes
CAL FIRE, the Department that includes the firefighters, the
men and women that are actually fighting these fires.
I'll start by sharing three important facts: 57 percent of
the forests in California are owned by the Federal Government;
25 million acres of our state, one quarter of our state's land
mass, is classified under very high or extreme fire threat; and
the wet winter that we experienced actually worsens fire
conditions in most of the states.
The Chairman put it right, which was 2018 was a devastating
year in California for wildfires, and we've talked about the
Camp Fire and Paradise. I'll mention that beyond the doubts and
the destruction in Paradise, 50,000 people remain displaced as
a result of that fire. So thank you very much for your
leadership and support of disaster assistance, because that is
changing lives in California.
I'll also say that the Camp Fire created the worst air
quality on the planet when it was burning. I have a four-year-
old and at the time last summer was living in the Bay Area.
Most of the time she spent outdoors was spent in an N95
certified mask with teddy bears. So literally for weeks on end,
folks were limiting time outdoors as a result of dangerous air
quality. That's the new normal that we face.
All told, 2017 and 2018, three percent of the land mass of
our state burned, over three million acres, and we expect it to
get worse.
Ranking Member Manchin was eloquent in talking about the
impact of a changing climate. We face a longer fire season,
average 86 days longer. Parts of our state are experiencing
fire risk almost throughout the year. We've suppressed wildfire
as our population has expanded resulting in overly dense
forests that are actually unnatural. And then lastly, fully one
quarter of our state, 11 million people, live in the wildland
urban interface and face this wildfire risk.
So, what are we doing about it? I'll just outline four
priorities for Governor Newsom since he took office, and we can
elaborate at question and answer if you want.
One is emergency fuel break projects around the most
vulnerable communities. Governor Newsom issued an Executive
Order in his second day in office that led to an emergency
proclamation, a proactive emergency proclamation that allowed
CAL FIRE to create fuel breaks around the 200 most vulnerable
communities in California in giving my office the ability to
waive certain environmental permitting requirements to get
those projects done quickly.
Number two is community safety, helping communities protect
themselves. So that's obviously just defensible space but
increasingly focusing on home hardening. Homes that are built
more fire resistant are demonstrating the ability to actually
remain through these fires and helping communities with
evacuation routes and safe havens when they can't evacuate.
Third priority, improving our ability to fight the fires.
So we put more funding into year-round fire engines to fight
fires, our aviation assets are being built up, and we're
focused on bringing more technology to the fire fight. Another
Executive Order that Governor Newsom issued is really waiving
contractor requirements to try to get the best technology out
there into the field this summer.
And then lastly, focused more long-term on landscape level
forest health. We are completing a programmatic environmental
review on 20 million acres in California that would essentially
create an expedited permitting checklist to let vegetation
management happen more quickly.
So we want to build on really strong partnerships with the
Federal Government, and I would identify three areas of
requests that we have today.
Number one is increased funding for vegetation management.
At a time when our fire risk is getting worse, our budget in
the region for the Forest Service is moving backward. The
Forest Service treated 310,000 acres last year in California.
It's had to reduce its target this coming year to 220,000 as a
result of reduced funding.
Second, we would like to help the Federal Government
continue to improve the tools that it's bringing to the fire
fight. Mr. Rupert mentioned the GPS on fire engines literally
saving firefighters' lives. We have that in California. Federal
agencies have not had that GPS on fire engines. Just an example
of the tools. Also, NEPA reforms that enable projects to happen
more efficiently while protecting environmental resources.
And then lastly as I close, more coordination. Very excited
that the U.S. Forest Service is pursuing state-by-state master
agreements to really evolve the partnership and bring more
innovation to the work that we do together.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crowfoot follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Crowfoot.
Thank you all for your contributions this morning.
I know that members are moving around a lot this morning.
We have a lot of different hearings going on. We actually have
several votes beginning at 11:30.
I am going to defer to you, Senator McSally, if you would
like to lead off?
Senator McSally. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Murkowski, I
really appreciate you having this hearing today. And thanks for
all of your testimony.
Arizona knows the devastation of these forest, these
wildfires, and we are coming up now on the sixth anniversary of
the Yarnell Fire that took the lives of 19 firefighters in the
Hotshots. I have been up at that site and that loss is still
very real for each of those families. So we are grateful for
all those who are out there and willing to go fight these fires
and the complexity and the danger that they pose.
On the front end, I support, you know, an ounce of
prevention, right? If we better manage the forests, then we
will have less risk to these heroes and to our communities. And
in Arizona, the 4FRI initiative is one important element of
that. We are waiting with held breath for the Phase 2 RFP to
come out. That will help manage another 500,000 acres. I know
it is not in your jurisdiction, but we had a discussion with
Chief Christiansen in the hearing in April and it is supposed
to be coming out in June. I don't know if you are aware of that
still being on track or anything you can pass on related to it,
because it is so critical for the prevention of these forest
fires and the management of our forests.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, so it's supposed to be coming out any
day. They're still working on the elements for the RFP is what
I know and when we get more information, we'll get back with
you on that.
Senator McSally. All right, well great. We will keep
looking for that.
We also have been out and visited many of the sites in our
forests and talk with a lot of the local stakeholders. One of
the real challenges, as you know, it has been like 100 years of
not managing our forests well that has gotten us to this place.
But there is so much with the low-level biomass that is
just not useable and so much of the red tape and the
regulations that really just do not allow any private company
to even think about the ability to come in and partner with us.
Related to this, that some of those things are unique in
Arizona and we have heard very specific things and we talked
about it in the April hearing about having to stamp load, small
diameter trees and the way trucks hauling low value biomass as
if the timber were large, just so many different elements of
this.
So I am not waiting any longer. We are going to introduce
legislation. I think some of this is within the jurisdiction of
the Forest Service, but we are introducing legislation today,
the Accelerating Forest Restoration Act which will direct the
Forest Service to develop alternative harvesting procedures
more suited for the low value restoration by-product that is
coming off of Arizona's forests. We really hope that we can,
again, continue to work with you.
Ms. Legarza, I would love for you to pass on our bill and
take a look at our bill and see what things you can do without
literally taking the Act of Congress that are in the spirit of
that bill. But any perspectives that you have related to the
management of the forests and the challenges of partnerships
with the private sector related to some of these, just, unique
issues that we just need to remove the red tape to make it
easier to have this happen to prevent these fires in the first
place.
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely.
So we will continue to work with you through the
legislation process. Thanks for initiating that.
And you know, I think about fire knows no boundaries, and
we should have no boundaries in the fuels treatments moving
forward and continue to use all the authorities that we have
for more enhanced active management. Reducing that fuel loading
is going to help for firefighter safety when we do get fires
into those areas and communities moving out.
Senator McSally. Absolutely. Well, I am grateful for that.
Thanks, Madam Chairwoman. I am going to yield back the rest
of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator McSally.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank all
of you.
I am going to start out with basically where my colleague
from Arizona left off in speaking about what has been done.
Let me give you some statistics and, if I am wrong on this,
Ms. Legarza or any of you all, tell me so.
From 1950 to 1990 the Forest Service cut 10 to 12 billion
board feet of lumber annually, 1950 to 1990, and fewer than
four million acres burned during that period of time. It seems
like it is fairly well-related. For each of the last couple of
years the Forest Service has only cut two to three billion
board feet annually and ten million acres have burned. In 2018,
the Forest Service sold only 3.2 billion board feet of timber.
That is one thing that just glaringly stands out. If that was
the success we had back then, why don't we do it now?
But anyway, last year over 1.8 million acres burned in
California, 410,000 burned in Alaska, only 6,000 in West
Virginia. We have a pretty robust timbering industry that, kind
of, keeps that under check. Can you explain to me if that is?
Have you all made recommendations that there should be more
control of these fires based on timbering? Or how else should
we manage it--the same as, I think, the Senator from Arizona
has suggested?
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely and thank you, Senator, for the
thoughts and questions there.
So we are seeing larger fires across the landscape more
year-round. We've seen fires start earlier in the calendar
year, they start later in the calendar year, and they burn more
acres. We know that since 1970.
I believe that the authorities that you all have been
giving us in this agency that we can continue to work across
boundaries with shared stewardship, 20-year stewardship
contracts and continue to move forward on those authorities. So
not just timber removal but hazardous fuels removal and
thinning and prescribed burning across the country. And it
takes time. It's going to take us time to get there.
We know we've just rolled out the new NEPA rule for
implementation, right? Because we're working right now on a
NEPA that's from 1992 for policies and procedures. So we almost
need a next generation NEPA. We can follow that for more time-
sensitive and science-based results to move forward to get more
work done on the ground.
Senator Manchin. Let me ask you this then.
If controlled burns, okay, the controlled burns.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah.
Senator Manchin. The Forest Service only conducts
prescribed burns on two million acres per year. But then you
have to pay to suppress wildfires on ten million acres. Why
wouldn't you do more controlled burns?
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, actually, last year we did just under
two million prescribed burn acres, more than we've done in a
long time. So we've really started to ramp that up. But
challenges with controlled burning or prescribed burning is
that there's a prescription we have to follow: the air
temperature, the moisture, the fuels, where the smoke goes
during the burn, after the burn and the backlog that we have
for some of the CEs, that we're working on.
Senator Manchin. And you are saying basically that
restriction impedes doing the controlled burns, but when there
is a forest fire, they have no control over where or when or
what conditions the fire burns--I mean, it doesn't make any
sense to me.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah.
Senator Manchin. You cannot explain this stuff to the
average person in West Virginia.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, it's tough, you know, it's continuing to
educate the public and the community on good smoke versus bad
smoke and more about it.
Senator Manchin. Well, let's get back into the finances
then.
In the 1990s we were spending $200 million per year. Now we
are spending close to $4 billion per year.
I understand that you operate fewer aircraft, own a similar
number of fire engines, but employ 50 percent more firefighters
than you did in the 1990s. However, the increase in the number
of firefighters alone does not account for the 2,000 percent of
cost increase. Explain to me where the money is going.
Ms. Legarza. So, we have, this year we're going to have up
to 32 air tankers into the system, both on our exclusive-use
and call-when-needed contracts. Those air tankers cost more
money than the air tankers did back in 1990. They're ``next
generation'' air tankers. We all know that.
Our firefighters have been remaining pretty steady at the
10,000 firefighters that we have in the Forest Service.
What we see different is the Planning Level 5, the activity
across the landscape. When we get to that Planning Level 5, the
highest level we have in America, sometimes there's 30,000
firefighters, all these agencies working on fires across the
country. Usually at that time the Forest Service has about
7,000 of those folks that are out on the landscape. The rest
remain home for initial attack.
Senator Manchin. One very quick question and anybody can
chime in.
We know the prevention works. We know it has worked in the
past, and we know that it could work. We see the results by not
doing prevention work and not being proactive. What we are
paying and the cost of human life, human assets and just
general revenue . . . . We can hopefully make that move in a
direction that would allow you to be proactive versus reactive.
What can we do more to get the attention?
Mr. Crowfoot, can we start with you and go right down the
line?
Mr. Crowfoot. Yeah, I think we have a tremendous
opportunity. I think there has been an alignment around of all
stakeholder groups from----
Senator Manchin. Are the environmental communities also
aligned? I think they do.
Mr. Crowfoot. Yes.
Senator Manchin. They understand we have to do----
Mr. Crowfoot. Yes. I mean, you know, the different
environmental groups, but there are a whole lot of
environmental conservation organizations that understand that
actually active management of the forests is essential because
these big mega fires----
Senator Manchin. I mean, timbering. So they are also okay
with timbering? Are they okay with timbering or are they
basically pushing back on timbering?
Mr. Crowfoot. Yeah, they're okay with commercial enterprise
within, well, let me not speak for them, but I think that there
is an emerging consensus that public-private partnerships in
forests are important.
Senator Manchin. Okay.
Mr. Crowfoot. And it's both commercial timber but let me
just also emphasize the point that the Senator from Arizona
made. We need to build new markets for the fuel that's not the
big trees, not the traditional timber.
Senator Manchin. We have the markets out East. You do not
have the markets in many places in the West anymore. How do we
redevelop those markets, and where do we focus?
Mr. Crowfoot. Yeah.
Senator Manchin. Because we can mulch. We use mulch. We
take all that underbrush and flammable debris and make it into
mulch out there. You don't have a demand for the mulch, right?
Mr. Crowfoot. Well, I would argue it starts with these 20-
year stewardship agreements because if we're asking the private
sector to come in and invest in capital into our forests, they
need consistent demand over time to amortize their investment.
So I actually applaud Congress and the U.S. Forest Service
for working to expand these 20-year stewardship agreements that
are, you know, essentially allow private partners to come in
and manage the landscape in exchange for 20 years of guaranteed
product.
Senator Manchin. Thank you so much.
The Chairman. I am going to continue to defer to
colleagues. Let's go to Senator Lee.
Senator Lee. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks to each of you
for being here.
Mr. Rupert, I would like to start with you.
Our discussion of wildland fires often focuses on forest
fires but rangeland fires also cause a whole lot of damage in
the West each year and that includes a lot of damage in my
State of Utah.
The Bureau of Land Management, as you know, manages over
1,400 separate grazing allotments in Utah covering 22 million
acres of land in my state. So it is a vast expanse. It affects
the lives and livelihoods of a lot of Utahans.
What can you tell me about what BLM's plans might be to
expand existing wildfire prevention strategies that are
specific to rangelands and the forest floor?
Mr. Rupert. Well, to your point--thank you for the
question.
To your point, you know, Interior, the, you know, nearly
550 million acres that we administer, a relatively small
portion of that is forest and we manage large, large areas of
rangeland, brushland, grassland, other habitat type. So as you
describe, the risk that we interact with is not just forest,
and the Great Basin is a perfect example of that.
You know, Interior and BLM, I think, from my perspective,
have made great progress, even over the last half a decade plus
in terms of focusing in and prioritizing work around fire risk
in the Great Basin. There's still a lot of work to go there.
As we're focused now on this engagement around active
management, as we're focused on implementing things like the
Executive Order, like the Secretarial Order to better integrate
our land management activities with our fire management
activities and really specifically what I think that looks like
in terms of the opportunity we have is as we're planning land
management activities, we now have put in place, you know, a
very clear expectation that those land management planning
efforts and then the activities, the management, that follow,
will be informed with a sense of high priority to reducing fire
risk as well.
And so, that takes, in terms of actual management
activities, it's everything from prescribed fire, as we've
talked a little bit about earlier, to mechanical treatment, to
where we can find public-private partnerships and we can
leverage that kind of opportunity. Absolutely, that's a
priority.
Grazing is a piece of that as well. It really is an all-of-
the-above strategy. And the progress, I think, you'll see us
making in the short-term as we better integrate that in a very
deliberate way into how we're planning to do our land
management activities, not, you know, essentially having fire
management working here and land management working there, but
actually fire and land management working in a very integrated
way.
Senator Lee. If you manage your grazing allotments
carefully and you allow appropriate grazing, that can help
suppress fires. It can help limit the fuel that a fire would
need to burn.
Mr. Rupert. Shawna shared during her opening remarks, the
fire triangle. So fire intensity, fire behaviors, actually a
fairly simple, it's a fairly, you know, sort of simple
relationship. It's those three things. It's weather,
topography, neither of those we really have, we can't control
day-to-day. And fuel. Fuel we can affect. And that's, I think,
that's a way to help explain why the focus on active
management, why the focus on reducing vegetation.
Senator Lee. There are some circumstances in which a fire,
a single fire, might affect BLM land and Forest Service land
simultaneously, correct?
Mr. Rupert. Absolutely.
Senator Lee. In that circumstance and you have from BLM,
how do you handle that?
Mr. Rupert. So well, in the case of, so, if there's a
wildfire on the ground burning--there's a long, well-
established, interoperable framework in place. And it's not
just Interior and the Forest Service. It's the federal family.
It's the state family. It's community.
When a wildfire is on the ground burning and that incident
is being responded to, the incident management framework we
have in place is actually pretty seamless. And to be honest
with you, there aren't a lot of good examples or a lot of
examples out there where we're at odds with priorities or
strategies to interact with that incident. It's actually quite
an impressive framework that we have in place with incident
management. So we don't struggle with a lot of those issues,
from my perspective.
Senator Lee. Thank you, Mr. Rupert.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Rupert. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Wyden.
Senator Wyden. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Ms. Legarza, I am heading home to rural Oregon this
weekend, and I can tell you the forests of Oregon, and
particularly in rural Oregon, are once again a tinderbox. What
we have had is we have had a heavy winter with devastating
storms, countless trees and debris down, a cool spring with a
lot of new growth, and now it is nearing 100 degrees.
This is not an abstract question. We have our forests in
our rural communities at risk as of today. We badly need good,
preventive management to make sure that this tinderbox does not
completely devastate lives and put our communities at risk of
breathing toxic wildfire smoke for weeks on end.
The reason I wanted to lay this foundation is a day ago the
Forest Service announced that it basically wants to roll back
environmental laws. They say this is going to let them get more
fuels and thinning projects done.
I think, once again, this is going to be, if it were put in
place, only a full-employment program for lawyers: lots more
litigation, less work in the woods and more fire-risk for rural
communities.
So here is my question. My home state alone has over two
million acres of thinning and prescribed fire treatment on
forest lands that have gone through environmental reviews. They
have gone through the reviews, and they are ready to go.
Why wouldn't you all focus on that which we know? It is
called shovel-ready projects. Why wouldn't you focus on that so
we could do something important to protect Oregon communities
now rather than chase one of these ideological ``pipe dreams''
of rolling back environmental laws while putting our
communities at risk? That is my question. Why would you propose
gutting the environmental laws when you are not even going
after the backlog of approved hazardous fuels and thinning
projects?
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, thank you, Senator.
So not only just Oregon, but other states have shovel-ready
projects that we need to do for either prescribed burning which
we need that window to burn or for mechanical treatments which
we need contracts and things moving forward there. So it's
almost like we need to do both. And the NEPA regulations that
we have right now from 1992----
Senator Wyden. Pardon me, ma'am. My time is short, and I
want to be respectful.
Ms. Legarza. That's fine.
Senator Wyden. These are projects that have been through
environmental review. There is not a NEPA question. They have
been through the reviews. They are ready to go.
What I am concerned about is somehow you all have made the
decision that something else seems to take precedence,
something which could, in my view, delay getting at that
backlog, because we will just see more litigation.
That has been the history of the Pacific Northwest. You try
to roll back the environmental laws and, Senator Cantwell knows
this, what you do is you basically run this lawyers' full-
employment program. You do not get real work accomplished, like
a backlog that has already gone through environmental reviews,
and our rural communities don't deserve that. They deserve that
backlog getting reduced. It should be done first. Why won't you
all do that?
Ms. Legarza. Well, we are currently working on that.
Last year, actually, in Region 6----
Senator Wyden. Currently, excuse me, currently working on
it. A day ago, you said what you are currently working on is
trying to roll back the environmental rules, not going after
the backlog. That was the statement a day ago.
Why don't you get back to me because my time is almost out,
telling me exactly how you are going to make sure you reduce
the backlog and it does not get waylaid in a whole new array
of, what I call, the litigation derby where everybody just
shows up and sues each other and you don't get the work done.
How soon can I have that? Can you get that to me within a
week--how you are going to actually get that backlog, the two
million acres that I am talking about, how you are going to get
that backlog done and get that done first before we start
chasing all these rollbacks in environmental laws?
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely----
Senator Wyden. Thank you, I appreciate it.
Ms. Legarza. You're welcome.
The Chairman. Senator Gardner.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to
the witnesses for their testimony today.
Ms. Legarza, given the wet winter that we have enjoyed in
Colorado, in fact, if you are still interested in skiing, you
can go ski this weekend again, if you would like, the cooler
spring much of the West has experienced, it seems like it would
be an ideal year to ramp up the fuels treatment projects.
How is the Forest Service approaching fuels reduction
projects right now and for the rest of the year? How does the
recent passage of the supplemental spending package with money
to pay the Forest Service back for fire borrowing affect that
approach?
Ms. Legarza. So----
Senator Gardner. And if I could just add on, you know, what
Senator Wyden was talking about, has the fire borrowing that
gobbled up other accounts affected the ability to spend money
like he is talking about on those fuel reduction projects?
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely.
So I'd love to go skiing in Colorado, anytime. I had a
house there, used to work there.
Senator Gardner. Thanks for being a taxpayer.
Ms. Legarza. Right.
So, I think, you know, what we're seeing, and we're very
grateful for all the authorities that you all have given us,
right, that we're using with the Forest Service and cross
boundaries. We have--time is against us. As I talked about in
my oral statement, we're in a continuous state of operational
emergencies because we can't get ahead of where we need to be.
I know that.
In my visits to Colorado, they're out there working hard
doing prescribed burning down in the San Juan National Forest,
up on the pike and out on the frontcountry and being as
prepared as they can with the authorities that were given us to
move forward and be prepared for the fire year.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
I would assume the fire borrowing issue was an effect and
did hurt the ability to put some of those projects into place.
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely, yeah.
Senator Gardner. And as we get that fixed and the fix takes
place, that problem will help solve itself, correct?
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, absolutely.
So thank you for getting the disaster aid passed and back
to us, and we will get back in alignment for that money to be
put back out to the field again.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
I had the opportunity to visit a timber mill in Southern
Colorado. A statement was made by the manager of the mill said
that the forest is not here to sustain the timber industry, the
timber industry is here to sustain the forest. His point being
that if they can use their work to help reduce fuels in
problematic areas, that it could save communities and save
forests for future generations. I think that is important.
It is estimated that 63 million acres of the almost 193
million acres of National Forest System are at high or very
high risk of wildfire. Last year the Forest Service performed
hazardous fuels reductions on 3.4 million acres, I believe.
Ms. Legarza. Yup.
Senator Gardner. At that pace it would take about 20
years----
Ms. Legarza. Right.
Senator Gardner. ----for us to treat those 63 million
acres, and that is not taking into account if other acreage
would be added into that 63 million acre number or not.
So are we making forward progress? Are we, kind of, running
in place? How are we doing?
Ms. Legarza. I think we have a long ways to go. And I think
that if we continue to work together with the authorities that
you've given us, we've done 3.4 million acres for hazardous
fuels is more than we've done in the past. And we are very
aggressive at the local level to work on those shovel-ready
projects for prescribed burning or mechanical that we can. But
we've got to be in it together for the long haul, and we've got
to continue to educate the American public on the challenges
that we face.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
I think it was brought up here that in California they are
making several decisions on fire breaks, community fire breaks.
We have seen in Colorado, I think it was the Buffalo Gap fire,
that the community was actually saved from devastation by a
fire break.
Mr. Legarza. Yeah.
Senator Gardner. People obviously moved to the mountains
because they want to be in the forest. They want to enjoy that.
And then you have a fire break plan that maybe the community
agrees to, and there is a lawsuit that prevents that from going
into effect.
How do we balance this? How do we get this right? How do we
make sure that we are protecting communities, preserving the
reason that that person moved to the forest? I don't know who
wants to take a crack at this. And how do we move forward on
some of those smart management decisions?
Mr. Crowfoot. Well, I'll say, Senator, first of all, fire
breaks work. We talk about the fire in Paradise. The death toll
would have been much higher had there not been vegetation
management around the main evacuation corridor and another fuel
break to protect the nearby community of Stirling City.
In California what we've done is we prioritize those fuel
breaks around the most vulnerable communities, given wildfire
risk and the demographics of those communities . . . you know,
people's age, car ownership, et cetera. And then we basically
expedited those projects and waived certain contracting and
environmental requirements.
We don't do that lightly, and then we want that to be, sort
of, surgical on the most urgent projects, but we can't go along
business as usual, particularly around, you know, protecting
these communities.
Senator Gardner. Thank you.
Mr. Rupert, you talked a little bit about the technology.
It was an honor to sponsor the Wildfire Management Technology
Advancement Act with Senator Cantwell and the work that had
been done. As of last week, I think, before this Committee we
had a group, a series of presentations from leaders in
firefighting that were showing us new technologies that they
led from nighttime firefighting to a Colorado company and
Colorado firefighters that is helping to save lives and save
our forests and communities.
Can you talk a little bit about the technologies that you
see are the most positive developments in terms of
advancements?
Mr. Rupert. Well, sure, thanks.
Yeah, well, you know, one of the things I've talked about
is, you know, there really is an abundance of technology out
there, real-time situational awareness or closer to real-time
situational awareness.
We've talked a lot about tracking assets and individual
firefighters and the safety considerations that go along with
that. Planning, a whole suite of technology that can inform all
of that. Implementing, you know, increased use of unmanned
aircraft and how that reduces risk to people. You know, again,
an abundance of opportunity there.
You know, the challenge I think we have, or the work that
we have in front of us, is really operationalizing that, and
it's integrating that into, not just the Forest Service, not
just Interior, not just the state, not just a local fire
department, but the community. It's a big community.
Shawna talked about last August over 30,000 wildland
firefighters on incidents. Only a portion of those were federal
firefighters, a portion of them were state firefighters, a
portion of them were local firefighters, contractors. So it's a
very diverse community.
It's the operationalizing of those technologies that's
really the work that we had to do, you know, developing the
standards so that we can talk to each other when we put these
things in place so that the imagery that we might take from
unmanned aircraft that would clearly help us develop a strategy
on an incident that everybody can see. That's the hard work we
have in front of us.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, and I am out of time. I
apologize.
Mr. Rupert. Thank you.
Senator Gardner. Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Senator Cantwell.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank you
and Ranking Member Manchin for holding this important hearing
and continuing the focus on these issues and for the witnesses
being here today.
I think you can hear from each of us, particularly from
Western states, how urgent we think these issues are. We are
all ready to help, and I think that we are ready to even come
up with more tools and more resources.
But a lot of our questions this morning are around what are
you doing to implement the tools that we just gave you? The
reason why members are doing that is because we have already
had fires like the Grant County fire in Washington.
I think this map depicting our state is alarming.
[Significant Wildland Fire Potential Chart shown.]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7802.027
Senator Cantwell. It is alarming because so much of the red
is in Western Washington. We are used to the challenges in
Central and Eastern Washington, but when you are talking about
the usually wet side of our state, to see fire season
predictions for the latest mapping to include so much of
Western Washington, it is concerning.
So we want every resource that we can get. We want this to
be the same as any disaster that you would be preparing for
whether it is a hurricane in the South or a storm off our East
Coast. We view the fire season as a major storm impacting us.
One of the first questions I have, Director Legarza, is we
are seeing other people implementing these GPS systems as it
relates to resources, like fire engines, and moving forward. I
know that BLM has now agreed to doing this immediately. What
can we do to get the Forest Service to immediately implement
that same GPS system so we know the location of resources and
assets and, hopefully, expand the technology to our
firefighters as well so we can protect them this season?
Ms. Legarza. Thank you, Senator.
So what we're doing in the Forest Service, actually
interagency at the National Interagency Fire Centers in just a
couple weeks, we're having a three-day industry technology day
to find out what is out there and then together we're going to
figure out what do we need interagency, not just the Forest
Service, but with the BLM and the states, and then put together
a request for information and RFP proposal and find out how
much all that costs so that we can all talk together and be
integrated through time.
Senator Cantwell. Well, Mr. Rupert's agency, the Department
of the Interior, and several of us went through this discussion
a year or so ago with the USDA Secretary. Not to put you in a
particularly tough spot, but we did go down to USDA
headquarters a year or two years ago now, with the Secretaries
and said, the federal agencies will adopt the same technology--
quickly. These GPS trackers are what BLM already has
implemented in their management of fire. They also have drones
and real-time information, and the Secretaries signed an MOU to
implement that very technology consistently across the
Departments.
Now we are here today. BLM has already taken the technology
legislation that my colleague from Colorado and I got enacted.
It basically said you have a year to implement it. However,
with the fire season upon us, and the fact that BLM has
implemented this right away, why can't we get the Forest
Service to move faster or at least do the same?
Ms. Legarza. Well, we're putting a strategy together to do
that.
With regards to the UAS, we've been very proactive with the
BLM and DOI and other state agencies.
On the Klondike fire last year in Oregon, the State of
Alaska brought their incident management team down and we asked
them to do a video on what they were doing for unmanned aerial
surveillance for burning out, location of spot fires and
mapping. Same thing on the Tonto fire in Arizona this year
using UAS on Forest Service lands working together with DOI and
OAS.
Senator Cantwell. Can we get either you and Mr. Rupert, or
just you, Director Legarza, to meet to discuss program
improvements now that we know that our satellite systems can
give us spot fire information?
Ms. Legarza. Yup.
Senator Cantwell. Are we using that on a daily basis for
hasty response? I mean, it is almost minute-by-minute
information about where a fire start is. Are we incorporating
that satellite information into a real-time response?
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, that's our goal. Our goal is to get a
real-time common operating pictures. And we're working toward
that and would be happy to meet with you and have some more
discussions on real-time ``common operating picture''
technology moving forward.
Senator Cantwell. I have met with Forest Service Chief
Christensen, who I have a lot of respect for, on this.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah.
Senator Cantwell. And I get that there are a lot of new
tools.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah.
Senator Cantwell. I guess what we are saying is pick the
most urgent, readily available ones that you can implement
today. Do not study this for an entire year because, as my
colleague from West Virginia said, this is costing us so much
money.
I am happy to reintroduce my language to change the
prescriptive burn season to an earlier date. I think this
notion that somehow working with agencies where we could not
get this prescribed burn window moved to more flexible times
because the public might be upset about smoke is not right. I
guarantee you the people of the Northwest are very upset about
smoke, and they want us to do something. So having a smoky
August instead of moving the prescribed burn to a March or
April timeframe and getting more of it done, particularly those
that are already done NEPA review.
And I just want to say--I know my time is expired--Mr.
Crowfoot, thank you for talking about the right way of using a
categorical exemption. We do not need a broad, like let's
bulldoze everything CE because we have good ones, and we think
we can use this opportunity to use those.
The reason I say that is because we are spending millions
of dollars on stream restoration for salmon. So we don't want
to see that disturbed by somebody who comes in without public
input and says, okay, let's just take out this 4,200 acres
right here. We want the discussion to be well-meaning, and we
are willing to continue to work with people on more
flexibility. We have just got to get it the right way instead
of just, again, bulldozing our way into it.
Let us get you the tools. Let us get you the resources. You
have our attention, and you are going to continue to have our
attention, because it is such a big issue and the climate of
hotter, drier conditions is going to continue to challenge us.
Thank you so much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Senator Barrasso.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Madam Chairman, last June, as you do nearly every year, you
convened a hearing on the wildfire outlook for 2018, and in the
last 12 months the country has experienced truly catastrophic
fires.
In my home State of Wyoming the Roosevelt fire destroyed 55
homes and forever changed the lives of the folks who evacuated
just in time. Fires in California killed dozens, displaced
thousands of families, destroyed whole communities.
Every year in this hearing we talk about wildfire potential
for the year ahead, and I know I am not alone when I say that I
hope this coming year is nothing like the last.
Madam Chairman, before today this Committee had held a
number of energy policy hearings over the last several months
ranging from renewable energy efficiency to opportunities to
improve carbon capture. As we have those important discussions,
we need to remember to include trees and forests. Healthy,
well-managed forests are critical for wildlife habitat and for
healthy watersheds. Unhealthy forests are more prone to insect
and disease infestation and catastrophic wildfire.
With proactive management and coordinated restoration, I
believe we can begin to restore a natural fire cycle across the
forest landscape. Forests can be carbon sources through trees
and as trees die and decay in place or they can be carbon
sinks, pulling carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to improve
air quality. I think we have an opportunity to stem the
deforestation of millions of acres across our federal forests
that occur as a result of beetle kill in unmanaged tree stands
and catastrophic wildfire. It is going to continue to be a team
effort, requiring that effort, requiring coordination among
many skilled partners like we have in terms of the witnesses
today.
Director Legarza, what I would like to ask is, President
Trump issued an Executive Order in December 2018. The Order
directed the Forest Service and the Department of the Interior
to coordinate on a number of activities to increase treated
acres on federal land and reduce the risk of catastrophic
wildfire. In your testimony you reiterate the Order's
instruction for the Forest Service to develop performance
metrics to get a better picture of the success of those fuel
reduction efforts. Can you talk a little bit about what those
metrics look like?
Ms. Legarza. Thank you, Senator, for your question.
The actual performance metrics fire land in a different
programmatic area than what I oversee so I'm not able to give
you a truthful answer to that, but we'd be happy to find that
when I get back to the agency and have somebody get that
information to you.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you very much.
Ms. Legarza. You're welcome.
Senator Barrasso. It is so interesting as you try to go
through that that you would think we would all want to know
what those metrics are. You would think the country would want
to know, that the whole department would want to know. I mean,
it is just like when you hear that this is siloed over here and
this is siloed over here and we are trying to direct the whole
issue. It is just concerning.
Mr. Maisch, I want to thank you for making the trip today.
There is no question Alaska faces unique challenges in forest
management, especially related to coordination across
jurisdictional boundaries. In Wyoming we face this as well.
Alaska has one whole Forest Service region for Alaska. We are
split into two different regions, Region 2 and Region 4.
Given that the federal and state agency have the same
geographic boundaries to manage within the State of Alaska, can
you give us some advice on specific states--steps to improve
coordinating and communicating that could maybe be applied to
other Forest Service regions that have multiple states to have
to work with?
Mr. Maisch. Yeah, I can try and do that.
Of course, we are very fortunate as Region 10 in our state
aligned very well, perfectly, actually, maybe not always
perfectly on some of our policy goals but certainly
communication is a big part and up-front communication is very
important.
Our state, we have a state-wide forest management plan that
spells out, kind of, the rules of operation so each of the
parties know how to interact with each other during fire
season.
We have a pre-imposed fire season meeting that occurs with
all the suppression agencies. So I'd recommend that in your
jurisdiction for your state. If that doesn't occur, we call it
a spring operations meeting and then a fall fire review which
is, kind of, an after action review of the season, what worked,
what didn't work, that gives you opportunity to adapt and
correct things as you learn from mistakes that maybe were made
during the season. So that's probably one of the biggest things
is that communication piece and that pre-planning piece. Really
form the relationships before you have an incident because when
you have an incident, it's too late to form a relationship.
Senator Barrasso. Mr. Crowfoot, if I could. I appreciate
the attention your governor has paid to reducing hazardous
fuels and with them, the risk of catastrophic wildfire.
In your written testimony you discuss 35 critical fire
break projects and identify recommendations for immediate
treatment. Of these projects, I think it was a 14-mile-long
fire break to protect a series of communities in the wildland
urban interface in the East Bay area. Of these 35 projects, how
many of them involve land managed by a federal agency as
opposed to just state and local?
Mr. Crowfoot. Well, several, and I couldn't put a number on
it, but there are several. And there's actually been great
progress made in avoiding silos that prevent actually getting
the work done.
So the Good Neighbor Authority is an important tool that we
use in California with the Forest Service, and it lets us do
work on the federal lands from the state agencies and vice
versa. Over half of the funding that we're spending on
vegetation management is actually spent on federal lands
because what we realized is the fire doesn't respect the
jurisdictional boundaries. So we're working closely with the
Forest Service on those emergency projects.
Senator Barrasso. And you are finding it good in terms of
Region 5 and the Forest Service officials to maintain the
compliance with federal law, even with specifics of NEPA?
Mr. Crowfoot. Yes. State law can't, obviously, waive NEPA
and so, what we are waiving for those emergency projects is our
California Environmental Quality Act. And so, I should make
sure to mention that we are not able to streamline the federal
NEPA. But we're working closely with the Forest Service on
these projects. A lot of projects that we're doing, obviously
on an emergency basis, are already cleared for NEPA.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair and
the Ranking Member for this important discussion today.
Let me bring it back to rangeland fires, similar to what
Senator Lee was talking about.
My understanding is that the federal wildfire funding has
primarily focused on forest land and not rangeland fires,
despite the fact, and I think Director Rupert, you have
mentioned this, that the Great Basin Range has led the nation
in acres burned for the second year in a row, totaling 2.1
million acres burned in 2018. That is 233 percent above its
ten-year average.
Furthermore, nearly 75 percent of all acres burned in the
West during the past two decades were on rangelands, not
forest. That is hundreds of thousands of acres. That is home to
rural ranching communities, sage grouse. They are going up in
flames.
I am curious, and I am going to pose this to both
directors. Do you think we need to create a more balanced
approach to fighting wildfires on all federal lands? And how
will we do that? Ms. Legarza, I am going to pull you into this
because I know you have a background in living in Elko, Nevada,
Carson City as well, and working for both federal agencies. So
I am curious. Let me start with you, Director.
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely. Thank you for the question.
I think a lot of the things that we're doing right now--
we're looking at cross boundary work on lands with the fire
activity as meeting ahead of time and looking at----
Senator Cortez Masto. When you say cross boundaries, do you
mean you are working with the BLM?
Ms. Legarza. BLM, absolutely, absolutely.
Senator Cortez Masto. And you guys are coordinating now for
the first time?
Ms. Legarza. Well, no. We have been throughout my career.
Senator Cortez Masto. Okay.
Ms. Legarza. I can remember as a District Fire Management
Officer we would have those pre-season meetings like Chris
talked about and we would look at the landscape and talk about
if we get a fire on to this area how we're going to manage it
on the BLM's lands or the Forest Service lands or even some
state lands. So it's definitely increased over time more than
it was 30 years ago. So there's more of those up-front
conversations that are happening.
Mr. Rupert. Just to reinforce, I mean, I think that that
collaboration is absolutely there. I mean, we have employees
that are co-located in the same office.
Senator Cortez Masto. Let me stop you there. I appreciate
the collaboration. I am talking about the federal funding. Do
we need to be redirecting more of the federal funding to
rangeland fire since there seems to be predominantly more of
those or is there a reason why and it may be because of the
topography? I don't know, you tell me. Are we missing out here
when it comes to addressing the funding that is necessary when
it comes to rangeland fires?
Mr. Rupert. So the big fire appropriation that comes in,
part of that appropriation goes to Forest Service, part of that
appropriation comes to Interior. Once it gets to Interior, we
allocate it to the Interior land management bureaus.
The suppression part of that appropriation, so the big pot
of money that we use to respond to these big fires, is
essentially agency neutral. That money, that suppression
account essentially sits there and is used when it's needed.
And so, when there's a fire on federal jurisdiction and we
respond to it, we have a suppression activity in place.
Regardless of which agency, we're drawing from, essentially,
the same suppression account.
And then even when we bring, when our partners are
assisting, state, local and others, that incident, again, you
know, I mentioned earlier, we have this incident management
framework where we all come in and very interoperable. We're
all----
Senator Cortez Masto. Yes, we will get to that and I
appreciate that. I only have so much time, so I appreciate that
because I do want to get into that.
I do want to talk to you further about the funding, because
I don't think that we should all be competing. I think there
should be enough resources for everyone when it comes to
wildfires whether they are on forest or rangeland.
But let me talk about the incident command because this is
another concern of mine. I spent a number of years with our
Cattlemen's Association in Northern Nevada. It was at Maggie
Creek Ranch. We were talking about a number of issues. But one
of the concerns that I am hearing from our local permittees, as
well as our Cattlemen's Association, everyone else, is that
there is a lack of the federal agencies talking to the
permittees from the very beginning. There is a lack of
coordination, so much so that some of our ranchers, our local
fire departments, our local government resources are not being
utilized in this discussion, particularly when it comes to an
incident command and something that is happening. When they can
spot a fire immediately because it is their land and they can't
take action right away, and then when the incident command
steps up, there is sometimes misinformation, miscoordination
and we are not doing what we should be doing to really tackle
the fire and work with all the state/local folks.
So here is what I am going to ask because I am running out
of time. I would love to have both of your commitment that you
are willing to work with me to address this issue in the State
of Nevada as I pull a roundtable to get discussions together
with all of the stakeholders to see how we can do a better job
when we set up an incident command and we are working together
to address wildfire in the State of Nevada. Can I get a yes
from both of you?
Mr. Rupert. Absolutely, easiest question of the day,
absolutely.
Senator Cortez Masto. Great.
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely, yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. I know my time is up. Thank you so
much.
I am going to submit the rest of my questions for the
record.
But let me just say one final thing. For purposes of
California, thank you for what you are doing. I know there is
discussion right now. You are working with the National Guard
to help you with drones and identifying wildfires. We are
working together with California at the Tahoe Summit regularly,
and we have the fire cameras around Tahoe to identify fires
early on with the Forest Service.
So there is new technology that is out there. It is being
utilized, and I look forward to working with you in the future
on all of that as well.
Thank you.
The Chairman. I actually saw those cameras when we were in
Tahoe last year. It was really interesting to see the
technologies that are out there.
Senator Daines.
Senator Daines. Thank you, Chair Murkowski.
I want to start, first of all, with discussing the recent
misguided efforts to close or transfer Job Corps Civilian
Conservation Centers, or the CCCs, currently operated by the
Forest Service. CCCs, like the Anaconda and Trapper Creek in
Montana, are critical partners in fighting catastrophic
wildfire. They help create high-paying jobs. They support our
communities. They train wildland firefighters and their
necessary support staff. In fact, some of Montana's foresters
hire up to 50 Job Corps students to assist in these efforts,
and the Montana CCCs provide tens of thousands of man hours
fighting wildfires. I cannot stress enough the importance of
the Anaconda and the Trapper Creek Centers in Montana and what
they mean for our families and our communities supporting them,
in places like Anaconda, Montana.
Bill Everett, the CEO of Anaconda Deer Lodge County
Operations there in the county, they were devastated when they
heard the news about the proposed shutdown of Anaconda. This
particular Job Corps was one of the top ten percent in the
country in terms of the metrics of outcomes that are scored,
yet it was announced it was going to be closed.
So I picked up the phone on June 1st. It was a Saturday
afternoon. My wife and my daughter were standing there beside
me, and I called President Trump. I talked to him directly
about this, and I was most pleased to see him listen to what I
had to say and to hear him agree to keep the Anaconda Job Corps
site open and designated as a CCC. I also received commitments
from Secretary Acosta and Secretary Perdue, and I want to thank
them for listening to the voices of the people of Montana.
It was an honor to update the Anaconda community following
that call, letting them know the great news. It was emotional.
There were tears shed of happiness, and that is what we are
here for at the end of the day, truly, to fight on behalf of
our communities.
And it ties directly to the future of ensuring that we have
a job force ready and prepared with the skills necessary to
deal with the 21st century challenges, particularly as it
relates to wildfires in places like Montana.
I also helped introduce the bipartisan Job Corps Protection
Act to block the closure and transfer of all these Job Corps
CCC centers in Montana and across the nation. I think it is a
mistake. Fighting wildfires requires partnerships like we have
with our Job Corps and we must see them continue at a time when
the severity of our wildfires are getting greater. This is the
wrong time to take these actions here on these CCCs. I am going
to continue to fight until we get this done.
Now it is time to turn to another important aspect of
protecting our communities from catastrophic wildfire, and that
is more active management.
Director Legarza, I applaud your agency for today launching
your proposed revisions to NEPA regs. Far too long the red tape
in the NEPA process has held up important projects on the
ground at a cost to the environment, at a cost to our
watersheds, at a cost to wildlife habitat, at a cost to jobs.
We need to get this environmental review done in the right way
so that work can get done on the ground to improve forest
health.
Secretary Crowfoot, last year's Camp Fire and Carr Fire in
California were truly devastating. They were heartbreaking. We
must do everything possible to prevent similar tragedies in the
future.
I applaud both actions that California has taken to
expedite forest management to reduce the risk of catastrophic
wildfires. And as you highlight in your testimony, California
has gone so far as to waive time-consuming environmental
reviews to increase forest management and to protect some 200
California communities.
In your testimony, you touched on the importance of fuel
breaks, talking about how vegetation along Skyway Road in
Paradise kept flames off the road, saving lives, allowing
people to flee and escape safely.
Furthermore, we know that nearly 95 percent, let me say
that again, 95 percent of human-caused fires start within one
half mile of roads. That is a very compelling stat.
My question is this. In addition to providing robust
funding for hazardous fuels reduction, what else can Congress
do to rapidly accelerate management and reduce immediate and
long-term wildfire risk on national forests, especially these
fuel breaks along roads?
Mr. Crowfoot. Well, first of all, I would underscore and
agree with the priority that we need to provide to these fuel
breaks on each side of these evacuation corridors and
specifically transportation corridors. My recommendation would
be to encourage the federal agencies to use an existing
categorical exemption, as I understand it, that actually allows
for fuels management along transportation corridors.
I'm not an expert on the technical ins and outs of that,
but as I understand it, we have tools that we are working with
the U.S. Forest Service on right now to actually clear
transportation corridors in California.
Senator Daines. Yes, would you be open to looking at
providing some additional authorities for fuel breaks, post-
fire restoration?
Mr. Crowfoot. As far as we're concerned, this is an all-of-
the-above approach and we need to consider any ideas that get
proposed. So we certainly look forward to talking to your
office more about that.
Senator Daines. Great, thank you.
And you mentioned the work that California is doing with
the Forest Service through the Good Neighbor Authority and the
Shared Stewardship Initiative.
Could you discuss briefly, and I am out of time here, so
you will have to----
Mr. Crowfoot. Yeah.
Senator Daines. You have been brief. I have not.
But can you discuss your coordination with federal agencies
and why cross boundary management across large landscapes is so
critical?
Mr. Crowfoot. Yeah, well, I think my colleagues testifying
talked about the importance of coordination during the
firefight, and I think that's really strong.
I think what we're working to strengthen is the
coordination and innovation among our jurisdictions to prevent
or to manage forests to prevent fires.
I'm very excited that the U.S. Forest Service is, has
essentially reached out to each state to modernize its
agreement, its working relationship with each state through,
essentially, like a master stewardship agreement.
We, in California, are working in real time with our Region
5 U.S. Forest Service to really talk about what else we should
be doing together. And I'm glad to report that there is shared
commitment, certainly in California on behalf of our Governor,
but I would imagine other states with the U.S. Forest Service.
Senator Daines. And what we are seeing, last statement,
Chair Murkowski, is this, is that you know, California was the
latest example of what happens when we don't manage our
forests, when these catastrophic wildfires strike. We saw this
in Montana two years ago, 1.4 million acres.
And it comes down to this fundamental truth. Either we are
going to manage our forests or our forests are going to manage
us. I applaud the efforts going on right now in California to
try to get back on top of this challenge we face here in more
effectively managing our forests because there are tremendous
environmental benefits by more effectively managing our
forests.
Mr. Crowfoot. We agree.
Senator Daines. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator. Well said. I think that
we have learned this time and time again, but it does seem that
there is a changed environment right now.
We have several votes that have just started, but I have
deferred to my colleagues because I thought it was important
that they have an opportunity to raise the issues that are very
local to their states.
Ms. Legarza, I want to ask about the memo that went out
last month to all regional supervisors announcing the reduction
in hazardous fuel targets. In that memo, you basically say that
there has been a slippage due to the lapse in appropriations
combined with the fire borrowing we saw during 2018. We all
know fire borrowing has been this perpetual problem and are
pleased that we are going to get that, ultimately, behind us.
I guess the question to you is, where are we now then? We
are on the other side of the shutdown. We are, hopefully, on
the good side of trying to get ourselves on track with regards
to the fire borrowing. But I guess I need to know for purposes
of this year whether or not you feel like you are getting on
track, on target with the hazard fuel targets that you have
set. Are we going to meet them for FY 2019 based on this
particular memo that you just sent out?
Ms. Legarza. Well, thank you, Madam Chairman.
So as far as hazardous fuels, what we saw this past fiscal
year in the fall and into the wintertime for work on the
landscape was we had wetter than normal conditions in part of
Florida and the southeast and even in parts of central of
America. So we got a little behind not having the prescription,
remember I always go back to the prescription if we're doing a
prescribed fire. You have to have certain weather for the
prescribed fire.
Mother Nature was good for us for not having wildfires on
Christmas, but at that same time we were a little behind to get
some of that burning done in the southeast.
Overall, right now, I'm feeling pretty confident on
hazardous fuel targets for mechanical treatment and prescribed
fire. The timber targets is outside my program of work, so we
can get back to you on that state of timber.
The Chairman. Okay.
And then on the fire fix and recognizing that that does not
go into place until the FY20 approps cycle. Last year you had
to borrow, the Forest Service had to borrow $720 million from
non-fire accounts to pay for the suppression costs. It was
mentioned, I think it was Senator Gardner that brought this up.
It might have been Senator Wyden. But with the disaster
supplemental that we signed into law, the Forest Service has
been reimbursed for those transfers. But I understand that
Forest Service has notified Congress that you intend to
temporarily retain these funds as a contingency in case
suppression costs exceed your budget this year, rather than
repay the non-fire program account.
There are a lot of management issues that are going on
here, but there is a lot of concern from folks about well, wait
a minute, we just give you, kind of, the checkbook and that
makes folks a little bit nervous because the funds are not
unlimited here.
What can you speak to in terms of actions that the Forest
Service is taking to ensure that these dollars are going to be
spent out wisely? Do you have a cost containment strategy that
you can share with us? And just how are you going to be
approaching that for this year before the fire fix fully kicks
in?
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, you bet.
So thank you to Congress to getting the disaster aid
package passed.
The Chairman. It was important.
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely.
Of that $720 million, there was $60 million of that was for
the repurposing of an air tanker for aviation modernization and
strategy, information technology. And so, those projects that
we can implement in the field in that area, we're sending the
money out there so they can work on the different air tanker
bases in Colorado Springs, we have one in Missoula, one in
Ready, California, the cameras in Tahoe Basin. So where we know
that we can send that money back out to the field to implement
it, we are doing it.
In talking to my budget shop, the prediction for what we
could spend on wildland fire this year could mean there might
be a potential to transfer. So guidance from the budget
directed area is to hold on to some of that, that we can't
initially institute into the field. And I know there could be
different K-V monies and different things that is outside of my
program of work that they're doing.
But our budget area is really diving in to look into what
we can send out, we will send out and implement. That that we
can't, we won't.
The Chairman. Well, you raised the issue of the air tankers
and we all know that the aerial firefighting really eats up a
big chunk of the suppression costs. In fact, well, this is
relatively old, a 2009 report from GAO suggests that aviation
activities claim up to one third of all federal firefighting
expenditures. That is probably even higher today. So I think we
all want to make sure that, again, these monies are being spent
wisely. My understanding is that timing is really everything
when it comes to effectiveness in aircraft being used in
different firefighting scenarios.
Can you give me the assurance, again here, that we are not
just putting aircraft up in the air because we have the
aircraft, but we are doing so in a manner that is really being
efficient and effective on these fires?
Ms. Legarza. Oh, absolutely.
The Chairman. I don't think anyone has really raised the
issue of the aviation and the aerial firefighting issues, but
it is a significant part of what goes on with the effort.
Ms. Legarza. Oh, absolutely.
So some of the priorities we had when I got this position
was fiscal integrity and no open checkbook and look at the cost
recovery, full cost recovery, look at our different agreements,
where can we become more efficient and knowing that we have
certain aviation that goes on our exclusive-use and then
critically working through those call-when-needed, when we need
them, working to the different geographical areas and down to
the local districts on the drawdown levels. When we bring them
on, we bring off of surge capacity. When we don't need them, we
release them. So really been ramping that up the last couple
years, trying to.
The Chairman. I have a few more questions that I want to
ask before we have to run off to the vote. But let me turn
quickly to Senator Hoeven.
Senator Hoeven. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Legarza and, I guess, Mr. Rupert both, talk a little
bit about use of UAS technology. We have one of the test sites
in Grand Forks, North Dakota, and tremendous partnership. They
have done a lot, for example, on flooding in the river valley
where we have used unmanned aircraft and clearly have the
ability to bring that expertise to the firefighting effort as
well. So talk about where you are using unmanned aerial
systems, where we can expand on that and maybe how we can
develop some partnerships with our test site?
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely. I'll go first then turn it to my
friend here, Jeff.
So I can remember just five or six years ago when I was in
California it was if you fly, we can't on the drone activities.
And since those five years, it's gone off the chart on how we
can use technologies on wildland fires.
Senator Hoeven. Right.
Ms. Legarza. They slashed on the Klondike fire in Oregon I
talked about earlier for doing back-burning operations for
surveillance, for mapping, also on the Tonto fires in Arizona,
already this year for doing some back-burning and mapping and
continuing to have that, not just for wildland fire, but for
different uses across the Federal Government and the Forest
Service.
We have a great partnership with DOI and BLM and knowing
that we need to continue to advance that technology and for
firefighter safety and less exposure for our pilots and our
firefighters.
We lost a firefighter early this year that was from
California doing prescribed burning in Texas on a low and slow
doing ping pong burning operations because when you're low and
slow and something goes bad there's not a lot of time to
recover.
So we're working really hard, Alaska and Florida, at DOI,
to see how we can enhance technology to reduce exposure for
firefighters and pilots moving into the future.
Mr. Rupert. Yeah, so just building off that, maybe I'll
talk just a little bit about, you know, the progress that we
have made.
So 2017 I think we had something like 700 flights, UAS
flights, over fire. Last year, that was up over 15,050 plus
flights, 200 fires. So we're seeing pretty dramatic increased
use of UAS.
I mean, I've shared with, you know, different folks, you
know, from my perspective, I feel like last year we really
actually implemented UAS in fires. I think it's there to stay.
I think, you know, undoubtedly, we'll continue to see more
use and more reliance on, you know, those technologies and
those capacities. I think now that we're here we're going to
have to start to get strategic in terms of okay, how do we
start to factor that in, to how we think about, you know, or
financing incidents in the use of the capacities where we use
contracts. We have contracts in place right now for UAS. It's a
huge help on incidents. We're training pilots in federal
agencies. The states are doing the same thing.
I think as it is now becoming really, sort of, a part of
how we're doing fire management, you know, we're just going to
have to build that into, sort of, strategically all of the
coordination we do together and how we're going to balance that
use and ultimately pay for it.
Senator Hoeven. Do you have points of contact at DOI and
Forest Service, BLM and so forth that we could get from you to
work with you on that?
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely, yes.
Senator Hoeven. Okay.
Ms. Legarza. We have a person dedicated solely for that in
the Forest Service.
Senator Hoeven. Okay, so I will have my staff reach out to
you both and get those points of contact.
Thank you.
The other question for Ms. Legarza, and we've talked about
it before, but for any controlled burns done on the grasslands,
it is very important that you talk to our ranchers, coordinate
with the ranchers and work with the Grazing Associations. And
you will commit to do that?
Ms. Legarza. Oh, absolutely, yes.
Senator Hoeven. Good.
Then in the Farm bill we included a Good Neighbor Authority
for tribes and counties that--it is essentially a pilot program
to let them do fuel management and so forth. Can you tell me
what the status is on implementing that pilot program?
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, so what I know about the Good Neighbor
Authority, Senator, is we have about 200 of those Good Neighbor
Authority agreements completed across the nation in 37
different states. And very excited about the new authorities
with not only the states, but tribes, yeah, that's right.
Senator Hoeven. Tribes, yes, that is the new development
that we included in the Farm bill was the tribes' piece.
Ms. Legarza. Absolutely.
Senator Hoeven. I know they are anxious to work with you on
it.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah, yes. And if there's anything more you
need, let me know and we can get that.
Senator Hoeven. No, I am glad to hear you like the program,
you are committed to working with it and now it will include
tribes too.
Ms. Legarza. Yeah.
Senator Hoeven. So, thank you.
Yes, sir?
Mr. Maisch. Yeah, if I could add just a little bit to that.
Through NASF we have a Tribal Relations Committee so we,
the Intertribal Timber Council, you may be familiar with. We've
been talking with them about this authority and sharing master
agreement templates and specific information that are lessons
learned, the states have learned in implementing those
authorities. So we actually have some dialogue going peer-to-
peer with that organization and the state foresters.
Senator Hoeven. Good.
Yes, I appreciate that, thank you. And that is exactly what
we intended, so thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
I am going to end the hearing. I made a big fuss yesterday
about people being on time for votes and I do not want to be
the one that is shamed this morning. I thank each of you.
I want to just ask Chris, do you know if the $2 million for
the spruce bark beetle funding has been transferred to the
state yet? Are we getting going with that?
Mr. Maisch. Yeah, it is. And we've actually got some
projects that have already been underway up in one of the state
parks where we've been following hazard trees as part of a fuel
reduction and safety issue.
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Maisch. And other projects will be hitting the ground
shortly, so.
The Chairman. Good. I would love to have further discussion
with you while you are here. I know that we will get an update
from you. I thank you for making the trip out.
And for you, Mr. Crowfoot, I am very interested to hear how
aggressive California is in these efforts. We appreciate it.
I met just yesterday with some folks from PG&E that
recognize that part of the big challenge out there in
California was the challenges that they face in vegetation
management around utility lines. Nobody wants to lose their
trees, but nobody wants to lose their life either when we have
these horrendous fires coming through.
This is about management, and management sometimes means
making some decisions that people would rather not, but it is
health safety.
Things are changing out there, and we have to work to
address this at all different levels. I appreciate the levels
that you all bring to us.
We have a lot of work to do here on these issues around the
country. We look at these maps and we know that next year
Alaska could be red. West Virginia could be red, for that
matter.
So know that we look forward to working with you, and we
thank you for this annual update.
With that, the Committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:48 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]