- [H.A.S.C. No. 116-50] THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ORGANIC INDUSTRIAL BASE: CHALLENGES, SOLUTIONS, AND READINESS IMPACTS
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 116-50]
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ORGANIC
INDUSTRIAL BASE: CHALLENGES,
SOLUTIONS, AND READINESS IMPACTS
__________
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
NOVEMBER 21, 2019
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-807
WASHINGTON : 2020
SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS
JOHN GARAMENDI, California, Chairman
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
ANDY KIM, New Jersey, Vice Chair
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
KENDRA S. HORN, Oklahoma
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
ROB BISHOP, Utah
JASON CROW, Colorado
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
XOCHITL TORRES SMALL, New Mexico
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
DEBRA A. HAALAND, New Mexico
Brian Greer, Professional Staff Member
John Muller, Professional Staff Member
Sean Falvey, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................
1
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................
2
WITNESSES
Gamble, LTG Duane A., USA, Deputy Chief of Staff, Department of
the Army.......................................................
4
Kirkland, Lt Gen Donald E., USAF, Commander, Air Force
Sustainment Center, Air Force Materiel Command, Department of
the Air Force..................................................
8
Moore, VADM Thomas J., USN, Commander, Naval Sea Systems Command,
Department of the Navy.........................................
5
Peters, VADM G. Dean, USN, Commander, Naval Air Systems Command,
Department of the Navy.........................................
7
Shrader, MajGen Joseph F., USMC, Commanding General, Marine Corps
Logistics Command, Headquarters Marine Corps...................
9
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Gamble, LTG Duane A..........................................
37
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................
33
Kirkland, Lt Gen Donald E....................................
52
Lamborn, Hon. Doug...........................................
35
Moore, VADM Thomas J., joint with VADM G. Dean Peters........
43
Shrader, MajGen Joseph F.....................................
63
Documents Submitted for the Record:
[There were no Documents submitted.]
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
Mr. Scott....................................................
71
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ORGANIC
INDUSTRIAL BASE: CHALLENGES, SOLUTIONS, AND READINESS IMPACTS
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Thursday, November 21, 2019.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Garamendi
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS
Mr. Garamendi. Good morning. I would like to welcome
everyone to this hearing of the subcommittee on the Department
of Defense organic industrial base.
The Department of Defense organic industrial base,
comprised of depots, arsenals, and shipyards, is a critical
part of our national security apparatus. Its mission is to
maintain, reset, and repair the platforms, equipment, and
supplies of our Armed Forces. The organic industrial base must
be postured to support peacetime requirements while also being
agile enough to respond during a mobilization, a contingency,
or an emergency.
Both of these requirements are at the crux of readiness and
therefore requiring the oversight of this subcommittee. As the
Department of Defense acquires new planes, ships, and vehicles,
and weapons systems, and implements the National Defense
Strategy, it cannot ignore the operation and support portion of
the acquisition cycle and must plan strategically for the
future.
This subcommittee is interested in hearing from our
witnesses how the services plan to modernize the organic
industrial base to ensure that it will continue to be postured
to maintain these modernized systems. It is not particularly
useful to go buy new stuff and forget to maintain it into the
future.
If the organic industrial base cannot quickly repair
weapons systems as they require maintenance, then we are doing
a disservice to ourselves and to this nation. Furthermore, as
we find new platforms and field new platforms, insufficient
planning for operation, maintenance, and repair of these
platforms is completely unacceptable.
Regarding our organic industrial base infrastructure, it is
widely known that the facilities and the equipment in the
industrial base is aging and, in certain locations, is in poor
or failing conditions. This situation does not help the
maintainers if they are required to work in a dilapidated
building with equipment made many decades ago. With that in
mind, we must have a plan to prioritize the facilities, the
sustainment, restoration, and modernization accounts that
support the organic industrial base. And be sure that we will
be watching for that and for those accounts.
To that end, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
on their plans to modernize the infrastructure, the capital
equipment of the shipyards, the arsenals, and the depots. In
addition to the facilities and equipment, we cannot and will
not ignore the essential organic industrial base workforce. The
Federal civil servants working at these locations across the
globe provide unique skill sets that we cannot afford to lose.
Their mission is essential. And we must make sure that we can
hire and train the next generation in a timely fashion, and
give them the protection and rights they deserve for their
loyalty to this country.
While depot, arsenal, and shipyard hiring managers have the
ability to hire different types of employees, whether it be
term, temporary, or full-time Federal employees or contractors,
we must continue our oversight of this workforce to make sure
people are being utilized and employed appropriately. In
addition, we need to ensure that the Department's senior
leaders--those of you at the table--have the tools and
authorities they need in order to compete with the private
sector to recruit, train, retain a motivated and skilled
workforce.
We, this committee, will continue to focus on readiness and
invest into the organic industrial base, as it is a key
contributor to military readiness. I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses here today on the challenges they experience
in their organic industrial base, and their lines of effort to
address these challenges and ensure that the organic industrial
base is postured to support the National Defense Strategy and
military requirements well into this, the 21st century.
Gentlemen, we look forward to your testimony. But first,
Mr. Lamborn, the ranking member.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garamendi can be found in
the Appendix on page 33.]
STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM COLORADO,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Chairman Garamendi. I would like to
thank each of our witnesses for your testimony today.
The depots within our military services are essential for
maintaining the complex ships, aircraft, and land systems that
form the building blocks of our joint force. It is not enough
for our depots to meet today's requirements. We must also
posture them to remain relevant for future demand. This raises
a major concern about the state of our aging infrastructure.
In an April 2019 report, the GAO [Government Accountability
Office] found that although most depot facilities are rated
poor on the DOD [Department of Defense] rating scale, the
military services do not consistently track when facilities and
equipment conditions lead to maintenance delays. GAO also found
that the trend for facility condition is downward.
As the costs and complexities of major defense systems
continue to evolve, we have to build capacity to support these
systems. At the same time, we will continue to rely on many
legacy platforms to serve well past their intended life cycles.
The B-52 Stratofortress, for example, first flew in 1954 and is
now estimated to fly into the 2040s.
The M1 Abrams [tank], although significantly upgraded, was
designed in the 1970s and first fielded in the 1980s.
The Navy has an ambitious 20-year, $21 billion shipyard
infrastructure optimization plan, and has started the process
to map existing facilities to aid in design. In a recent
hearing with Secretary Geurts and Vice Admiral Moore, we
discussed the need for the Navy to resource this plan. We also
discussed NAVSEA's [Naval Sea Systems Command's] efforts, in
partnership with the fleet commanders, to level load the
private shipyards and send a predictable demand signal to
industry.
The Army has invested more than $1 billion over the past 10
years to upgrade its depot facilities, and estimates it will
cost another $8.3 billion in military construction and
modernization funds to fully recapitalize. These long-term
plans require senior leader commitment and sustained resources
to reach fruition.
The Air Force, Marine Corps, and NAVAIR [Naval Air Systems
Command] also have long-term plans in various stages of
maturity.
I look forward to learning more detail about the
investments required to support these efforts.
For the Army, I look forward to a detailed discussion about
the size and breakdown of the depot requirement. The committee
needs better clarity if we are going to support our
warfighters. The Army has nearly double the carryover work that
is funded but not finished compared to the next highest
service. I have some concerns but would broadly like to
understand if it is an outgrowth of budget uncertainties
unrelated to process issues or caused by supply chain issues.
With regards to the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps, I
look forward to hearing about your efforts to stand up some
organic maintenance capability to support the Joint Strike
Fighter. We heard testimony last week from Secretary Lord and
Lieutenant General Fick about F-35 sustainment, which will cost
more than $1 trillion over its life cycle. They informed the
committee that you are implementing some work sets to support
the program. I look forward to hearing about these efforts and
whether you have sufficient access to intellectual property to
support this work.
The trained artisans in our workforce are the key to
success or failure of the depot enterprise. The services have
struggled to fill these positions, whether the root cause was
funding uncertainty or the burdensome hiring process. My
understanding is that we have made some significant progress,
but I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about more
that can be done; for instance, the 6-month cooling off period
when someone leaves the military and before they can go into
certain civilian work. I think that is something we should
discuss. And I think we can address that in our next NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act].
Finally, I am concerned that when we extend the life of
major defense systems we often pay premiums for old technology
that is less capable, dependent on a shallow bench of
suppliers, relies on obsolete manufacturing processes, and is
not reasonably fuel efficient. Many depots are actively
involved in reverse engineering old components to address these
challenges, and we would appreciate our witnesses sharing their
insights.
These are tough problems, but in my view they can all be
addressed if we have the discipline to plan, resource, and
implement the solutions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Ranking Member Lamborn.
I'd now like to welcome our witnesses:
Lieutenant General Duane Gamble, Deputy Chief of Staff, G-
4, Department of Army. Welcome.
Vice Admiral Thomas Moore, Commander, Naval Sea [Systems]
Command, Department of the Navy. Thank you for being here.
Vice Admiral Dean Peters, Naval Air Systems Command.
And Lieutenant General Donald Kirkland, Commander, U.S. Air
Force Sustainment Center, [at] Air Force Materiel Command.
And Major General Joseph Shrader, Commanding General,
Marine Corps Logistics Command.
Welcome, gentlemen. I will take your testimony. Lieutenant
General Gamble, if you would proceed, and we will go down the
line.
STATEMENT OF LTG DUANE A. GAMBLE, USA, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF,
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
General Gamble. Yes, sir.
So, good morning, gentlemen. Good morning, Chairman
Garamendi. Good morning, Ranking Member Lamborn, other
distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you for this
opportunity to testify today on the Army's organic industrial
base or OIB.
Our Army OIB is decisive, as Ranking Member Lamborn pointed
out, to our Army strategic readiness. The materiel readiness it
enables is critical to ensuring our Army can provide the
responsiveness, the depth, and the capability demanded of us in
the National Defense Strategy. Your support enables us to
maintain an OIB that generates Army readiness.
The main elements of the OIB are three: our skilled
workforce, our facilities and infrastructure, and our resource
workload that meets the Army's readiness requirements.
The backbone of our OIB is our skilled workforce. Our
ability to hire, attract, and train new talent is essential to
maintaining the viability and the output of our Army organic
industrial base. The flexibility you have provided us with
direct hiring authority has helped us process over 3,500--the
exact number is 3,560--personnel actions in fiscal year 2019,
and a total of 4,800, over 4,800 since 2017.
It has helped us reduce our hiring time from 114 days to 85
days, which allows our organic industrial base to remain
competitive with our industry employers seeking the same
critical skills. So, it is a competition for talent. And the
authorities you have given us has enabled us to win in that
competition.
Much of our organic industrial base infrastructure, as
already pointed out by Representative Lamborn, is over 50 years
old, and more than half were built before 1945. In order to
maintain the appropriate level of readiness, we have developed
the OIB Infrastructure Master Plan since the last time the Army
testified before this committee. And we have developed that
plan to identify and, more importantly, to prioritize our
projects for our government-owned, government-operated
facilities. And that plan will carry us over the next 20 years.
This plan is a forward-looking and forward-thinking
solution that will keep our organic industrial base facilities
and infrastructure postured and programmed to sustain Army
readiness. It is also nested with our Army modernization
efforts.
In addition to modernizing our government-owned and
government-operated facilities, within the last 2 years we have
had more than doubled investment to modernize our government-
owned and contractor-operated facilities. We have prioritized
facilities that are single-source suppliers, like Radford Army
Ammunition Plant and Holston Army Ammunition Plant, and aligned
our investment with the Futures Command cross-functional team
priorities to make sure and ensure our modernized requirements
carry our Army into the future.
Although it will remain a priority to modernize our
facilities for the future, readiness today is as essential as
ever. To meet our Army's current readiness requirements, we
strategically invest resources in the highest priority and
focused readiness unit requirements. We workload our depots
through a delivery process that combines current materiel
readiness, readiness assessments, near-term COCOM [combatant
command] requirements, and we resource those priorities with
focused readiness unit requirements in a workload that combines
work for our Army, work for other services, and work to support
foreign military sales. This combined workload serves to
preserve the artisan skill sets that are critical and unique to
the Army industrial base.
As we maintain current readiness and modernize for the
future, we will continue to hone in on supply availability and
capacity planning, and implement initiatives like our OIB
Infrastructure Master Plan. Just like all our Army efforts,
these efforts will require continued congressional support and
oversight to be successful.
I thank each of the distinguished members of the committee
for holding this hearing, and I look forward to our discussion.
[The prepared statement of General Gamble can be found in
the Appendix on page 37.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, General.
Vice Admiral Moore.
STATEMENT OF VADM THOMAS J. MOORE, USN, COMMANDER, NAVAL SEA
SYSTEMS COMMAND, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
Admiral Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Garamendi,
Ranking Member Lamborn, and other distinguished members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
committee today to discuss organic industrial base issues.
This committee's support for our organic industrial base
has been critical to the Navy's ability to turn the corner and
restore readiness to our fleet. Recent on-time performance
trends in both the public and private sectors are improving;
however, challenges remain.
To address these challenges, the Navy has undertaken a
multi-pronged approach focused on increasing accountability and
improving productivity in both the public and private
shipyards. In our four public yards we are growing the capacity
of the shipyards to meet the workload demand, improving the
training and productivity of the workforce, and making the
needed investments in our shipyards to ensure they can support
our growing needs.
The Navy is focused on several key lines of effort: growing
the capacity of the shipyards to match the workload demand;
improving the training of the workforce; improving the
productivity of the workforce through innovation and
improvements to our business processes, in both planning and
execution; and making needed investments in our shipyards to
ensure a 21st century shipyard to match our 21st century
workforce.
The Navy's four public shipyards have seen a 25 percent
increase in their planned workload since 2010. To match the
growth, the Navy has increased the size of our public yards by
more than 9,000 people, from 27,368 in 2010 to 36,696 employees
in 2018. This growth was achieved about one year ahead of
schedule, and is allowing us to stop growth in the backlog of
work and begin working off that backlog earlier than planned.
However, the rapid growth of the workforce has resulted in a
less experienced workforce, where 50 percent have less than 5
years of experience.
To get new hires trained more efficiently, the shipyards
have transformed how they train their new employees through
learning centers that use both virtual learning tools and
hands-on work. The net result of these learning centers at the
shipyards have cut the time to create a productive worker from
the time they are hired to more than 50 percent over the past 4
years.
The Navy is now in the second year of the planned 20-year,
$21 billion Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Plan [SIOP]
that will fully transform shipyards originally designed and
laid out to support building ships of sail and coal into 21st
century shipyards dedicated to executing complex maintenance
availabilities on the Navy's nuclear-powered aircraft carriers
and submarines. Fully executed, SIOP will deliver required dry-
dock repairs and upgrades to support both current and future
classes of ships, optimize workflow within the shipyards
through significant changes to the physical layout, and
recapitalize obsolete capital equipment with modern machines
that will dramatically increase productivity and safety.
The Government Accountability Office has recently reviewed
the SIOP plan and identified opportunities for the Navy to
enhance reliability, to improve cost estimating, and better
define the roles and responsibilities to the shipyards. The
Navy is taking steps to implement these recommendations,
executing modeling and simulation efforts to inform area
development plans at specific shipyards, and provide a more
complete costimate for executing SIOP.
The committee's continued support for SIOP is greatly
appreciated.
Mr. Chairman, the Navy fully understands that on-time
delivery of ships and submarines out of maintenance
availabilities is a national security imperative. The
Department has taken a holistic approach to ensure both our
public and private yards have the information, people, and
equipment needed to maintain the world's greatest navy. The
Navy will continue to work with the Congress and our industry
partners to address our challenges and to efficiently maintain
and modernize the Navy's growing fleet by growing the capacity
and capability of the organic industrial base.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear today. I look
forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Admiral Moore and Admiral
Peters can be found in the Appendix on page 43.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Admiral.
Admiral Peters.
STATEMENT OF VADM G. DEAN PETERS, USN, COMMANDER, NAVAL AIR
SYSTEMS COMMAND, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
Admiral Peters. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Lamborn,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, good morning, and
thank you for the opportunity to discuss naval aviation
readiness and the health of our organic industrial base.
NAVAIR's industrial workforce and infrastructure remain my
top priority. Since my last testimony in June of 2018, naval
aviation has seen modest improvements in readiness through
comprehensive reforms, sponsored by naval aviation's 3-stars:
the air boss, Vice Admiral Miller; the Deputy Commandant for
Aviation, Lieutenant General Rudder; and myself.
We report quarterly to the Vice Chief of Naval Operations,
the fleet commanders, and the Secretariat on our performance to
plan that ensures transparency and provides an opportunity to
share lessons across communities.
Our improvements are indicated by multiple occurrences of
80 percent mission-capable rates for Hornets, Super Hornets,
and Growler aircraft, and improvements across all of our
platforms. For Super Hornets specifically, we surged to 700--
or, excuse me, 372 mission-capable aircraft on 30 September,
after many years of averaging approximately 250 to 260 mission-
capable aircraft.
Our aircraft depot lines and component repair lines are now
delivering more effective and reliable products, with reduced
turnaround times and significant improvements in quality.
Instead of merely completing the minimum repair spec and
pushing aircraft back to the fleet with remaining maintenance,
we are now accomplishing, with the fleet's partnership, the
return of fully restored aircraft ready to promptly support
squadron flight schedules. Foundational changes now in place at
our depots include an apprenticeship program, an enterprise
quality management system, and an investment strategy that
targets modernization.
The next steps for naval aviation involve expanding these
reforms to all of our depot lines and to our intermediate-level
maintenance sites. We will also begin implementation of the
infrastructure optimization plan, as detailed in the interim
report delivered to Congress in April of this year.
Naval aviation leadership looks forward to working with
this subcommittee and the larger Congress to achieve and
sustain a ready and capable fleet. And we very much appreciate
your continued support of our sailors and Marines.
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Admiral.
General Kirkland.
STATEMENT OF LT GEN DONALD E. KIRKLAND, USAF, COMMANDER, AIR
FORCE SUSTAINMENT CENTER, AIR FORCE MATERIEL COMMAND,
DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
General Kirkland. Good morning, Chairman Garamendi, Ranking
Member Lamborn, distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to update you on the Air Force's
organic industrial base. On behalf of our Secretary, the
Honorable Barbara Barrett, and our Chief of Staff David
Goldfein, thank you for your continued support and demonstrated
commitment to our military and civilian airmen, families, and
veterans.
As you will attest in my written statement, the United
States Air Force has relied upon a strong organic industrial
base to deliver air power in support of our National Defense
Strategy. We are proud of the capabilities our Air Force brings
to the organic industrial base. Our logistics enterprise
effectively uses existing infrastructure across our three
depots and two supply chain wings to provide cost-effective
readiness for a range of legacy weapons systems, while
posturing for the future.
Last month, at Tinker Air Force Base, we opened the first
hangar of a depot campus dedicated to the KC-46 Pegasus
refueling aircraft. We continue to expand F-35 Joint Strike
Fighter aircraft depot and commodities maintenance at our Ogden
Air Logistics Complex. And in middle Georgia, our F-35 avionics
repair is expanding at Warner Robins.
Looking ahead, our team is already making preparations for
depot support for the B-21 Raider and Ground Based Strategic
Deterrent.
Even so, readiness and sustainment challenges driven by
legacy weapons systems are complicated by an aging
infrastructure footprint, a diminishing supply and
manufacturing base, and a Federal workforce hiring process that
is improving but not yet conducive to supporting today's
environment.
As rightly directed by title 10, U.S. Code, it is a
national imperative to have a robust industrial base supporting
the nation's weapons systems. Without investments that ensure
lethality, maintain readiness, properly fund and train our
personnel, and deliver necessary infrastructure, we risk losing
our advantage. To optimize our depot infrastructure over the
coming years, our current and near-term 6 percent funding
sources will not by themselves achieve and maintain the depot
capacity and capability necessary.
Last March, the Air Force submitted to Congress an initial
report on our organic industrial base infrastructure. This
study made clear that even as we smartly use current
investments, over the next 20 years we will need resources
above current thresholds to modernize across four major
dimensions of our industrial base. As mentioned in my written
statement, we have already started a second, more detailed
analysis of depot infrastructure and will report out in late
fiscal year 2020.
As we respond to a diminishing supply and manufacturing
base to support aging fleets, we are accelerating the use of
predictive analytics such as condition based maintenance-plus
to minimize the time a weapons system is unavailable due to
unscheduled maintenance. The Air Force Sustainment Center works
closely with supported weapon systems program offices to ensure
the data learned for predictive analytics are baked into supply
forecasting, generating longer term efficiencies.
Regarding our civilian workforce hiring and development, we
greatly benefit from the hiring tools and authorities that
Congress has provided. These are necessary to stay competitive
with our defense industry peers. Thank you for providing these
authorities and continued support of expanding their use. In
fiscal year 2019 we hired 74 percent of all hires using direct
hiring authority. This is making a difference to our workforce.
In every instance or crisis, the defense organic industrial
base provides solutions to meet unanticipated demands. The Air
Force will need help from Congress with continued investments
to meet the needs of an increasingly sophisticated and
contested battlespace in the 21st century. We are making
generational decisions in our depots now. The Air Force needs
stable and predictable budgets to maintain and modernize our
critical logistics and sustainment capabilities. Consistent
funding underwrites our mandate to produce readiness that
guarantees our service's ability to fly, fight, and win.
Thank you. And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Kirkland can be found in
the Appendix on page 52.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, General.
General Shrader.
STATEMENT OF MAJ GEN JOSEPH F. SHRADER, USMC, COMMANDING
GENERAL, MARINE CORPS LOGISTICS COMMAND, HEADQUARTERS MARINE
CORPS
General Shrader. Chairman Garamendi, Ranking Member
Lamborn, and distinguished members of the House Armed Services
Subcommittee on Readiness, thank you for the opportunity to
testify on this important topic.
Our Commandant's vision for the Marine Corps is to be
manned, trained, and equipped as the world's premier naval
expeditionary force in readiness, forward-postured with the
Navy's fleets to deter conflict and respond to crises, and to
be globally recognized as an elite corps of marines of
exceptional talent.
A ready and modern organic industrial base plays a key role
in achieving the Commandant's vision. Accordingly, we do have a
long-term Organic Industrial Base Modernization Plan to repair,
repurpose, consolidate, and construct new facilities across our
depot, and tear down those facilities deemed too old and no
longer relevant.
We are pursuing innovative and state-of-the-art technology,
such as robotics, on our main production lines and sub-shops.
Also, 3D printing and additive manufacturing to augment the
supply chain and extend our operational reach.
Marine Corps Logistics Base Albany in Georgia was also
recently selected to be one of the first of four DOD locations
to receive 5G bandwidth capability, which will enable us to
employ more capable, automated, and IT [information technology]
maintenance management solutions. And of note is our base at
Albany is also pursuing an aggressive goal to become a net-zero
energy consumer through employing renewable and resilient
technologies such as borehole thermal energy storage systems
and ground-source heat pumps.
Finally, and most important, we are improving our ability
to recruit, train, and retain the depots' next generation
workforce.
So, again, I thank you for this opportunity to talk about
the Marine Corps organic industrial base readiness, and I will
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Shrader can be found in
the Appendix on page 63.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Gentlemen, thank you very much
for your testimony. We will now do a round of questions. We
will hold to the 5-minute normal rule of our committee.
Generals, each of you have developed a plan to address the
concerns of the organic industrial base, modernization of it.
And, presumably, that plan takes into account the new equipment
that you will be receiving, for example, the Army Modernization
Program, the Navy-Air Force F-35, so forth. We will be watching
that very, very carefully.
At the same time, you have legacy equipment, some of which
has been around for more than a few decades. We can talk about
the B-52. And I am sure there are plenty of track vehicles in
the Army that probably are of a similar age. So, the
fundamental question of this particular hearing: Is your
organic industrial base plan sufficient to take care of the
past older equipment, ships, aircraft, as well as the future?
That is what we are going to be looking at. And we are going to
go at it in detail.
We have received from all of you over the last several--
last year, your plan. And you can be assured that this
committee will go into it in detail.
Now, let's start with all of you. And I want to just hear
your commitment to the industrial base, to the plan that you
have before us, and I put it very clearly, in the new
President's budget will there be the money to support that
plan?
Let's start with the Marine Corps and we will go left to
right, or left to right as you may view it. General Shrader.
General Shrader. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Sir, we submitted, the Marine Corps submitted, the
Commandant submitted this past July our plan for improving the
organic industrial base facilities. It is a 25-year plan. It is
a $1.9 billion price tag. It is to be executed in three phases.
We are right now executing the first phase. The first phase
calls for a 7-year period. And in that first 7 years we are
getting after process workflows, we are also repurposing some
of the facilities that we have, and we are also doing
consolidation and rebuilding.
Once we get to a point where we have the capacity, then we
can turn to tearing down old facilities that I talked about
before.
Mr. Garamendi. I am going to cut it short. I am going to
try to stay to 5 minutes.
General Shrader. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. So maybe we will do about 1 minute each, and
that will put me well past the 5-minute limit.
General Shrader. Aye, sir. So, whether, whether we are
going to fund it, sir, I think it is a risk, it is a balancing
act because we are funded--the Marine Corps allocates money
across all MILCON [military construction] projects, so it is a
risk equation.
What I would offer, sir, last, is facility modernization is
a function of equipment modernization. The more money we can
put into equipment modernization, the less need for us to
maintain equipment longer. So, if we are not fielding new
equipment, it stretches out the life cycle of that equipment.
So, we have to make sure that we can find that balance.
Mr. Garamendi. You shall see. Exactly.
General Shrader. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. General Kirkland.
General Kirkland. Chairman Garamendi, thank you for that
question.
Sir, you are aware the report we sent over from the Air
Force back in March lays out notionally a $26 billion
investment strategy over 20 years. That is phased from the near
term to, if you will, catch up, and then allows to keep up
while we posture for depot infrastructure of the future.
That lays out across four categories: depot equipment,
technology, IT infrastructure, industrial software, facilities
for overhaul and the final assembly, as well as repair nodes
and hidden infrastructure. These are essential to our long-term
viability.
Meanwhile, Chairman, we are making the most of the
infrastructure we do have with our world-class workforce. We,
to support operational customers we rely a lot on our processes
right now to mitigate any challenges we have with equipment or
facilities.
And in looking ahead, sir, this year we are going to do a
detailed analysis that will result in a more refined 20-year
strategy with an implementation plan and resulting guidance.
Mr. Garamendi. Excuse me, gentlemen.
General Kirkland. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. The specific question is, we know your, we
have seen your plans, we know--we want to know if you have
committed to carrying out that plan. In other words, will the
money for the plan implementation be in the upcoming budget?
General Kirkland. Chairman, we are using this process to
inform our choices over the next, this next planning cycle.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay.
General Kirkland. And I would expect that this process that
the Air Force will go through in fiscal year 2021 form those
choices through our corporate process.
Mr. Garamendi. For all of you, you should be getting the
gist of where I am going. Happy talk. I want real commitment,
meaning, are you going to put the money and the effort into
carrying out the plan? Okay?
Let's continue on. Mr. Peters, Admiral.
Admiral Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, the Navy is
committed to the aviation infrastructure optimization plan,
$3.5 billion: $1 billion in sustainment, restoration,
modernization [SRM] funding; $1 billion in capital equipment
modernization; and $1.5 billion for MILCON.
I will speak to the commitment in terms of the first two.
We are taking actions and have support from the Navy for the
SRM funding, and also partial funding for the equipment
modernization. Some of that will come through appropriated
funds, some will come through our rate structure.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Admiral Moore.
Admiral Moore. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Yes, the Navy's
PB20 [President's budget for fiscal year 2020] submit does
support the plan. It is a good plan. It addresses both current
ships that we have, and also the need to get after setting the
depots up for success in the new platform that is coming down
the road: Ford-class carriers, Virginia-class submarine, and
Columbia.
But I would note this is not a one-and-done plan. We dug
ourselves a readiness hole over a number of years, and one year
is not going to fix this. We have to stick to the plan over the
next couple years in order to be successful.
Mr. Garamendi. We will look at the budget and see if you
are actually going to start.
General Gamble. Chairman, the Army is also committed to
Army readiness. We recognize that legacy systems, or our
enduring systems as you mentioned, are part of our Army's
ability to win. The truth is that we will not modernize the
entire Army. We will have legacy track systems in our Army for
years to come.
Our 2020 budget includes top priorities of maintaining
these enduring systems. It also includes money for industrial
base modernization.
Among those systems are--we are leveraging the uniqueness
of our industrial base to convert UH-60 helicopters from Lima
to Victor models for the Army National Guard. That will save us
money in the long term. We won't be buying new production for
those systems. So we are leveraging our industrial base and
resourcing our industrial base to do important work for Army
readiness.
Mr. Garamendi. You are going to spend $1.6 billion on depot
maintenance in 2020?
General Gamble. Our depot maintenance budget in 2020 is $2
billion, just north of $2 billion. It reflects 80 percent of
our validated depot requirement. That is up from last year
where I think we funded 78 percent of our requirement last
year.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Gentlemen, you should be able by now to understand where we
are going here with this committee. We are going to hold you
accountable to the plan. We will first make sure the plan
achieves the goal, and then we will make sure that you carry it
out.
With that, I yield to Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
stress that this is a bipartisan concern. I am with the
chairman 100 percent on making sure that we have plans and that
we are funding those plans, that it is a high enough priority
to do so. And if we are not funding and making the plans and
funding them properly, then it is really obviously not a
priority.
I know there are many needs, many urgent needs that the big
services have to deal with. But this is the future; we have to
make sure that the future is taken care of.
So, I will be watching with the chairman closely to make
sure that we do accomplish this. So, thank you for that.
And I would like to address the Army in particular now,
partly because the depot carryover numbers are so big.
According to a July 2019 GAO report, the Navy, Marine Corps,
and Air Force averaged less than 6 months of carryover worth
$1.0 billion, $0.2 billion, and $1.9 billion per year
respectively from the period 2007 through 2018. And the Army
averaged $4.3 billion of carryover during the same timeframe.
So, what can you tell me, General Gamble, about what the
Army is doing to address its particular depot maintenance
requirements?
General Gamble. Yes, sir. I appreciate your question.
With respect to the Army carryover, I think it is important
to point out that the Army's system, our enterprise resource
system is different from the other services. So, the Army
carries with that carryover the cost of materiel. We are not,
we don't have the flexibility to eliminate that. You know, we
bill the whole. The entire work is billed when it is done, when
it is complete.
So, when there is a supply chain issue, if there is a lot
of bill of materials, that encumbers our carryover. So, our
carryovers compared to the other services, while I won't argue,
sir, we do have a carryover problem in the Army, it is a little
out of--it is a little bit of apples and oranges. It is still
carryover but I don't know that it gives you total insight by
comparing our carryover to the other services.
Our carryover is down this year. It is in excess of 6
months. You know, GAO just reported on carryover. And their
determination, frankly, I agree with their determination, any
carryover calculation should inform, should be quality I think
is the words GAO used, but I think it should be decisionable
information that allows us to do something about the carryover.
And as you pointed out in your opening comments, carryover
is a function of either the supply chain or our budget. I would
add, probably add that forecasting is part of that carryover,
too. So, what the Army is doing is General Perna, the Army
Materiel commander who commands our depots, has reserved at his
level taking work late in the year. Because, of course, if you
take work late in the year, your ability to accomplish that
work, that OMA [Operation and Maintenance, Army]-funded work in
the year, starts to diminish. So, he has reserved that at his
level and his executive deputy commander level, and that is
making a difference.
You know, what leaders check, just like the oversight of
this committee, but leaders check, people do. And he is
checking. So, we have seen carryover come down in that regard.
I will offer one last comment on carryover. I believe that
the carryover calculation does not lead us to those, the
current carryover calculation--GAO highlights this in their
report--does not lead us to decisionable information. To some
degree the carryover has been weaponized. It is a divining rod
to find money to move to other programs.
I am not so sure that is a good, a good trend. I would
offer that if the carryover calculation, whatever we come up
with OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense], leads us to make
decisions on depot capacity, increasing or decreasing capacity,
whether it is workforce or infrastructure, that that, that
would be a good use for carryover.
And then my final comment, sir, is that today the carryover
does help us bridge appropriations. Today at Anniston Army
Depot, for example, in Congressman Rogers' district, 89 percent
of the work being done today at Anniston Army Depot is
carryover. The remaining 11 percent is Army Working Capital
Fund work.
The amount of OMA work being done today, first quarter at
our Army depots, is very, very small because of the CR
[continuing resolution]. And so, units are husbanding their
resources, waiting. And as the appropriation comes to fruition,
that money will start infusing into the depot. But the longer
that that goes on, the more, more chance that we will have
carry--that will carry over in the next FY [fiscal year].
I hope I answered your question.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. Ranking Member Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, then I will make this real fast. I will
make this----
Mr. Garamendi. It is okay. Take your time.
Mr. Lamborn. Please make this a yes or no answer.
General Kirkland, we talked about this the other day, but
getting rid of the 180-day cooling off period, at least for GS-
1 through 13, not 14 and 15, if that were to be done in the
next year's NDAA--and I know there is a Senate bill also
addressing this by Senator Lankford--would you, would you like
to have that accomplished?
And just go down the line, yes or no.
General Gamble. Yes, sir.
Admiral Moore. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Wait, wait. We will stop right here and
I will let Austin Scott address that as well. Okay, he is
kidding. Okay, let's go on down the line.
Admiral Peters. Yes, sir. We would support.
General Kirkland. Yes, sir.
General Shrader. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. We need a better understanding of
the carryover. I think that I know that I don't understand
exactly how the Army calculates the carryover. We will get into
that in more detail. We may be misunderstanding or not
understanding the way in which you calculate it.
Ms. Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you,
gentlemen, for coming. My questions are about workforce.
Congress has provided you direct hiring authority for depot
work to expedite hiring, but this authority doesn't seem to
have been terribly successful in filling skill gaps that we
still see. Do you think it is possible or likely that the
skills and workforce gaps that we see persist in part because
people with these skills are seeking to be hired full-time and
not in term or temporary hire, is my first question?
And to what degree is it possible that reliance on term or
temporary hires is contributing to skills gaps for an enduring
workforce?
And anybody can start, please.
Admiral Moore. Well, first of all, I would say from the
Navy's perspective we are a huge fan of direct hiring
authority, and it has helped me significantly in the depots.
That is why we would be able to hire, you know, as many people
as we have over the last couple years.
We don't use temps at the naval shipyards, so that is not
an issue for me. So the hiring authority is really something
that we would hope that you would keep there. And it has made
a, it has made a difference.
You know, our challenge in the naval depots is, you know,
we are in competition with that talent with the private sector
as well on the new construction side, et cetera. Welding
skills, you know, pipefitting skills, electrical skills are in
competition throughout the homebuilding industry, et cetera. So
anything, tools that we can have to get people in the door
quicker and pay them well will help us.
So, I appreciate----
Ms. Houlahan. That actually was going to be my follow-up
question for you. We heard from a hearing prior to this that
most people have less than 5 years of experience who are
working at our shipyards. And to what degree can you talk--and
I will follow up on the other question--but about how we can be
more competitive with the civilian economy?
Do you have any examples of places where we have been
successful in marrying up with vocational or trade schools, or
that sort of thing that has been helpful in being competitive?
Admiral Moore. Yeah. That is a fantastic question. So,
almost every one of my major depots is partnering with the
State to have hiring fairs, have apprentice schools. Norfolk
Naval Shipyard and Puget Sound Naval Shipyards specifically
have apprentice schools, which is equivalent to a vocational
school. They get a degree. The competition to get into those
schools is extremely competitive, which tells me that people
want to get in there.
And once we get people in the door and we can get them past
that 5-year point, we tend to keep them for a long period of
time. And so I think that the attraction of being trained and
then having a good salary and a job that you know you're going
to be able to have for a long period of time is very
attractive. So, it has helped us in this competition with the
private sector.
Ms. Houlahan. Would any of you other gentlemen like to
comment on my, or answer my first question? Thank you, sir.
General Gamble. Congresswoman, the Army does use temps and
terms at our depots and our ammunition plants. And so, I do
agree that most people are, you know, would prefer a permanent
employment over a temporary or term employment.
We found the temporary or term employment to be a good tool
to expand and contract, in some cases, the workforce based on
workload. But in a more positive way it gives us the ability to
identify talent, and then use the direct hiring authority this
committee has given us to hire that talent.
The direct hiring authority, the first part of your
question, has been absolutely decisive for the last couple
years. The truth is, it took us a couple years to implement,
fully implement that authority. But we hit our stride this last
year, in fiscal year 2019, hiring over 3,500 people.
Ms. Houlahan. Is there anything that we could be doing to
make it even better for you?
General Gamble. I think Representative Lamborn's proposal
or suggestion to limit the cooling-off period would help
somewhat. All the talent is not in the service, obviously. And
just like the Navy, all our depots and arsenals are partnered
with the local school systems, whether those are post-graduate
school systems, or undergraduate systems, or secondary school
systems. That represents, you know, manifests itself in
internships, et cetera, at our depots.
So there are different streams of talent coming into the
Army. The direct hiring authority has allowed us to be compet--
remain competitive with industry.
Ms. Houlahan. I have about 50 seconds left. Would anybody
else like to contribute?
General Shrader. Ma'am, the Marine Corps is a, we are an
advocate of the direct hire authority [DHA], and we have used
it.
Regarding terms and temps, we also use that kind of a warm
start. But I would offer that there is a value to permanency
all its own. And so I think that a lot of folks that we are
competing for, they are looking for that permanent position.
But all those are tools that we look to.
A modernized depot is something that attracts our young
people that come out of college. They want to work someplace
that is going to have modern technology that they can apply
their skills to. So it is all, this all goes hand in glove.
Ms. Houlahan. Sure. Understood.
I have about 7 seconds left, which is plenty; right? I
would love to hear from you.
General Kirkland. Ma'am, I will----
Mr. Garamendi. Take your time.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
General Kirkland. So, ma'am, particularly I will just talk
for Air Force Sustainment Center. We use it at every level of
our workforce. And I will highlight on the upper end for our
trained engineers and software folks, which is for us a growing
enterprise. We have north of 4,400 software engineers now
working for our Sustainment Center.
DHA has been a tremendous tool to give them an on-the-spot
job offer. And once they join, they like what they are doing,
and our retention rate reflects that.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. And I actually served in the Air
Force as an engineer, so I very much appreciate that comment.
Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much.
There is a whole series of questions here that we want to
get into on the hiring part of it. And, undoubtedly, my
colleagues will carry on with it.
Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wasn't joking when I said Mr. Lamborn stole my question.
He actually was looking at my notes.
Mr. Lamborn. Then it is time for you to ask it.
Mr. Scott. He was looking at my notes and his time was
expired.
The National Defense Authorization Act, hopefully we will
have a piece of legislation in the next several days or weeks.
There is an opportunity to resolve this issue I believe once
and for all in the upcoming National Defense Authorization Act.
Some have suggested that it should apply to O-6, or the
waiver should be for O-6 and below. Some of--General Kirkland,
you suggested the GS-13 and below. I am indifferent which route
we go. My suggestion would be that all of the services request
the same thing.
So, real quick, is everybody on board with GS-13 and below?
Everybody is good with GS-13 and below?
[A show of hands.]
Mr. Scott. I think the committee----
Mr. Garamendi. I think there was four hands up. And so the
answer to your question is they have agreed with you.
Mr. Scott. Okay. And I think the majority of the committee
agrees on this. So, I would hope that as the National Defense
Authorization Act comes forward this is something that we can
resolve.
My understanding is that this prohibition applies to full-
time Guard and Reserve as well, as they retire. My question,
and I will just ask you, General Kirkland, for our part-time
Guard and Reserve, do we have hiring restrictions on them as
well or is it only for full-time Guard and Reserve as they----
General Kirkland. Congressman, I would need to check on
that and make sure I am giving you the right answer. I would
like to take that for the record, please.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Scott. Okay. I think that is something that we, we can
research as well.
And--but full-time Guard and Reserve as they approach their
retirement, my understanding is the 180 days does apply to
them. I am just making sure we find the right standard with
regard to all of the different types of services that people
have. Hopefully, that gets resolved.
General Gamble, I heard as you discussed the differing
accounting methods by service, you said it makes one, one
service's carryover look worse than another, another branch's
carryover would look. From our standpoint, it makes it hard,
harder I think for Congress to do its oversight role.
I know it would be a big move to get everybody to the same
accounting standard on the carryover, but I do believe that is
something that we should look at because it is hard for us to
see relatively who is doing better. But would the different
accounting methods--and this is my specific question--with
regard to the Defense Logistics Agency [DLA] for the different
services, do the differing accounting methods by service create
confusion at the Defense Logistics Agency?
General Gamble. Sir, from the Army perspective I believe
not. I believe the answer is no.
The carryover calculation is the same for all the services.
But our resource, our enterprise resource system drives us to
not be able to bank, if you will, those, the costs. So, the
cost of material rolls forward in the way our ERP [enterprise
resource planning] does.
And then with respect to DLA, I think maybe the heart of
your question has to do with the forecasting of the organic
industrial base requirements for DLA.
Mr. Scott. The sourcing of parts?
General Gamble. Yes, sir. Forecasting our work as it
translates to the supply chain that DLA is responsible for.
We believe, one, DLA gives us exquisite support but, two,
we believe we have a fairly solid forecasting process with DLA
for our organic industrial base workload.
I hope I answered your question, sir.
Mr. Scott. General Kirkland. Admiral Peters.
Admiral Peters. Sir, if I could just say, I mentioned from
the carryover standpoint there is a little bit of an
artificiality here that I think is recognized that, you know,
because you heard the Army experience that they are not even
inducting components that need to be repaired because of this,
the optic associated with carryover, we need to realize that
there are components that break during the course of the year.
And they are going to take longer than a few months to fix
sometimes.
Mr. Scott. My time is expired. I guess my concern is,
Admiral Peters, this is kind of what you are getting to, is the
current system forced to gaming of the numbers, and which gives
us a false, a false read on what is actually happening.
Gentlemen, I appreciate your service. I will yield my time.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
The metrics by which you measure are metrics that we
observe and hold you accountable for. We have always, at least
in my experience, is we do question the appropriateness of the
metrics and whether they actually give us the--give you and us
a clear picture of how the maintenance is occurring.
Ms. Horn, you are next.
Ms. Horn. Thank you, Chairman Garamendi. And thank you to
all of you for being here.
I have several questions along those same lines. And I want
to start with General Kirkland because I think we are talking
about a couple of things: ongoing maintenance, investing, and
how we sustain current systems through the process.
So, General Kirkland, I know that Tinker has done a lot
to--and I have been very impressed with the maintenance and
what you have been able to do to maintain some of our legacy
aircraft, the KC-135s and the B-2s. And as these, as these
planes and other legacy equipment gets older there are growing
issues, I know, with supplies and parts on these legacy
aircraft.
So, can you speak to a couple of things: the use of
predictive maintenance and how that is enabling the maintaining
of these legacy systems; and the role of public/private
partnerships in the organic industrial base, and how that is
helping to maintain in the interim?
General Kirkland. Yes, ma'am. Congresswoman, thank you for
the question.
So, ma'am, you highlighted Tinker. And I will just start
there. With regard to diminishing supply and our parts
constraints, two approaches really. First is to partner more
in-depth with our industry teammates on who we rely. We do that
often through the Defense Logistics Agency, who does provide
fantastic support to us.
We benefit from a vehicle we are calling Captains of
Industry where we have an omnibus agreement for a higher level
supply support. In fact, we have one that works very well with
GE [General Electric]. And we are pursuing the same
relationship with other prime vendors.
Where and when we can't get the part, we often rely on
reverse engineering. And there, ma'am, we are doing that across
all three of our depots, in Utah, Oklahoma, and Georgia. But by
and large the reverse engineering provides us a technical
package which we can then manufacture the part, either organic
or outsource that to commercial industry where that might make
sense.
And that works really well for small batches. And we have
learned can keep a part, can return a part in days or weeks
instead of months or years, and get an airplane either through
the depot line or out in the field and back in business. And
that has been a tremendous thing.
And, ma'am, along the way then we rely heavily on process
to lean out our operations there. And we are quite proud of the
workforce that is doing that.
Ms. Horn. Thank you. And to follow up on that, turning to
the direct hiring authority and the need to maintain the
organic industrial base as a critical piece of this, I want to
revisit the ability to retain the civilian workforce, and
having that base for things like reverse engineering as we are
going through this process and assessing how the process
improvements and the incentives of being able to reverse
engineer or keep people there is connected to the direct hire
authority, and what else is needed.
General Kirkland. So, ma'am, with respect to retention, I
would offer that simply by having a steady influx of trained
personnel, personnel we can train in order to keep the
production lines going, that has morale increase. And as we put
more and more work into the same facilities and same
workforces, that has a beneficial effect of keeping every
employee gainfully, gainfully employed, and providing upward
mobility with supervisory opportunities. And that has been our,
that has been our experience.
With respect to engineers, I will just highlight that
across our enterprise, our software engineers, we have an
attrition about 7 to 9 percent annually. And that is right, is
right there with industry. And so that is even as we grow the
enterprise, about 6 percent a year.
Ms. Horn. Thank you. Would any--I have just under a minute,
any of the rest of you like to speak to that?
General Shrader. Congresswoman, I would say on the retain
piece, a challenging, challenging work environment where you
have the ability to innovate: 3D printing, additive
manufacturing. When you go down to visit our engineers, I mean,
they, they look forward to coming to work every day to work
with that and get after some of the obsolescence challenges
that we have and that we are getting after with 3D
manufacturing.
And it is just, it all boils down to having a good
environment to work in, which means modern facilities. So, that
is really a big factor in retaining.
Ms. Horn. Thank you, General Shrader. Just a couple more
moments, a few more seconds, any additions?
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. The Marine Corps and the Air
Force are receiving substantial new funds to the emergency
appropriations for the rebuilding of some of your facilities,
not so much for the Air Force on the organic side, but the
Marines most definitely. We will be looking at that,
particularly Cherry Point, and how you are going to be working
on that, your plans, how you will be spending that emergency
appropriation money to update and rebuild that facility as a
modern organic industrial base.
No response necessary, just know that we are watching.
Mr. Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to all of
you for being here.
I don't know, this is one of those questions I really don't
have an answer to. Is there a percentage of your civilian
workforce that is unionized? Okay. Do those unions have
apprentice programs or do you have apprentice programs in place
to actually, you know, we call it in some cases OJT [on-the-job
training], but could you, any one of you speak to the successes
you have had in apprentice programs aboard any of your
facilities?
Admiral Peters. I can start, sir. Just, we have just
recently established an apprenticeship program. It is highly
competitive. We started 148 of our artisans in this
apprenticeship program. It is 4 years, with a 2-year payback,
so that helps on the retention side also. But it also provides
some cross-training opportunities. And we have had, you know,
1,000 applicants for the 148 slots that we started this year.
And 168 in fiscal year 2020 is the plan.
So it has been very effective for us.
Mr. Bergman. And is this in conjunction with the union?
Admiral Peters. Absolutely.
Mr. Bergman. Good. You know, because, you know, good unions
really, really, really add value to any company or any entity.
That is good to see.
Carryover funds. Let's just say what I heard here was the
little tricks: if you do this, you get to that, or, you know,
whatever, and there is kind of potential for gaming the system.
Let's just say flat out that you got to reinvest as you saw fit
any money you saved by, let's say, shortening the transition
from legacy to next gen, or whatever, in that sustainment
period.
In a time of limited funding, which we are in a time of
limited funding when you think about all the things we, as the
Federal Government, do, could you come up with a business plan
that, as Jim Collins, Good to Great, would say, stop doing the
things you don't need to continue spending money on, knowing
that you got to keep that money to reinvest it in other things,
could you actually present to this committee or the committee
as a whole on armed services where, you know, how much? Just
give us a--I don't care where you do it, you just tell us, give
us a dollar figure? Could you do that, I mean over time, 6
months, whatever, before we do the next NDAA?
Admiral Peters. I will just add, sir, very quickly, we
could do that. As part of our working capital funds we reinvest
back into the plants. And we are committed to 6 percent. Our
challenge has been meeting that 6 percent each year. But we are
starting to be able to do that. Just in fiscal year 2019 we
accomplished it, and going forward we intend to accomplish it
also.
Mr. Bergman. It is, you know, again, if you were a business
and you were paying your, not even your stockholders, just say
your employees dividends based on their performance, and their
performance, part of their performance plan was to figure out
how they could do their job not only better but cut unnecessary
spending where it no longer made sense. Okay. And that is, if
you have that in your culture I think it would--and I am not
going to speak for the committee--but to hear it from you where
you can do better and allow the money to be wisely spent
because you are the managers of it, that is a plus for all of
us here.
So I will, Mr. Chairman, I will give you back a minute. And
I yield. Thank you very much.
Mr. Garamendi. We appreciate the extra minute. However, the
discussion you are having is an extremely important one. Part
of the problem that this committee has, at least this chairman
has, is that there are multiple definitions of the way in which
the money flows. And certainly between the services that does
exist, and within the services, carryover funds.
So, to achieve your goal we need to have a clear
understanding of the accounting process, which is an ongoing
issue within the Department of Defense.
Mr. Bergman. You are not telling me that there is tricks
played with the numbers are you?
Mr. Garamendi. Of course I wouldn't.
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Mr. Garamendi. Of course, the gentlemen----
Mr. Bergman. Well, having, having built a budget inside the
military of roughly a billion dollars a year for 4 years in my
senior years in uniform, I have seen--I have played both
offense and defense.
Mr. Garamendi. Would you like to explain?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
About a month ago I was over at the AUSA [Association of
the United States Army] convention. I try to go over there
every year. And I spent several hours over there this year and
I was struck by how many platforms are robotic and autonomous.
And it is just across the spectrum over there.
So, General Gamble, given that you-all plan to have these
autonomous and robotic platforms in your formation, and Army's
Future Command is to accelerate modernization timelines, how
are you going to get the depots ready to work on that stuff?
General Gamble. Sir, Thank you for your question.
So, we have embedded in every cross-functional team an Army
logistician from Army Materiel Command specifically to have
eyes and ears and to make sure that we upgrade, we modernize,
and we improve or make modifications to the industrial base to
keep pace with modernization.
In some cases we don't know what the modernized system
looks like quite yet. But there are decision points for every
program along the way so that the industrial base, the
infrastructure could be modified, improved, or reconstructed,
developed, or restored, or modernized through SRM [sustainment,
restoration, and modernization] funding. But that is our
principal way is to embed Army logisticians in the cross-
functional teams.
And we also invested into Army Futures Command a former
brigade commander colonel, Army colonel, as the director of
integration to integrate the sustaining base with
modernization.
Mr. Rogers. So, I take it you are not worried about that
technology getting too far out in front of you?
General Gamble. No, sir. It is--we are not, no, sir, we are
not worried about it. We are cognizant that we have to keep
pace. That we may--we don't want to wake up one day and have a
system that we don't have the sustainment capability of Army to
maintain.
Mr. Rogers. Right. That is my point.
Do any of you have that concern that you are going to wake
up one day and not be able to have the infrastructure to work
on those new technologies?
I take it by the silence, the answer is no. Good.
In the past, depots have had a hard time advocating for
MILCON money for infrastructure. What do you think you are
going to be able to do about that in the future? Do you think
you are going to be able to be more aggressive in that front
and productive?
Admiral Moore. Yes, sir. Actually, I think what the Navy
has tried to do, instead of having each of the depots kind of
compete against themself for MILCON funding, which is our past
practice, and every depot has its own local constituency, what
we found in that area is we were having trouble getting the
MILCON funding because we were competing against each other.
The Navy's Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Plan is
really meant to be an integrated plan that takes a look at the
infrastructure needs across the entire organic depots that I
own. And then the Navy can set the priorities in terms of when,
when does the work have to be done. And what I have found is
that the innovative plan has allowed the Navy to actually take
a holistic look at it. And we are now getting three times the
MILCON funding that we were getting when I first came to the
job in 2016. And that is likely to double again in the next 3
or 4 years as we head into the plan.
So, I think the competition for MILCON is best served when
you can put an innovative plan together and you are not just
doing this one project at a time.
Mr. Rogers. Excellent.
General Shrader. Sir, if I could just real quick. Certainly
in the Marine Corps the fact that the Commandant signed off on
our OIB plan this July to me signals that he is going to
support the plan.
Mr. Rogers. Excellent.
General Shrader. And then the second thing is we do have
three large MILCON projects right now underway in Albany, two
in Albany and one in Barstow. So there is evidence there, yes,
sir.
Mr. Rogers. Good. And I like your new Commandant. He
doesn't mind kicking over furniture and getting things done.
General Shrader. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. So, he is my kind of guy.
General Shrader. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. General Gamble, talking about carryover, as you
mentioned it is a big thing in my world with the Anniston Army
Depot, which is one of our largest depots. As you know, I
worked with General Perna to get some language that we put into
last year's NDAA to hopefully resolve that. I take it from this
GAO report we need some more work on that?
General Gamble. Sir, I am not prepared to answer that,
honestly. I have read the GAO report. I understand it. I
understand the Army's position. But I will be honest with you,
I have a little bit of a blind spot on the language in the last
NDAA specific to carryover.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I told General Perna at the Depot Caucus
Breakfast 2 or 3 months ago that if he needed some more
refinement to that language, just let us know. Because I think
you have heard up here that we want to be helpful on that. I
recognize there may be some differences. But that is true of
all of y'all--that is the plural of y'all in Alabama--just get
us some language and we want to help you on this. But,
specifically, let General Perna know that we want to be
helpful.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi. I thank you, Mr. Rogers.
Since we ended that discussion with General Gamble, we have
gone around this a couple of times, we need to know from you to
fully inform our staff on your 2020 and 2021 land forces depot
maintenance budget request. We want to go into detail. Part of
what Mr. Rogers was talking about is a piece of this.
We are concerned about happy talk and execution. We want
happy talk to be executed, or executed to be happy talk, either
way. So, if you will make sure you do that. I am not asking for
a commitment. You know that I know that you will do it;
correct? Thank you.
General Gamble. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. There we go, far end of the table, let's go
to Texas.
Ms. Escobar. Chairman, thank you so much for holding this
hearing.
Gentlemen, thank you so much for your testimony today and
for your service. We are very, very grateful for it.
General Gamble, I know that from your testimony and from
what we have learned that Army depots and arsenals sometimes
face challenges finding suppliers to provide parts for legacy
systems that you need to repair. And we know that General Perna
is a big fan of additive manufacturing. And additive
manufacturing is so critical to our modernization and our
readiness. It offers great competitive advantages, like faster
delivery of parts, shorter acquisition timeline, shorter supply
chain, potential cost savings and, in certain cases, can create
lighter, heat- and weather-resistant parts.
In my home district, at the University of Texas at El Paso,
we have a world-class additive manufacturing facility through
the Keck Center. And it is in fact a satellite center for
America Makes within the National Center for Defense
Manufacturing and Machining system. The kids--I call them kids,
although they are young people--who are going through the
program are among the brightest in the country. The leadership
there is among the most ambitious and very bold in terms of
trying to kind of capture the potential of additive
manufacturing.
And so, I am wondering if you can, number one, tell us a
little bit more about the specific challenges that you face in
finding the suppliers and, number two, have you considered
partnering with smaller businesses and also academia like at
the University of Texas at El Paso through the Keck Center in
order to help fill these gaps?
General Gamble. Yes, ma'am. Thanks for your question.
So, the challenges of obsolescence are real. And you have
pointed out many of those things.
The finding repair suppliers, repair parts suppliers is
challenging. In our vision, the Army vision, and our Army
Secretary signed out an Army strategy and policy for additive
manufacturing just in the last 60 days, and part of the Army
vision is just that, to attack the obsolescence problems that
we have because our depots are capable of, and they do it all
the time, reverse engineer parts that we either can't find a
supplier for or it is not economical. But that is not always
the best way.
So, obsolescence is a key component of our strategy. We
have made, we have actually manufactured over 200 parts since
March 19th, many of those obsolete parts, at Rock Island. But
that is not our strategy either. Our strategy is to transmit
proven data across the network to, even to the far forward edge
of the battlefield and print parts forward.
So, as we edge towards that strategy there are tons of
opportunity to partner at echelon in our Army. We are not quite
there yet. It's a tactical edge. We have some fundamental
capabilities in tactical units right now.
But so to answer your second part of your question, yes,
there are small business opportunities. And there are more,
there are opportunities for greater partnering with
institutes--educational institutions and colleges. We are
partnered with many right now, but predominantly in the Iowa/
Illinois area where our Center of Excellence is. But as we
proceed down this path, I do believe there will be expanded
opportunities.
Ms. Escobar. I appreciate that. And I would love to host
any or all of you at any point in El Paso at the University of
Texas at El Paso so that you can see some of the cutting-edge
additive manufacturing capabilities that our students and that
our academics are helping promote and create.
And I am running out of time, but I would encourage all of
our other service leaders to do the same because I know we face
the same challenges across the board. And, as such, we face the
same opportunities going forward.
Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Ms. Escobar.
You did raise a question that, an issue that I want to
bring to the attention of all of you, and that is the small
business opportunities. The major contractors are basically
moving out of legacy and moving on to tomorrow's systems,
leaving behind problems for you all to solve.
I don't believe we have a robust system in place for each
of your depots to reach out to small businesses, machine shops,
additive manufacturing shops and the like, that may exist 1,000
miles away from your depot. And so, I am going to pursue with
you in the months ahead how we might be able to assist you in
setting out a very wide net to capture those opportunities that
exist out there.
There are modern communications systems that you may be
able to use called the internet and the like. So, we want to
explore that. I have had the discussion with some of you about
this. So, we will carry on with that. Not an issue for today,
but an issue that we will come back and ask you about how that
might be done service-wide with each of your services and
follow up on Ms. Escobar's question.
We will go to another quick round of questions here. I
think I have one more. But let me turn to Ms. Horn and then I
will wrap it up.
Ms. Horn. Thank you, Chairman. I will be brief. I think
this is an important conversation today, and many of my
questions have been asked by my colleagues on both sides of
this dais, which I truly appreciate about this committee.
I want to follow up on one particular piece of building the
workforce and the conversations that have been directed about
working with our educational institutions as well as
apprenticeship programs and how layering those things are
important.
I understand that a few of you work directly with those
institutions. I want to ask about the direct relationships.
I know in Oklahoma we have a very strong career tech
system, and the ability to not only develop engineers at our
advanced educational institutions but the practical skills-
based work. And if you have enough, sufficient ability to work
directly with those institutions, the career techs, the
community colleges, the hands-on and the apprentice programs,
to get the specific skills that you need to hire on, and what
else you might need authority-wise from us to do that.
And I will just let you go down the line.
General Shrader. Thank you, ma'am. The answer is yes.
Locally with our community colleges, Albany State, Albany Tech,
we work with them to help them develop their curriculum so it
enables us to take on the workforce and do that. So, the answer
to your question is, yes, we are working with them very closely
to do that.
General Kirkland. Congresswoman, I will add, like General
Shrader, we have a close relationship often local and State
level make this happen. In many cases we can take the technical
college's training into our actual workspaces.
Just recently, this last quarter in Georgia we have
occupied a new facility where we are moving some commodities
work. And the Central Georgia Technical College has their
students training on the other end of the same facility. And we
feel very comfortable about that relationship. It gives them
hands-on experience. And candidly, we recruit very well among
that training force.
Admiral Peters. Yes, ma'am, we also partner with the
community colleges in North Carolina, Florida, and California.
And we have had some success in influencing the curricula such
that the skill sets that we are looking for are accomplished
there in the community college.
Admiral Moore. Yeah, we also partner as well. But I would
also point out that some of our efforts in our Navy depots are
actually below the college level, because I think we need to
emphasize that a lot of this workforce that we have today, the
blue collar workforce, the welders, electricians, we don't need
college graduates. And we need to actually value the artisans
that actually get in there and do the really hard work of
maintaining these depots, and make that a career that a young
man or woman today could get into and spend a lot of time.
And I saw data the other day that if you get trained as a
welder at age 18, by the time you are 65 years old you will
have made more money than someone who went to medical school
and is just a general practitioner. So, I think more emphasis
on valuing those skill sets and getting in and doing STEM
[science, technology, engineering, and mathematics] early is
something that we could, should keep doing.
General Gamble. Ma'am, the Army has similar programs. We
are very proud. They are generally regional. And just as
Admiral Moore pointed out, they support our wage-grade stream
of talent as well as the white collar stream of talent.
Ms. Horn. Thank you very much.
And, Admiral Moore, I couldn't agree with you more. I think
a greater emphasis on long-term career-building skill sets that
are needed across all of the depots and in so many other places
in our workforce that goes to the small businesses as well as
beyond just the engineering talent that is needed.
And I will just say this and yield back the rest of my
time. If there are additional, as we are looking at how we
better understand your needs, the carryover, all of the other
issues that we have addressed, additional ways that we can
encourage cooperation and direct communication with these
education institutions, perhaps even not just in the localized
areas but across the services, that develop those workforces,
that is something that I think we should all be interested in
to maintain that organic industrial base.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you for raising that set of questions.
The Federal money that supports the educational system, the
career education training programs, require that those programs
reach out to the employers in the area. So, there are two sides
of this. Delighted to see the military is reaching out to the
education programs. At the same time, those education and
career technical programs out there are required, if they are
going to get Federal money, to reach out to the employers, all
of whom are sitting at a table. So, that is a back and forth.
I also want to note that with regard to retention, pay is
an issue. The continuing resolution that the House passed--and
presumably the Senate will take care of it today otherwise we
have a shutdown tonight--does not include a pay increase for
civilian employees in the military. It does include a pay
increase for the military employees and military personnel. So,
okay, we are likely to have a problem here on retention if we
don't deal with the increase in pay requirements that would be
necessary.
A couple of other things. I want to iterate again that each
of you have developed a plan for the organic industrial bases
that you are responsible for. We will be reviewing those plans
in detail. And the rubber meets the road with the money. So, it
is show me the money in your budgets going forward in your
programs. If it is not there, we will have a discussion, and we
will play both offense and defense on this, Mr. Bergman. And it
has been known that I can be offensive.
Mr. Bergman. Noted.
Mr. Garamendi. Well noted.
I want to make sure, we will come back on this hiring thing
with a little more definitive discussion on it. It is an issue
that continues on. And that is the waiting period and the like.
There is one very, very important and, frankly, a very
unhappy thing that I need to do, so I will try to make it as
happy as possible. Next to me, Brian Greer is, this is his last
year with this committee. He is moving on to greater
opportunities over in the non-government, or at least indirect
government system. I understand he will be joining a new firm
here in the town and become a major part of that firm.
So, Brian, we will certainly miss you. You have been an
extraordinary employee for and professional staff here for a
long period of time. How many years?
Mr. Greer. Three.
Mr. Garamendi. Three years. Thank you so very much for that
service here.
And behind us, the Marine Corps has a very serious problem
that they are going to have some time overcoming, and that is
they have stolen Megan Handal from this committee. And she is
going to work down at Quantico.
Mr. Scott. General Shrader.
General Shrader. Sir, I am in Albany, Georgia, so I----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. You are not the responsible party here?
General Shrader. The Marine Corps is very good at
recognizing talent and poaching it, so.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. We will accept that.
Megan, you have been wonderful to work with. You have been
a joy for all of us. And thank you so very much for all of your
time with the committee. How long?
Ms. Handal. Three years.
Mr. Garamendi. Three years.
General Shrader. Welcome aboard.
Ms. Handal. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. I am getting a feeling here that 3 years is
something of importance.
We will miss both of you. And thank you so very much and
for all of your service. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]
Mr. Garamendi. We will be back. Thank you so very much.
The committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
November 21, 2019
=======================================================================
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
November 21, 2019
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING
THE HEARING
November 21, 2019
=======================================================================
RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
General Kirkland. Enacted in 1964, the 180-day policy was waived
after a state of national emergency was declared on 14 September 2001.
After that, the Air Force was afforded the flexibility to appoint
retired military members within 180 days of retirement without needing
a waiver. On 23 December 2016, a new DOD requirement took effect as
part of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) FY17. This NDAA
mandated military retirees seeking to enter civil service in the
Defense Department now require a waiver if they are within 180-days
following their official date of retirement. The Department of Defense
Instruction, Number 1402.01, dated 9 September 2007, paragraph 3.3
defines Retired Member of the Armed Forces as a ``member or former
member of the Armed Forces who is entitled to retired, retirement, or
retainer pay.'' Furthermore, HQ AF/A1, MFR, dated 19 April 2019, b.
Applicability, specifically states, ``the 180-day waiting period
applies to active/retiring/retired members of the Armed Forces (to
include Guard and Reserve retirees) and those who have medically
retired and are entitled to retired, retirement, or retainer.'' Since
all supporting documentation and guidance provided addresses all
members and former members of Guard and Reserve an assumption can be
made that there is no distinction when it comes to defining Guard and
Reserve retirement entitlements therefore the 180-day waiver process is
applied equally to part-time and full-time Reserve and Guard personnel.
[See page 17.]