- OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
[Senate Hearing 116-110]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-110
OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 13, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Small Business and
Entrepreneurship
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
35-698 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
----------
MARCO RUBIO, Florida, Chairman
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland, Ranking Member
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
EDWARD J. MARKEY, Massachusetts
JONI ERNST, Iowa
CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
CHRISTOPHER A. COONS, Delaware
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MITT ROMNEY, Utah
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
Michael A. Needham, Republican Staff Director
Sean Moore, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Opening Statements
Page
Rubio, Hon. Marco, Chairman, a U.S. Senator from Florida.........
1
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L., Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from
Maryland.......................................................
4
Witness
McMahon, Hon. Linda E., Administrator, U.S. Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.................................
6
Alphabetical Listing
Cardin, Hon. Benjamin L.
Opening statement............................................
4
McMahon, Hon. Linda E.
Testimony....................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
9
Responses to questions submitted by Chairman Rubio and
Senators Risch, Inhofe, Booker, and Hirono.................
67
Risch, Hon. James E.
Prepared statement...........................................
38
Rubio, Hon. Marco
Opening statement............................................
1
Small Business Investor Alliance
Statement dated November 7, 2017.............................
39
Letter dated August 10, 2018.................................
50
Letter dated February 27, 2019...............................
64
OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
----------
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2019
United States Senate,
Committee on Small Business
and Entrepreneurship,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
Room 428A, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Marco Rubio,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Rubio, Risch, Ernst, Young, Kennedy,
Romney, Hawley, Cardin, Shaheen, Markey, Booker, Coons, Hirono,
Duckworth, and Rosen.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCO RUBIO, CHAIRMAN, A U.S. SENATOR
FROM FLORIDA
Chairman Rubio. This hearing will come to order, the
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. I want to
thank all of you for being here. I want to welcome
Administrator McMahon. It is an important hearing for me. It
is--actually, it is my first. We have done subcommittees
together but this is our--so there is really no baseline, so
today is the baseline for how to judge the other ones. But--and
it is really an honor to lead this Committee and to do so with
the Ranking Member, who I also serve with, in the same
capacities, on the Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere and
Foreign Relations. So people are starting to say we look alike,
which is--we have done a lot of bills together as well.
And we have three new members to the Committee--Senator
Romney, Senator Hawley, Senator Rosen. We appreciate your
service and look forward to working with you this Congress. The
issues under the jurisdiction of this Committee are of great
importance to the whole country. Over--close to 60 million
Americans work for a small business so that is literally half
of our workforce.
And this Nation has a long history of innovation and
entrepreneurship and hard work. And when American ingenuity,
innovation, access to capital, access to markets, access to
workforce--when all of that is in place we are a Nation that
creates dignified jobs, and dignified jobs create upward
mobility, and with upward mobility lives are changed for the
better, communities are changed for the better, and the country
is stronger for all of that.
So my priority here as Chairman is to pass bipartisan
legislation that will expand economic opportunity for small
businesses and for entrepreneurs who are forced to take on
personal risk and sacrifice to compete in this new global
marketplace.
As everyone in this room is aware, we got off to a slow
start here at the beginning of the year in Washington. However,
by most accounts, Administrator McMahon and the Small Business
Administration have responded well, following the government
shutdown. I commend you, your staff for their hard work to
process the backlog of loans, to get expansion plans and small
business growth back on track.
Following a history year of small business growth and
optimism, I look forward to solutions from this Committee that
will continue this pattern of growth, because bringing
dignified jobs back and increasing opportunity in the areas of
our country that need it the most are priorities, I believe, of
every member of this Committee and should be the priority of
this Committee during this Congress.
In times of distress and challenge, small businesses bring
communities together and are vital to boosting morale. I have
seen it first-hand in Florida, after the effects of natural
disaster and the subsequent assistance the SBA offers to
revitalize the area. Last October, Hurricane Michael hit our
Panhandle, with the third-most intensity of any Atlantic storm,
and the SBA is now processing more than 14,000 loans that will
inject more than $651 million into recovering and rebuilding
the homes and businesses in Georgia and in the Florida
Panhandle.
Previous to that, Hurricane Irma, the strongest storm to
ever exist in the open Atlantic, hit Florida and Georgia, South
Carolina, and Puerto Rico, in August and September of 2017.
Hurricane Maria, the worst natural disaster on record for
Puerto Rico, struck just two weeks after that. The SBA was
quickly on the ground with nearly 2,000 field staffers and has
handled more than 675,000 phone calls just from Puerto Rico.
The region could not have survived without the $7.37 billion in
loans that the SBA distributed in the wake of Hurricanes
Harvey, Irma, and Maria.
In times of tragedy, small businesses are the gathering
place for the community and they become centers of optimism. So
we have to make sure the disaster loan process operates at its
peak efficiency, streamlining the process, making recovery
dollars quickly available. And I look forward to working with
the SBA to find the most effective way to serve disaster
survivors.
Another focus, I hope, of this Committee will be the
competitiveness of American entrepreneurs and small business.
Yesterday we released a report, ``Made in China 2025 and the
Future of American Industry'' that evaluates China's plan to
become the global leader in innovation and manufacturing. Our
report highlights the challenges posed by China's blatant
industrial espionage and coercion, actions that threaten our
economic framework and our national prosperity. It offers
several policy recommendations to strengthen the system against
its rivals.
The role of government is to align our economic policies
with the right national priorities, and my personal view is
that for too long we have been aligned behind some of the wrong
priorities. Our most important priority should be creating
dignified work through investment and innovation, and I see
real opportunity through this Committee to bolster SBA's
programs that provide capital for innovative, high-growth-
potential firms. It is the goal of the SBA programs to act as a
launching pad for small businesses, and there are specific
programs at SBA that fill a gap in capital to startups and
entrepreneurs who may have the next great robotics product, as
an example.
One of these programs, the Small Business Investment
Company Program, introduced a concept of venture capital.
Through this program, SBA licenses privately owned SBICs and
provides them with leverage from SBA-guaranteed loans that the
SBICs then couple with their own capital to invest in small
businesses. This venture capital tool is a great way to fuel
innovative, high job growth industries and companies.
Last Congress, I introduced the Spurring Business and
Communities Act to increase the number of SBICs in states like
mine, like Florida, where there are fewer investment companies.
I'm proud to say that bill passed. The President signed it in
December, and I'm eager to hear from Administrator McMahon on
the SBA's progress in implementing this new law.
Unfortunately, an issue Congress needs to address is the
timing for getting an SBIC license approved. Already an arduous
application process, licenses can take more than a year to be
approved, hampering access to capital for innovative startups.
This is an example of the need to streamline agency processes
so that we are not leaving money on the table and keeping
businesses from starting or growing or innovating.
Another set of SBA programs that are focused on innovation
are the Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business
Technology Transfer Programs. They provide an opportunity for
small businesses to partner with the government to conduct
research and development that can ultimately fill a government
need and provide the small business with funding to develop
their ideas and technologies with the goal of commercializing
that technology. Though these programs represent a very small
percentage of extramural R&D for participating agencies, they
show an impressive--very impressive return on investment.
The Navy commission to study, in 2016, it showed that
commercialization of SBIR and STTR technologies resulted in
$14.2 billion in sales of new products and services and $7
billion in sales for new capabilities and products to the U.S.
military from the Navy alone.
The economic impacts of the program tell a similar story of
nearly $2.3 billion investment from 2000 to 2013. The program
provided a 19-to-1 return on investment, with an economic
output of $44.3 billion and the creation of nearly 200,000
jobs. I understand a Defense-wide report on these programs is
expected in the coming weeks and I have no doubt that the
numbers from them will be similarly impressive.
But this is the kind of program and investment we need to
make in the continued development of innovative firms that will
bolster American jobs and bolster American global
competitiveness.
While I intend to focus on innovation and competitiveness,
it is also important that we work together to streamline
processes at SBA and conduct appropriate oversight of the
agency to ensure small businesses are able to access the
programs that they need. An area that small businesses will
always come to the SBA for is capital. Access to capital
remains a top issue for entrepreneurs across the country. So
any changes made at SBA that affect programs providing capital
should be considered thoughtfully.
It is also important that we work to streamline processes
that we're not--as we work to streamline processes that we're
not skipping over the very small businesses that the SBA exists
to serve.
A proposed lending rule that the SBA issued in October
appears to have failed to consider the effect of the regulation
on small entities. Aside from some questionable changes that
the rule would make, it is concerning that the Small Business
Administration is making rules without considering small
business impacts through a detailed regulatory flexibility
analysis. SBA requires other agencies to do this analysis when
a proposed rule will have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities, yet this rule contains no
analysis of the potential impact of these provisions on smaller
loans, under $350,000, and the negative potential impact on
small business access to capital.
So I look forward to discussing these things today and to
working with this Committee and this Congress to ensure that
the SBA is working as effectively as possible for the American
people, and I also look forward to learning how this Committee
can provide the support the SBA needs to carry out its
important mission.
I turn it over to the Ranking Member.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, RANKING MEMBER, A
U.S. SENATOR FROM MARYLAND
Senator Cardin. Well, Senator Rubio, first congratulations
on your selection as Chairman of this Committee. I can tell you
on behalf of not just the Democratic members but all members of
this Committee we look forward to working with you. We are
excited about your strategies for what this Committee needs to
undertake during the 116th Congress, and we look forward to
continuing the great tradition of this Committee to work in a
nonpartisan, bipartisan manner to help the small business
communities in this Nation.
And to Senator Risch, congratulations on your term as
Chairman of this Committee. The two of us look forward to your
leadership on the Foreign Relations Committee, since we serve
on that committee with you, but it has certainly been a legacy
that we intend to continue.
Administrator McMahon, it is nice to have you here. As you
noticed, we both are the leadership of not only this Committee
but Western Hemisphere, so we expect that you will be putting
the priority on trade between small businesses in the Western
Hemisphere countries. So we will be asking you to report back
to us on that. But it is good that we really have, I think, a
very ambitious but important agenda.
I also want to join the Chairman in welcoming our new
members. Senator Rosen, it is good to have you here on this
Committee and I look forward to working with you. And to
Senator Romney and Senator Hawley, it is good to have both of
you on our Committee and we look forward to your participation
on this very important Committee. And welcome back, Madam
Administrator.
Chairman Rubio went through a lot of the issues that are
extremely important. The bottom line is that small businesses
are the driving force behind our economy. We know that. That is
where job growth is going to take place. That is where
innovation takes place. I am always so energized when I visit
small businesses in Maryland and see the creativity that is
taking place in these businesses. It is not only exciting
because I know it is going to translate into more jobs, and
good-paying jobs in our community, but I know that we are going
to do things better as a result of their innovation.
Our job is to make sure that the tools that are available
are used in the most effective way to encourage the growth of
small businesses in our community. And Chairman Rubio went
through many of those particular areas, and I support what he
has said. What I hope, on the oversight function that this
Committee plays, that we can look at the essential tools that
are under the SBA jurisdiction to see whether these tools are
being operated in the most effective way or whether we also
need to, in a reauthorization process, look at ways that we can
make these tools more effective.
Whether they are the access to capital, the 7(a) program,
the 504 program, whether it is the SBIC that the Chairman
talked about, what we are doing on high tech, on the SBIR
program--all those are areas where we can try to see whether
these programs can even be made more effective than they are
today, in accomplishing our mission not only to help small
business growth but to make sure it is done in a fair manner,
so that underserved communities have access to these tools in
order to be able to build the capacity in areas that we may not
have had a fair allocation in the past.
So I look forward to that type of discussion during this
Congress. I think we can make tremendous progress.
The Chairman also mentioned the disaster loan program, and
I have mentioned this before in the Committee. Thank you again
for the work that you did after the tragedies in Maryland. In
Ellicott City, your people were on the ground, literally, when
the waters were still flooding. You were there immediately and
provided tremendous assistance. The only complaint I have from
the small businesses is that your people had to leave the
community at some point. They would have liked you to stay
there because the services that you were providing were
extremely helpful for these small businesses to get back on
their feet. So I thank you very much for that service.
I do want to say your presence here is very timely in that
we went through the longest shutdown in the history of this
country. The SBA was operating, as I understand, with about
one-third of your workforce during that period of time. I want
to first thank the dedicated workers at the Small Business
Administration--these patriotic people, many of whom showed up
for work without pay, doing their jobs, others not knowing
whether they would get a paycheck, who were furloughed. And
they are dedicated people and please express, on behalf of this
Committee, our thanks for carrying out the mission.
I know that many small businesses were inconvenienced
during this period of time. I had--we know that loans were
slowed down dramatically, came to a stop in several areas. The
number I heard is that we lost as much as $100 million a day in
loans that were not made during this period of time. We know
that some of the contracting was not done. We know that the
mentoring services had to be curtailed. The certification
process for women, for HUBZones, and for 8(a) programs all were
jeopardized during the 35-day shutdown. So I would be
interested in your testimony as to how well we are back
functioning since the government reopened, and we certainly
hope that by tomorrow night, midnight, we will have a budget so
we do not have to go through this again.
But I just really want to comment. I, along with Senator
Van Hollen, we had a meeting, a town hall meeting in Montgomery
County, Maryland, not far from here, with small businesses.
Small businesses that were there were not directly involved
with the Federal Government. They did not have contracts with
the Federal Government. They were not located in Federal
facilities that were shuttered. And yet the dozen or so small
businesses that were represented, their volume of business
during the shutdown was down 20 to 60 percent from a year ago.
The general impact on our economy was felt by all businesses,
but small businesses do not have deep pockets, and it was
extremely difficult and challenging for them to be able to
maintain their workforce.
We heard from one company that had to lay off 46 employees
during this period of time. We know that the Community
Advantage lender program, we heard that there were loans that
were held up. In one case it was a restaurant in D.C. that
wanted to locate in Baltimore, a $100,000 loan. That was put on
hold during this period of time. We also had a situation with a
504 lending program that could not close on a real estate deal
by December 31st because they could not get their 504 loan. We
are happy to report that that company has now gotten their loan
but they missed their original date so it put them at a
tremendous disadvantage.
So we would like to hear from you how we are getting back
up to work speed and dealing with the challenges that were
created during the shutdown, and how confident you are that we
can make up for those days and provide the services necessary
for our small business community.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing our
Administrator and am looking forward to our exchange.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you, and now I would like to welcome
the Administrator of the U.S. Small Business Administration,
Linda McMahon. She is head of the SBA since February 14th of
2017, so a year ago tomorrow--two years. Is it 2019 already?
And as an entrepreneur she co-founded the World Wrestling
Entertainment and led the company to grow from a 13-person
regional operation into a publicly traded global enterprise
with more than 800 employees.
I want to thank you for being here today. We look forward
to your testimony.
STATEMENT OF HON. LINDA E. McMAHON, ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. SMALL
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you, Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member
Cardin, and members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to visit with you again.
Tomorrow will be two years, appropriately Valentine's Day,
since I was sworn in as the Administrator of the SBA. In my
testimony today I want to look back on my service, provide
updates on our agency's progress, and outline some areas where
I hope we can work together.
Let me start by reporting on our activity following the
lapse in appropriations. As a result of the lapse, our lending
programs were closed for a total of 20 business lending days.
During that time, SBA was unable to approve loans and was not
able to accept new applications.
Over the last two years I placed a great deal of emphasis
on loan process improvement. By the end of 2018, we were able
to reduce our processing times by half. Those improvements have
clearly helped us following the lapse.
Since lending activity resumed in all lending categories
but one, our application volume is back to pre-lapse levels. In
12 days of lending, we have approved over 5,700 loans, totaling
over $2.5 billion.
During the funding lapse, the agency had close to 2,000
staff that were furloughed. While most routine activity ceased,
we were able to perform limited risk management of our loan
portfolio. We were also able to support contracting actions for
DoD and other funded agencies. Our disaster staff were exempt
from furlough and our operations continued as normal. The
agency's work in responding to natural disasters stands out as
an area that has touched so many members in so many states.
Following the hurricanes in 2017 and 2018, I traveled to
all of the impacted regions. Our work in many of these areas is
ongoing. To give you a sense of scale to date, SBA has approved
over 170,000 loans totaling $8.3 billion for those five
hurricanes.
In addition to the major disaster events, many of you
certainly know and identify with more localized events in your
states. Working with you and your governors, SBA has helped
businesses and homeowners get back on their feet following
flooding in Maryland, algae blooms and red tide in Florida,
wildfires in Idaho and Washington, and volcanic eruptions in
Hawaii, just to name a few. And speaking of Hawaii----
Senator Hirono. Aloha.
Mrs. McMahon. Aloha--snow in your State yesterday. Oh my
goodness.
Last year I updated you on my Ignite Tour, Senator Hirono,
after I returned, and my goal to visit all 68 SBA district
offices. I'm happy to report that I completed that tour in
December and my last stop was in Honolulu. The purpose of my
travel was to meet our field staff, see our SBA services are
delivered to our customers and visit with small business
owners, over 800 in total. I was pleased that many of you were
able to join me.
Highlighting some other accomplishments, in the last 16
months we have closed 27 GAO and 144 Inspector General audit
recommendations. We have made great strides in our agency's
information technology and our IP protection. Also, we have
increased our yearly SBIC license approvals from 15 to 25. We
continue to improve the application process for Federal
contracting through our certified system. We want to utilize
the system this year for certifying women businesses and
potentially service-disabled veterans.
In the area of training, this spring we plan to launch a
digital platform to provide learning resources for women
entrepreneurs. This will enhance our outreach to more than 1
million women, up from 150,000. We also will launch a
leadership program for veteran entrepreneurs in conjunction
with the VA.
With our lending programs we will continue to expand our
outreach in rural areas, as well as to minority populations. I
am pleased with the success of our Microloan and Community
Advantage programs and I hope we can build on them.
I continue to examine workforce challenges, an issue I
heard so much about during my travel. And lastly, we are
reviewing our international trade initiatives so as to bolster
export opportunities.
In closing, I have shared with many of you how much I
appreciate the bipartisan approach of this Committee and your
support of the agency. We worked together last year on a number
of items. This year I would invite you to experience SBA with
me. Perhaps we can schedule time for site visits or roundtable
discussions with small business owners in your State. Also, we
could drop by our SBA district office or visit any of our
resource partners--a university-based SBDC, women's business
center, or a SCORE chapter.
Two years ago I began my service as Administrator and every
day I have valued our work on behalf of America's small
businesses' men and women. I look forward to a productive 2019
and to our continued work together, and I thank you very much
for having me today and giving me the opportunity to speak with
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McMahon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Rubio. Thank you, and thank you for being here.
Let me start with this. There is a--and I mentioned this in
my opening statement. The proposed rule that has been released
and makes significant changes to the rules governing the SBA's
lending program, it has resulted in about 4,000 individual
comments. Now what I have heard from some lenders in Florida
about the impact on the rule, especially those receiving loans
under $350,000, I have heard a lot of concern about it.
The change in the rule, I think, generally requires a full
discussion, but the part that I am troubled by is it appears
that it did not consider how the rule would affect small
businesses. The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires agencies to
consider the impact of their proposed rules on small entities
and to consider less burdensome alternatives if the rule would
have significant impact on a substantial number of small
entities.
The SBA Office of Advocacy, which monitors compliance with
the Regulatory Flexibility Act, has looked at this rule and has
asked the SBA to look for a less-burdensome way to regulate the
loan program.
So what analysis, if any, did the SBA perform to determine
the impact of this rule on small entities?
Mrs. McMahon. Primarily--and thank you for the question,
Senator--primarily, we looked at this rule change relative to
fees. And what jumped out at us, in fact, our Oakland office
suddenly saw a few outliers in the fee structure. For instance,
one particular loan in the amount of $22,000 had fees of
$11,000. That prompted us to look across loans in very
different areas of lending, different amounts, and we looked at
about 65,000 of those loans, and we found that there were some
outliers. But by and large, about 90 percent of the lenders
were right in the area of the fee proposal caps that we took a
look at. So we were comfortable with that range of the fee
caps.
And we looked at--you know, there were about 4,100
responses now. We are still in the rulemaking process. So
clearly as we continue to review those responses during the
rulemaking process we will evaluate if we need to make changes
in the rule and we will certainly report back to you, and I am
welcome to have discussions with you at any time about that.
Chairman Rubio. Well, just to be clear, at this moment the
SBA's rationale is that this rule would not have a significant
impact on a substantial number of small entities?
Mrs. McMahon. I think in the lending process. What the rule
is to do is to protect the borrowers, because the borrowers are
the ones that were being gouged----
Chairman Rubio. I see.
Mrs. McMahon [continuing]. With exorbitant, I think, fees,
fees that were being charged, both to the lender and to the
borrower. So we wanted to make sure that we have strengthened
the program to protect small entities, not in any way to
negatively impact them.
Chairman Rubio. So obviously if moving forward it is to be
discovered that the SBA did not properly consider how the rule
would affect small entities, would you commit to being open to
re-examining the----
Mrs. McMahon. Certainly, and we are continuing the
rulemaking process and we definitely will look at what those
responses are.
Chairman Rubio. On the issue of disasters--and there are
several of our members here who have been impacted by it--I
don't need to tell anyone here what role this played. I
outlined it in my opening statement. And making programmatic
improvements should be one of our top priorities, because these
events have shown both the strength of the program and some of
the places where we can get better.
As you know, the physical presence of SBA in the form of
business recovery centers is crucial to being able to receive
necessary support, especially as a natural disaster leaves
millions without access to power, to the Internet. For example,
most recently in the aftermath of Irma and Michael, thank you
for hearing our calls to have these ground resources there.
So I want to begin the discussion with SBA's disaster
recovery program and get your take on what efforts Congress
should prioritize. After responding to so many natural
disasters, what are the lessons learned and how can the SBA
better coordinate with FEMA and other government agencies in
disaster response? How can you better coordinate with FEMA and
what can Congress do to assist in that effort?
Mrs. McMahon. I have an incredibly good relationship with
FEMA, Administrator Brock Long. He and I have met several
times. I have traveled with him to disaster zones. You know,
FEMA is first on the ground. SBA is right behind them, or at
the same time, and we co-locate in the FEMA offices. FEMA is,
first of all, taking care of the immediate needs of housing,
food, et cetera, and SBA comes behind for lending to those
homeowners, as also business owners, to get them back in their
homes and back on their feet.
I think we have a really good relationship with FEMA. One
of the things that I have stressed with our disaster department
is the, you know, response time we are there, working on the
ground, I want to see our application time for loans be
reduced. And we are working with new technology that we are--I
am very proud of what we have already accomplished.
In terms of the five hurricanes that hit in 2017 and 2018,
we processed our applications in half the time that it took for
the prior series of storms relative with Katrina and that
group. So I think we are making great progress. There is always
room for improvement.
Chairman Rubio. I have one final question before I turn it
over to the Ranking Member. I don't--the critical gap that SBA
fills in making capital available to victims is important. So
last November, a provision expired that allowed disaster
victims to apply for physical damage disaster loans up to
$25,000 without having collateral required. Led by our
colleague and member of the Committee, Senator Kennedy,
Congress passed a one-year fix, but to my view that it is
necessary to permanently increase the cap of the physical
damage disaster to $25,000 so the victims may have adequate
resources to fully recover from these tragedies.
What is the average physical damage disaster loan amount
requested, and I guess aligned with that is what are the
negative consequences of not--if we do not increase the loan
limit?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, as you can imagine, I am not sure what
the average is, but I can respond this way. Critically, as soon
as a disaster happens, the sooner you can get funds into the
hands of those folks who have lost businesses or need to
rebuild homes, the better it is, and the larger amount that we
can get in their hands is better. So having to revert back to
the $14,000 really would have limited our ability to be able to
service those needs--$25,000, hopefully we can make permanent.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. Ranking Member.
Senator Cardin. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, thank
you, Madam Administrator, for your work.
You had one of the largest percentages of workers that were
laid off or furloughed as a result of the government shutdown.
Have all of the workers received their back pay since the
government has reopened, under the Small Business
Administration?
Mrs. McMahon. I'm happy to report yes, and when our workers
came to work on Monday morning after the furlough they had a
letter from me on their computer that said my number one
priority was to get them paid. We had processed the paperwork
to get them paid and they would get paid by Thursday of that
week. I am glad to report they were paid by Tuesday night of
that week.
Senator Cardin. Well, thank you. I appreciate that, because
it was pretty desperate.
There is also, I assume, some of your workforce that laid
out money for travel, et cetera, that was reimbursed by the
government. Has that also been processed to make sure that they
are reimbursed for their out-of-pocket expenses?
Mrs. McMahon. You know, I will check on that and get back
to you. I do not know that answer.
Senator Cardin. I appreciate that.
Mrs. McMahon. But I can tell you it was pedal to the metal
for me, to make sure everybody was made whole.
Senator Cardin. Thank you. The numbers that we have is that
during the shutdown there was approximately $117 million of
7(a) and 504 loans that were held up as a result of the
shutdown. You have given us some impressive numbers since you
have reopened. Is there a backlog today, or how are you dealing
with the inability to give the loans during those 35 days?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, the good news is, as I mentioned in my
testimony, that we had put process and procedures in place even
prior to the storms, just in good business practice, that we
had reduced the processing of our loans in half. So that really
helped us coming out of the furlough period.
So we caught up on our loans in about two weeks. There is a
bit of a backlog still relative to some 504 servicing issues.
All of our delegated loans moved through quickly. It was the
non-delegated loans that took us a little bit of time to catch
up. So basically it is just the servicing of the 504s, and
that, I think, they will be finished pretty quickly.
Senator Cardin. Good. You mentioned in your prepared
testimony about servicing the agencies that were still open for
their small business set-asides--Department of Defense and
others. But those agencies that were shuttered as a result of
the shutdown, how are they complying with their small business
commitments now that government has reopened? Are you confident
that they will put small business as a priority in dealing with
the contracting, as required?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, any that we find that are not--and I
have not come across any yet that are not complying--we would
certainly be urging them to make sure that small businesses are
a priority for them.
Senator Cardin. One of the areas that we heard about is the
mandatory training required for 7(a) Community Advantage
lenders, and that that was postponed, canceled during the
shutdown and has not yet been rescheduled. Do you know whether
you are scheduling the mandatory training so that Community
Advantage lenders can satisfy that requirement, new vendors?
Mrs. McMahon. It will be rescheduled. I do not have the
time with me today but I can let you know.
Senator Cardin. Would you, because that is a priority.
Because I know Community Advantage program, it is one of the
major efforts we have to help disadvantaged communities, and it
was a major setback to have that mandatory training canceled,
which you had to do during the shutdown.
You have heard both Senator Rubio and I talk about wanting
to make these programs work better for the small business
community. We would like to work with you and evaluate how
these programs are working. We have not reauthorized these
programs for many years, and it is, I think, incumbent upon the
Congress to reauthorize the major programs.
Can you assure us that your staff will work with us in a
way that we can look at the legislative authority on your major
programs and look towards a reauthorization that would help us
work together to focus on how we can make these tools work
better and help disadvantaged communities?
Mrs. McMahon. I look really forward to doing that. I think
we have shown, over the last couple of years, not only your
willingness to work with us but our willingness to be with you
too. In fact, I have enjoyed traveling with many of you in your
states, and Senator Coons, Senator Shaheen, I have certainly
been there, and I am really happy. I have not been with Senator
Kennedy but I have enjoyed my trips down to New Orleans and
Louisiana. So we look forward to that.
Senator Cardin. Well, and I just would confirm that you
have been very accessible and your staff has, and we appreciate
that.
One last question, if I might, dealing with small
businesses that had--were doing work for the Federal Government
that were not paid during the shutdown, that had service
workers. We are looking at legislation to try to help them. Are
you--do you have a way to reach out to small business
communities that may have had difficulty in maintaining their
workforce that had contracts with the Federal Government to see
whether you can assist them in mentoring them as to how they
deal with protecting the workforce that was disadvantaged
during the shutdown?
Mrs. McMahon. We are gathering some of that information
now, but as you can imagine it is--those contracts across all
agencies of the government are those that we are working more
closely with firsthand, with DoD and others. We had more
information but it is a pretty big task, but we are certainly
reaching out to all of those contracting offices to see how we
can help.
Senator Cardin. And would you keep us informed----
Mrs. McMahon. Yes.
Senator Cardin [continuing]. As to how that--because that
is an area that, I agree, we did not anticipate this, but I
think would be good for us to get an understanding of the risk
factors that we have in regards to contract workers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Romney.
Senator Romney. Thank you, Administrator McMahon. It is
good to have you here today, and I want to express appreciation
on behalf of my State for the work the SBA does to help create
small businesses, particularly in areas that are most affected
by changing economics. Rural parts of our State have been an
area where there has been a great deal of SBA focus, for which
I express a great deal of appreciation, and also areas where
there is a disruption as a result of changes in technology.
Specifically, we have a county called Coal County--excuse
me--Carbon County, which obviously is a place where a lot of
coal is mined, and there has been a lot of loss of employment
there, and the SBA has played a real role in helping get people
on their feet with new enterprises.
I am of the view that it would be wonderful if the
Administration were to do the same thing that President Kennedy
did when he talked about his challenge to go to the moon, if we
would have a challenge to have a transformative initiative in
the world of energy, so that we could find ourselves not
reliant upon energy sources that are creating, or contributing
to global warming.
And I wonder if it is possible for the SBA to, in any way,
encourage enterprises that have, as their interest and their
focus, changes that will make us perhaps someday achieve an
objective like that. And I wondered to what extent the SBA is
able to have influence in the types of purposes of businesses
to which you make loans.
Mrs. McMahon. Well, clearly that is a big goal and a lofty
goal and one I think we all aspire to get to. We do not have a
particular focus in SBA at this particular point on that
development, except to say that through all of the technology
support that we give, especially through SBIR programs, STIR
programs, there are so many incubators that are looking at
developing technology to help in energy and across all sectors.
So to the extent that SBA is supporting all of those technology
programs clearly the forms of energy would be part of that.
Senator Romney. Thank you. I think we all are familiar with
the statistics that the great majority of jobs that are
created, millions and millions of jobs are created every year
by small business. At the same time we know that millions and
millions of jobs are lost every year by small business.
A professor at Harvard Business School, Michael Porter, has
indicated that there are two categories of businesses, some he
calls export businesses, which sell goods and services to a
broad community throughout a State, throughout a country,
perhaps even globally, and then there are other businesses that
are support enterprises--hair salons, auto repair shops, and
the like. And the latter, it would seem, tend to rotate more
coming in and out of business. The others have the potential to
be longer-term contributors to the economy with more permanent
job opportunities for those that are employed there.
And I guess the question is, can you make efforts to
encourage those kinds of enterprises to be the recipients of
support from the SBA?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, I can tell you that one of the reasons
why we do have our resource partners located all over the
country--our SCORE offices, our SBDCs that are co-located with
universities, our women's business centers, our veterans, our
outreach centers--because they are mentoring and helping
businesses understand not only how to start and to grow, but
once they get to a certain position then how to scale. Because
I have often said there is no status quo in business. You can
start but unless you start to grow you're going to eventually
start to decline. So how do we help them scale?
And that happens more often in understanding their business
and their business plan in our resource partner offices, which
are, you know, free to those who are going to those offices.
And I have spent the last 20 months traveling the country--you
were not here so I will just be repetitive--traveling. I have
been to every State and I visited every SBA district office.
There are 68 of them. I have made it a point to sit with
businesses in roundtable discussions and visit their
businesses, because I want to make SBA not the best-kept secret
in the country for those mentoring and networking
opportunities.
And I think we have made some good progress because I have
done local media in all of those areas to talk about the
programs from SBA, and I think we are seeing, you know, an
uptick in those offices. We are incredibly supportive of our
SBDCs. There is a really fine one in Utah. And we just want to
encourage people to go there. The small businesses can go but
they do not understand their business plan. And the biggest
single factor for small businesses to fail is cash flow
management, so we are hoping to help them understand that
better.
Senator Romney. Thank you, Administrator.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
congratulations on your new position.
Administrator McMahon, I want to begin by thanking you and
the SBA for your commitment to sign the Notices of Award for
those SBDCs that operate on a calendar year. I met with the
folks from our SBDC in New Hampshire who talked about how
important that is in giving them clarity for how to go forward
this year, so thank you very much for that.
And I would put that on the list, to follow up on Senator
Cardin's comment, of programs that we need to reauthorize. We
need to do it as soon as possible. It has been a very long time
since that reauthorization has happened, and as you pointed
out, the SBDCs do some of the best work of any of those
resource partners for the SBA. So I hope that we can work with
you to get that done this year.
I want to talk about, to begin by talking about the role of
women in small business, and you are now the third woman in a
row to serve as SBA Administrator, so that's been a very good
sign, I think, in the trend for SBA.
But while we have seen the number of women-owned businesses
grow from just 4.6 percent of all firms in 1972 to 40 percent
of all firms in 2018, unfortunately just 15 percent of U.S.
venture capital dollars went to firms with a female founder in
2017, and women-owned businesses still secure only about 5
percent of Federal Government contracts, based on the last 2016
SBA data.
So can you talk about what more you think SBA can do to
help support those women-owned firms, which are growing despite
the challenges, and just think what they could do with a little
more support and access to capital?
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you, Senator. It is a subject very
close to my heart. Before I came to SBA I had actually founded
a company that was to support women in business, so it is
something I like to keep a sharp eye on.
One of the things that we are doing, this upcoming year--
and we have already been working on it, and I mentioned it in
my opening remarks--it is a new platform. It is an interactive
learning platform for women entrepreneurs. It will be first at
SBA, and then we hope that all agencies will be able to use it.
You know, right now we reach about 150,000 women through our
WBCs and other offices. This platform will enable us to have an
outreach into rural areas and to other--for women to use it at
their own time. And we think we are going to be able to reach
about 1 million women.
And this, again, will start out--the first program that is
on it is about scaling. It is about growing your business,
because a lot of women will get to a certain point, and then
they will need capital and they do not know how to get to that
next step. So this is going to be an interactive learning
program that I really am confident is going to be a little bit
state of the art, and even though I have sort of announced it
now, the official rollout is going to be in May, with National
Small Business Week. I think this is going to be an incredible
tool.
We have also authorized, I think it was nine more women's
business centers since last year, so we are up to 100--I am
going to get the number wrong--114, 117. I will clarify that
for you. But just having more--women have more access, again,
to these mentoring services I think is incredibly important.
And the mentoring is not just about, you know, business plans
and marketing, but it's also where to go to try to get capital,
you know, for your businesses.
And I have met with some incredible venture capitalists,
you know, that are in the marketplace, that do, more
specifically, for women, like Springboard. So I try to learn
from them more thoughts of how we can push women towards them
or in ways that we can encourage our lenders to have more women
through that pipeline, because I think that's really important,
and to encourage women, you know, to take that risk to get more
capital. And so I think, combined, we will have a good program
moving forward.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I hope when you roll out the
platform that you will let us know so we can share that with
the businesses that each of us deal with in our own State.
Mrs. McMahon. We definitely will. Maybe you will get a
preview when we are doing the beta testing, just for you.
Senator Shaheen. Good. Sign me up for that.
One of the real challenges that our young entrepreneurs
have, I think, is the amount of student loan debt that so many
young people are graduating from college with these days. In
New Hampshire we have the second-highest student loan debt in
the country. And as we look at some of the biggest, most
transformative, exciting businesses, many of them were started
by young people right out of school who then were able to grow
those businesses. You know, Facebook comes to mind as one of
those.
So in thinking about young people starting businesses and
wanting to be entrepreneurial as they come out of college,
would you support the idea of deferring student loans for a
period of time for young people who are starting their own
businesses?
Mrs. McMahon. I think so, because it would give them a
little bit of a breathing time to do that.
Senator Shaheen. And do you have any thoughts about how we
could actually put that idea into place, and whether that is
something SBA might be willing to help with?
Mrs. McMahon. I would like to come and talk to you more and
get more of your thoughts on that as to how we could--how we
could be helpful together.
Senator Shaheen. Good. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Ernst.
Senator Ernst. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Administrator,
thank you very much for being here. I appreciate it.
During the first two years of the Trump administration we
have really taken some big steps to reduce excessive
regulations on small businesses, and, of course, as a result
our job creators are spending less time on compliance issues
and sorting through regulations, and instead they are focusing
on growing their businesses and investing in their employees.
I have started my 99-county tour this year, doing the full
Grassley, and as I am working across the State of Iowa I do
hear an overwhelming sense of optimism from our small business
owners. They really are the lifeblood of our Iowa and our rural
communities, so we appreciate their hard work and your advocacy
on their behalf.
And during the 2017 National Defense Authorization Act,
Senator Gillibrand and I included legislation that requires the
SBA to submit a report on small business participation in
multiple award contracts, and currently the Federal Government
is increasingly using large contracts, but there is very little
data regarding these awards, and whether adequate awards are
being given to women, to veterans, and to minority contractors.
And the deadline for the report was June of 2018. Do you
happen to have an update on when we can expect that report to
come out?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, I saw a letter from you in January
indicating that that report had not gotten to you yet, which
made me go find out why. And it was a more complex answer than
I expected to have. To say I am disappointed that you have not
had a response from that, I can assure you that there is a lot
more focus and attention on it at the moment. But what I found
out was that we have to go across all agencies and not just go
to one to find out, you know, where the schedules are that
small businesses can then get onto to participate and to be
there, you know, to participate in these contracts.
So we are doing that. We are in the process of doing that,
and I will not be much longer before I get back to you.
Senator Ernst. Okay. Well, very good. And that just speaks
to the----
Mrs. McMahon. And I apologize.
Senator Ernst. Oh, no, that is--that is--it is unfortunate.
We would really like to be moving forward. If there is a way we
can craft legislation to find a way to really engage some of
our minority contractors, those women, those veterans, we want
them engaged in the contracting process within DoD. And if we
can further that we certainly want to do that.
So just another question then. The Federal Government is
consolidating contracts more and more into much larger awards.
What steps do you think the Small Business Administration can
take to ensure that those small businesses are not being left
behind in that process?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, you know, we do have a formula, you
know, with the Federal Government that, you know, 23 percent of
Federal Government contracts must be awarded to small
businesses. So we are vigilant about that. Also, as part of
that breakdown, the percentage that goes to women and other,
you know, minorities, you know, for those contracts.
So our Office of Advocacy keeps a sharp eye on that. We
want to make sure that we are meeting all of those demands. I
think as Senator Shaheen said, you know, women are like 5
percent of those contracts that are being awarded, and I
really--I want to see that--sometimes we fall a little short of
meeting that 5 percent. I want to exceed that 5 percent. So we
want to make sure our small businesses are part of that
program.
Senator Ernst. Right. Outstanding. I will yield back my
time. Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Rosen.
Senator Rosen. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Rubio,
Ranking Member Cardin. Thank you, Administrator, for your work,
your presentation. I look forward to being on this Committee
and supporting small business and entrepreneurship around our
country.
This past weekend, in Las Vegas, I hosted a roundtable at
the Urban Chamber of Commerce with members of the Las Vegas
African American small business community. We had a really
robust discussion about ways to continue to promote economic
growth across Nevada. And so one of the top concerns that they
had this weekend, and something I actually hear every time that
I go speak with small business owners and all of our local
chambers, is the need for quicker, easier access to capital. So
more resources, I believe, need to be given to small business
development centers, especially to assist our minority business
owners.
And so what are you doing to increase capital specifically
for minority-owned businesses?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, we want to make sure, first of all,
they are aware of where to go, you know, to get capital, to
apply for their loans. And that's why I am trying to make sure
more people are aware to go to sba.gov and look at all of the
resources that might be available to them.
You know, between our 7(a) loans and our 504 loans, which
are the two biggest loans, we have about $30 billion each year
in appropriations for those loans, and so we want to make sure
that those who need them know where to go to find them, and
that we can help them do that.
So we do it through outreach from our district offices,
through our own online presence, through workshops that we have
in the communities, through outreaches through our lender
resource specialists that interact with our lenders in the
community to make sure that those who are seeking capital, you
know, can know where to find it.
Senator Rosen. Perfect. And do you think that the current
funding levels for your small business development centers are
adequate as it stands today?
Mrs. McMahon. I think it is, because often we find that
there is some carryover from year to year at the SBDC. So I
want to make sure that we are spending those dollars
effectively.
Senator Rosen. Perfect. I want to move on to another issue
that I like to talk about a lot, which is cybersecurity. So
small business owners don't often consider that they are going
to be attacked, and they often don't have the resources, of
course, that large businesses have, just due to their size and
the nature of their business.
But the majority of all targeted cyber attacks were
actually directed at small businesses. And so 60 percent of
businesses that are attacked will go out of business within six
months after the attack. You think about dog groomer or a hair
salon, those things. They do not have the resources to recover
if all that information is gone from them. So they have the
valuable information cyber criminals want--those credit cards
and customer data, employee accounts.
So I know that you have been working with NIST and the FBI
to improve the small business cybersecurity, so can you discuss
any other initiatives that you might be working on to help
protect our small business owners and partner with them so they
can protect themselves against hacking?
Mrs. McMahon. I think what you talked about are some of the
greatest ways to do it, you know, working with the FBI, and we
have, you know, internally, before we even went externally at
SBA, we wanted to make sure that our--you know, our data was
very well protected, and we made great strides and great
efforts to do that. As a matter of fact, we have, you know,
received awards now for where we are in our cybersecurity
platform.
So taking that kind of a role model to kind--we cannot role
out exactly what that is to small businesses, but I think
making small businesses aware of the threat of cybersecurity,
we found was one of the things that they did not ever think
about when they were setting up their businesses. You know,
some of them are more interested, okay, how do I take Square
and bill immediately? How do I, you know, reduce the time frame
of my paperwork through some of the technology that is
available? And yet they really never thought about, oh, it is
just me. I do not have much of a customer base, so I am not a
target.
So I think with more publicity, more education for our
small businesses, and it is part of the program that we are
rolling out to them through our district offices and our
resource centers, is to make businesses aware of hacking and to
look at programs for anti-hacking.
Senator Rosen. And I hope that as you roll out some of
these websites and platforms for people to find on-ramps you
can also maybe consider having links to cybersecurity sites, or
ways that they can do that kind of hygiene, or give them the
tools to search out what they need and help them in that way,
because they often do not know where else to go.
Mrs. McMahon. Sure, and link from the sba.gov website on
that too, as well, would be a good thing.
Senator Rosen. Thank you. I would appreciate. I yield back.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. I want to thank Senator Hawley for letting
me go first. I am going to ask you one question, after making a
quick statement. I think you are doing a fantastic job, Madam.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you, sir.
Senator Kennedy. And I know you are working hard. I am
sorry I missed you in Louisiana.
Mrs. McMahon. Me too.
Senator Kennedy. I will catch you next time.
I have just got one question. You have been on the job now
for two years. You knew a lot even before then about business.
You know even more now. What impact do you think the Green New
Deal will have on small business in America?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, I think I would have to see how it
exactly rolls out. There will be a lot of impacts on small
businesses that I think would be very difficult, but I think I
would rather reserve my comment until I really know more about
it.
Senator Kennedy. Well, do you think it will have a positive
impact or a negative impact? Let us start there.
Mrs. McMahon. Well, I----
Senator Kennedy. I agree with you that it will be
impactful.
Mrs. McMahon. I guess that depends on what kind of
businesses do what under the Green Deal. If it is technology
development, looking at other sources of energy, they will
probably exceed. If it is impacting small business farmers,
especially, and some of the issues that we are looking at, I
think that those would be harmful. So----
Senator Kennedy. What about the taxes that would be charged
to small business in order to pay for it?
Mrs. McMahon. I do not know if we know where that is yet,
but I am not sure we could--from what little I know, I am not
sure we could tax enough to pay for it.
Senator Kennedy. Okay. Well, you have had two years of
experience here in the Federal Government. Suppose a President
turned to you and said, ``Here is the Green New Deal. Implement
it.'' Where would you start?
Mrs. McMahon. I would have to take a look at it and see
where we would need to start. I am not trying to be evasive
with my question but just to implement a whole new program you
have to look at where it is going to start. And you are talking
about specifically relative to new business. Do we look at
farmers? Do we look at technology?
Senator Kennedy. Well, I am thinking----
Mrs. McMahon. Do we look at bankers or lenders, and how do
we do that?
Senator Kennedy [continuing]. Suppose the President turned
to you and said, ``I want you to implement a program that would
guarantee a good-waged job to every American,'' if they wanted
to work. If they did not want to work they did not have to. How
would you go about doing that?
Mrs. McMahon. With great difficulty.
Senator Kennedy. Okay. Thank you, ma'am.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you, Sir.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Senator.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Coons.
Senator Coons. Thank you, Chairman Rubio, Ranking Member
Cardin. Congratulations, Chairman Rubio, on your new role.
Senator Kennedy and I are, in this Congress, going to be
the Chair and Ranking of the Financial Services and General
Government Subcommittee, and I look forward to talking with
you, Madam Administrator, about your budget priorities for this
coming year. I just--I want to congratulate you on everything
you have gotten done. Your report back to us about cutting loan
processing time in half, increasing backup to the pre-slowdown
level, digital training and outreach for women entrepreneurs is
just another reminder of why I enjoy working with you and enjoy
being on this Committee.
I recently met, actually yesterday, with the head of the
SBDC from Delaware, to hear about some of their concerns and
what they are doing operationally, and to being encouraged
about their work. I look forward to reauthorizing SCORE in this
Congress, something Senator Risch and I have now tried two
Congresses in a row.
And SBA is making a great impact in Delaware. Last year you
guaranteed 195 loans to small businesses, totaling about $73
million, the second-best year on record in the State.
So thanks for our recent conversations about poultry loans.
I look forward to continuing to work with you to ensure our
poultry farmers have access to appropriate and relevant
financing and there is sufficient oversight of lenders under
delegated authority.
I want to express my appreciation for your working with my
staff to improve the method for designating rural areas. A
State as small as Delaware does, in fact, have rural areas, and
because of your office's attentiveness all business in Sussex
County, Delaware, is now eligible to benefit from the Rural
Lending Initiative's fee waiver.
Take a minute if you would and just help me--and I assume I
will have a chance to do this with Senator Kennedy on the
Appropriations Subcommittee--but just at a high level tell me
what your funding priorities will be for FY 2020, and I am
hoping that in the next day we will pass the FSGG approps bill
for FY 2019. That will be the first time in 20 years, because
it is typically a divisive bill. SBA is the one area in the
bill that has never been divisive. So tell me what your top
funding priorities are for this coming year, if you would.
Mrs. McMahon. Well, always, clearly we look to make sure
that our lending programs have sufficient funding, and so that
would always be a concern. But I would work with you, and if
there were any particular issues, and my staff would be working
with your staff to make sure that we are looking at all the
programs. And if we think there are funding opportunities that
we should enhance, then we will come to you and we will talk
about that.
The women's initiative that I talked about, that's a--it's
platform driven so there's technology investment in that, you
know, through appropriations. I think we're good but to move
forward and roll it out we might look for, you know, some
additional funding on that.
Also, I really--one of my priorities this year is I
traveled all across this country, over the last 20 months. My
goal over the next year is to travel more internationally to
look for more export markets, and how can we develop that?
I've had great outreach from many countries that talk to us
about the model that the United States has for SMEs, small and
medium enterprises, equivalent to our SBAs. How do we do it?
How do we work with the government? How do we set up our
training programs? And so I want to focus more on that, as well
as making sure that our STEP programs in our different states
are exposing those businesses to the opportunity for trade and
for export. And so I think that is going to be a really
critical program for what we are doing. It is going to be a big
program and I really want to see that grow.
And now if we have USMCA, I think that is going to really
enhance that, especially, you know, that is a treaty that, for
the first time, has a total chapter on small businesses. And I
would hope to see that chapter incorporated in other treaty
deals as well.
Senator Coons. I look forward to working with you, in
particular on the international aspects, both trade growth and
export. But women's entrepreneurship programming, I have been
to more than 20 African countries and there is a rapid rise in
women's entrepreneurship in the developing world.
Let me talk about apprenticeships with you for a minute, if
I could. I appreciate your reference to the importance of
workforce development. I think apprenticeships offer a terrific
cost-effective way to develop skills for good jobs. But small
businesses, in particular, have a hard time developing
apprenticeships and sustaining them.
Senator Young is also on this Committee and I introduced
the Apprenticeship Hubs Across America Act in the last
Congress. It would fund workforce hubs, intermediaries which
help small businesses design and run apprenticeship programs
and provide support services to help apprentices complete their
training, especially in sort of non-traditional areas--not in
the building trades, not in areas that have had apprenticeships
for a long time, but things like hospitality, for example, or
health care.
In your travels around the country, what did you hear about
workforce needs for small business and how do you think an
expanded apprenticeship program might help with this? I
recently talked to the Secretary of Labor about this particular
idea.
Mrs. McMahon. And I work with Secretary Acosta a lot, and
looking at the apprentice programs, workforce development is
one of the--or access to a skilled workforce is one of the
greatest challenges that I hear from small businesses all over
the country--small and big business. You know, we are--we
clearly are at a great unemployment level, which makes the
demand for those workers even more. So how do we skill those
workers?
I have also been working with the Secretary of Education to
look at programs that are not just traditional, you know, in
our high schools and in our colleges. Apprentice programs, I
think, are critical.
And I will give you just a quick side story, if I may. I
was with a landscaper and he started--he is not just a
landscaper. He is in big equipment business and clearing and
all of that. And he said when he was in high school he used to
drive his dump truck. He had a second-hand dump truck and he
would drive it. He said it did not do much for his dating life
but it really helped him start to build his business. And his
friends always made fun of him.
He said, but he now has a really big, flourishing business.
And I encouraged him. I said, ``Are you talking to your
guidance counselors at your schools, et cetera?'' He said, ``As
a matter of fact, I go at least once a month and talk to kids
in assemblies and whatever about apprenticing. Come over to my
shop. Let me show you not only how to operate, you know, this
big equipment, but how to manage your business, how to grow,
how to do sales, how to do marketing.'' I do not think you
could do better than to have that kind of one-on-one experience
to help young people grow and develop.
Senator Coons. Well, I appreciate your tireless advocacy
for growing small businesses and the relevant workforce. I will
close by just referencing that Chairman Rubio and I--we are
joined with Senators Kennedy and Jones--recently introduced the
Small Business Credit Protection Act to help make sure that
small business owners have the same protections against data
breach, compromising their credit, that many other larger
businesses enjoy. So I hope you will be willing to work with
us, and with small business owners, to build and protect their
commercial credit.
I really appreciate your testimony and I appreciate the
Chairman's forbearance in allowing me to extend beyond my time.
Thank you.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you very much.
Senator Coons. I welcome you back to Delaware at any point.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you. I look forward to that.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Hawley.
Senator Hawley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Administrator,
thank you for being here.
I have two questions for you. Thank you for the excellent
work that you are doing. But let me start with a concern, one
that has already been raised by the Chairman, related to the
proposed loan rule change.
I want to ask you about the affiliation provisions. I have
heard from a lot of farmers in my State that they are concerned
about the changes, the proposed changes to the affiliation
provisions. Missouri, as you may know, is one of the top 10
poultry producers in the United States. Poultry farmers, in
particular, in my State, are concerned that a lot of smaller
operations who depend on partnerships with larger poultry
operations will be swept in by this rule change and, therefore,
no longer eligible.
Will you take--and I am sure this is showing up in the many
thousands of comments you have received--will you be taking
these sorts of things into account as you assess going forward
with this rule?
Mrs. McMahon. Oh, we absolutely will, and that is exactly
what we are doing now, as part of the rulemaking process, is
evaluating those statements that have come in.
You know, SBA operates under the umbrella of making sure
that our lending goes to right-sized businesses. So we need to
make sure that they are, in effect, small businesses, under all
of the guidelines, and there is no credit elsewhere available.
So as we look at all the responses that are coming in we will
then report back.
Senator Hawley. Great. I look forward to that. Thank you,
and thank you for your attention to this.
Let me ask you about the Rural Initiative Pilot Program. As
a guy who grew up in a very small town in rural Missouri, and
familiar--all too familiar with the difficulties that rural
parts of our country and of my State are facing in terms of
keeping good jobs, attracting new businesses, starting a
business in a rural area--I mean, there are significant
challenges across all these fronts.
Your Rural Initiative Pilot Program, to increase access to
capital in rural areas, I think is extremely promising and much
needed. I wondered if you could describe that to us and the
progress that you are seeing there, or making there.
Mrs. McMahon. Well, I have signed a Memo of Understanding
with Secretary Perdue at USDA, because we want to combine our
service. He has greater outreach into rural areas. They have
96,000 people in the field in USDA. So what we are doing is
combining our marketing materials as well as loans that we
have, loans that USDA has, and providing those marketing
materials into the marketplace so that more and more of our
potential rural business development can see exactly what is
available, you know, for them.
In addition, I think that--I am not doing it but Secretary
Perdue, under USDA, has launched, you know, a rural toolkit for
broadband penetration. That is going to also help, I think,
significantly in helping our rural businesses grow.
Senator Hawley. Great. Thank you so much. Thanks for your
leadership on this.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you.
Senator Hawley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Hirono.
Senator Hirono. Thank you. Thank you very much for coming
to Hawaii.
Mrs. McMahon. I enjoyed my visit but it was much too short.
Senator Hirono. Oh, well. You are welcome any time.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you.
Senator Hirono. Hawaii has had a number of disasters in
2018, so I did want to go over some of these disasters and how
SBA has been very helpful.
So we had disasters including severe storms, floods,
mudslides, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and hurricanes.
These disasters displaced homeowners, disrupted businesses, and
had an enormous impact on individuals and families in our
communities, as well as State and local resources. And even
today, people in my State are still working to recover from
these disasters.
And when you last appeared before the Committee in 2018, in
May, we had the opportunity to discuss the record rainfall that
flooded Kauai. In fact, it was the most rainfall that had
fallen anywhere in the United States in the history of the
United States----
Mrs. McMahon. Wow.
Senator Hirono [continuing]. And Oahu communities. And
since that time Hawaii has experienced other natural disasters,
including, of course, the volcanic eruptions on the Big Island.
So to date, roughly 500 disaster survivors in Hawaii,
including business owners, individuals, and families and
homeowners have received more than $48 million in disaster
assistance from the SBA, primarily through the SBA's low-
interest disaster loan programs. And with this assistance
businesses have been given access to SBA resources that will
help them rebuild, including, of course, replacing damaged
machinery, equipment, inventory that may have been affected by
those disasters.
And, furthermore, homeowners--I think there was something
like 2,000 homeowners who are displaced because of the volcanic
eruption, and they have been given access to resources that
will help them rebuild by allowing them to repair their homes,
refinance mortgages, and make improvements to better prepare
for future disasters.
So needless to say that SBA has been right there. And at
one point we were having all of these natural disasters on a
recurring basis, and when I was on the Big Island there were
dozens of Federal people, including, of course, the State and
county people and SBA there. They were there for months at a
time, as it turned out.
And yesterday afternoon I had a chance to meet with local
directors from Hawaii's Small Business Development Center, and
they, as you know, provide businesses counseling services, and
they have many examples of how they hands-on help entrepreneurs
to succeed, including, I think you mentioned, money management
and how to use computers to keep track, as opposed to
handwriting, you know, their receipts and all of that. So that
is really important.
They reiterated the challenges that businesses in the State
faced last year related to these disasters, and, of course,
were really appreciative of SBA's coordinated efforts.
So as an island State, when disaster strikes we are
particularly vulnerable so I will continue to work with you.
And now I have some questions, a few questions to ask you.
You were asked several times about the set-asides for
women. And in the country, we put out about $400 billion worth
of contracts to various businesses. And I am wondering whether
the set-aside for women-owned small businesses, which is 5
percent of this $400 billion--is part of the challenge for
women-owned businesses that they do not provide the kinds of
goods or services that the government wants to contract for?
Mrs. McMahon. That is a good question.
Senator Hirono. Is that the problem?
Mrs. McMahon. I have not done that kind of analysis but I
think that is a really good question to raise, one I will look
into, and I will get back to you.
Senator Hirono. Could you please, because I know that a lot
of small businesses that I have encountered, they work really
hard but they--I think they do not produce things that the
government wants. I mean, I love chocolates and cupcakes.
Mrs. McMahon. But I can tell you, I have been to a couple
of women-owned businesses----
Senator Hirono. Right.
Mrs. McMahon [continuing]. That produce manufacturing
parts, you know, and supply for, you know, the larger prime
contracts. Those women are--it is unbelievable how they run and
operate their businesses.
Senator Hirono. So as you expand your outreach to rural
areas, and especially to women in these rural areas, I think it
would be helpful to encourage them to perhaps get into those
kinds of goods or services that can enable them to vie for the
$400 billion in contracts.
I also had discussed with you last time, and I am running
out of time, the importance of supporting the ability of Native
Hawaiian-owned businesses or NHOs in Hawaii, or Native--Alaska
Natives, American Indians. You have a Native American outreach
program. And I would like to make sure that you are doing
everything you can to continue to enable these minority-owned
businesses, these very particular minority-owned businesses to
be able to successfully be able to get government contracts.
Mrs. McMahon. I think, under my tenure so far, I think we
have made a good start. I just recently--we had a team on the
ground with outreach to the Hawaiian Native Americans to look
and to see what the--if there were issues, if there was help we
could do, et cetera. And so it has been certainly an
instruction from me that we must do more of that outreach.
And I had a great time when I was in Hawaii. Was the
Dawson----
Senator Hirono. Mm-hmm.
Mrs. McMahon [continuing]. The Dawson family, their whole
business.
Senator Hirono. I know them well.
Mrs. McMahon. And, oh, my goodness, they were involved in
contracting, and they bring so many businesses in and support
so many businesses.
Senator Hirono. Yeah.
Mrs. McMahon. So I talked to them about how we could even
be more helpful and work more closely with them, because they
seem to have such a great footprint. So I will look forward to
continuing that as well.
Senator Hirono. Thank you, and, Mr. Chairman, just one more
thing. I want to pitch Hawaii on the Hill, because Hawaii on
the Hill is an opportunity for Hawaii's small businesses to
bring their products and services to Hawaii. And they come the
farthest to highlight their products and services. And I would
like to extend to you, as the SBA Administrator, to participate
in the policy summit portion, because that is an opportunity
for Hawaii small businesses to interact with leaders like you
who will be making decisions that will impact their businesses.
Mrs. McMahon. Is it called Hawaii on the Hill?
Senator Hirono. Hawaii on the Hill.
Mrs. McMahon. When is it?
Senator Hirono. It is a really hot ticket. Truly. The
people stand in line to get in.
Mrs. McMahon. Could I get an inside?
Senator Hirono. Sure.
Mrs. McMahon. Could I get a little inside access?
Senator Hirono. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Senator Duckworth. Are you ready.
Senator Duckworth. I sure am. I just made it. Thank you.
Administrator McMahon, as you know the Veterans Small
Business Enhancement Act was recently passed into law last
year, allowing veteran-owned businesses to be eligible for GSA
surplus property. Senator Kennedy and I worked very hard to
make sure our veteran-owned businesses have access to the
program, with help and support from the dedicated staff at SBA.
My office has been hearing from veteran-owned small businesses
eager to take advantage of this new program.
Can you provide details on how implementation will proceed,
specifically what SBA, in coordination with the GSA, issue
general implementing rules before establishing Memorandums of
Agreement with each State agency, or will SBA and GSA begin to
get those MOAs drafted and finalized now?
Mrs. McMahon. What we are--I don't mean--this is not a
pejorative statement, but what we are waiting on at the moment
is for GSA to establish and set the parameters for the program.
We will then be working with them very closely, and I would
look forward to coming back and talking with you about, here is
what we are looking at. How do you think we can improve that? I
would really appreciate your input when we are ready to do
that.
Senator Duckworth. Okay. Thank you. Let us hope that it
moves along quickly.
Mrs. McMahon. Yes. I think that is such a great--it is such
a great program.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you. I have heard from small
business owners across Illinois that one of their biggest
challenges continues to be access to capital and the need for
technical assistance from the Federal Government to help them
compete with major corporations. That is why I am developing
legislation that would enhance the SBA Microloan program, which
helps meet those needs, particularly for women-, veteran-, and
minority-owned small business and low-income entrepreneurs.
I think we agree it is an important program and I was
really pleased to see President Trump request increased funding
for the program in fiscal year 2019.
Can you explain why the Administration believes the program
is important to the small business community?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, it is one of our fastest-growing loan
programs as well. And I think it does--and with the technical
assistance and working closely in the communities I think we
are developing more and more of those small businesses. So it
is really that connectivity, and I am really pleased to see how
well it is doing, and we want to continue to focus on it.
Senator Duckworth. Great. Thank you. I agree that, you
know, that is one----
Mrs. McMahon. And you might be interested to know that the
average loan is about $17,000 in the Microloan program.
Senator Duckworth. That goes a long way, does it not?
Mrs. McMahon. It does go a long way, but sometimes people
need $500 to start, or $1,000 to start. So that is about the
average loan.
Senator Duckworth. That is fantastic. I cannot think of a
better time to enhance the program, and my legislation would--
my draft legislation would increase microloan intermediaries'
loan portfolios per year, and overall, and authorize increased
technical assistance funding, just as you mentioned----
Mrs. McMahon. Mm-hmm.
Senator Duckworth [continuing]. The importance of technical
assistance. I think this would serve as a continuation of the
success that SBA has had with this program.
Would you support my forthcoming legislative proposal that
builds on your progress to further increase intermediaries'
loan portfolios so that they can take on more--we can give them
more money that they can loan out more loans to more
businesses?
Mrs. McMahon. I would--I would certainly look forward to
working with you on that.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you. And also the level of
technical assistance, increased level of technical assistance
funding, as well, throughout the country.
I really think it is wonderful that you are supporting this
program and actively championing for it. I know across
Illinois, for example, small businesses are 95 percent of all
employers----
Mrs. McMahon. Mm-hmm.
Senator Duckworth [continuing]. In our State, and so the
vast majority of people in Illinois work for small businesses,
and should they not be successful we certainly would not be
successful as an economy, statewide. So thank you, and thank
you----
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you.
Senator Duckworth [continuing]. For being so available to
discuss this.
Mrs. McMahon. You bet. You know, two out of three net new
jobs in the private sector are created by small businesses.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you.
Mrs. McMahon. So that is--we need to take care of them and
help them grow.
Senator Duckworth. Thank you. I yield back the remainder of
my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you. The Ranking Member had some
questions and then I had one to wrap up, as well.
Senator Cardin. I had one or two more questions. On
workforce development, one of the issues I hear over and over
again is the difficulty of small businesses getting trained
workers. I know that you mentioned that when you were here
that, in your travels, you are finding it challenging.
What steps have you taken to ensure that small businesses
have easier time finding skilled workers, and is there any way
that we can help you in that regard to help strengthen the
tools in regards to small businesses being able to have a
trained workforce?
Mrs. McMahon. Well--excuse me--it does become more and more
competitive as we have low unemployment, because clearly then
there is a competition for those workers. So that is kind of a
given as part of the marketplace.
However, the apprentice programs that we were speaking
about with Senator Coons, I think they are incredible. They are
not--those apprentice programs are not only being done by
schools and private businesses, they are also being done by
unions who will come in to different areas and offer
apprenticeship programs. And I think it is going to take more
and more of the private sector working with our educational
system, and with government, to make sure that we are
emphasizing providing funding, you know, for those programs.
I will give you an example of how this is working so well.
I was just--I was in Cleveland about a week ago, and I went to
Tri-C Community College. So not only do they work with the
private sector to develop their apprentice--apprenticeship
programs and technological training, but they have gone a step
further. They actually have taken a tractor-trailer and they
have portable units for training in the field. And they take
that tractor-trailer to businesses and will be there for a time
period to train those workers, at no charge, often, for the
program. Sometimes it is travel or expense-related
reimbursement.
But that kind of innovative thinking, you know, for virtual
welding, for technology, for computer science, and being able
to take programs to companies, to schools, is going to be one
of the ways that we are going to be able to increase our
workforce.
Senator Cardin. I would also urge you--the apprenticeship
programs are critically important. I agree with you. This is
the Congress that should reauthorize the workforce development
program, and I would just urge us, this Committee, working with
you, to take a look at making sure there is a focus on small
businesses in our workforce development programs and local
government, using Federal funds----
Mrs. McMahon. Mm-hmm.
Senator Cardin [continuing]. To help small businesses deal
with this shortage of trained workers. Whether it is because of
low unemployment rates or just difficulty finding trained
workers generally, it is a particular problem for small
businesses.
Mrs. McMahon. Oh, it is, and it is something I talk about
all the time.
Senator Cardin. And then, lastly, we passed the Small
Business Runway Extension Act, which deals with the five-year
averaging in order that there is not an abrupt qualification
problem for small businesses in getting the tools available
under SBA. In talking with your staff I understand the delay in
implementing that as you are going through a rulemaking
process. I would just urge you to give this a priority
attention, because I know this is an area where Congress really
wants to implement this five-year averaging as soon as
possible.
Mrs. McMahon. And I think it is the right timing, as well,
for the five years, and so, yes, we are going to be pushing on
that rulemaking.
Senator Cardin. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rubio. Just on the SBA disaster loans, last year
we were able to get language included in the supplemental, the
2018, that ensures that applicants aren't penalized when they
apply for but do not accept an SBA disaster loan. That only
unfortunately applies just to those disasters.
Does the agency support a permanent fix?
Mrs. McMahon. Yes. I would like to see a permanent fix. It
is--you know, it is relative to HUD programming. You know, SBA
comes in and we make our loans, you know, and in disaster
lending it is the only time that SBA is actually the bank, to
make the loans for businesses and for mortgages. So we make
those loans, but then the--going into the municipality or the
local district office--not district office, but local
government--if HUD comes in to make the grant it has been HUD's
determination that it is a duplication of benefits.
So we would like to see that clarified, because we come--
you know, we get our stuff done and then we want to make sure
that those who are receiving the loans are not penalized.
Chairman Rubio. And then on the SBIC program that was
created back in 1958, before there was really venture capital--
in fact, some think that is where venture capital got the idea
from--but it is still, even though we have a lot of venture
capital today, it still fills a gap that is really important.
And I think what has been concerning is to see the approval
process that--well, the approval process takes 18 months, and I
do not know if that applies to it, but there has been a
decrease in the number of approved applicants over the last two
years.
I'm curious, do you know how many licenses were approved in
2017 and 2018, or either one of those years, or in cumulative,
and I guess what is behind the decline, what is being done to
address it?
Mrs. McMahon. Well, we have changed. It is not declining
anymore. We have changed it. It went from 15 approvals to 25
approvals in 2018. So I am pleased to see the direction change
on the approval levels.
It is--part of the timing is because those venture capital
firms who come in to get the license, they come in and first
they apply, and they get a green-light letter that says, okay,
we have verified that they are capable of running the SBIC.
Then they must go out and raise $75 million. They have 18
months to do that. Sometimes they do it in a much shorter
period of time. But they have a length of time to come and
raise their capital. And they come back and then we have the
matching program. We put in $175 million. Then from that
process, you know, the--they just get approved at that point,
so that is a few more months.
What we are doing is shrinking the amount of that tracking
by new technology, and it is called backstop. It will give us
the ability then to track status of case management. I think
that is going to cut down on some of the approval time. So I am
looking really forward to getting that in place. It should be--
it will definitely be before the end of the year.
Chairman Rubio. Do you have anything further?
All right. Thank you so much for being here today. We
really appreciate it. I think we had great attendance and it
was a good way to start the year. We have a lot of work ahead
of us but I think you have done a good job at sort of outlining
what you have done to this point, and, in particular, your
individualized awareness of so many of the states that are
applied here. I think certainly a lot of members clearly have
been interacting with you and are impressed by the work that
the agency has done.
So the hearing record for this hearing is going to remain
open for two weeks. Any statements or questions for the record
that anyone might have should be submitted by Wednesday,
February 27th, at 5 p.m.
Thank you again.
Mrs. McMahon. Thank you both very much.
Chairman Rubio. Thank you.
Mrs. McMahon. Chairman, Ranking Member, thank you both.
[Whereupon, at 3:58 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]