[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-111]
MILITARY TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER:
THREATS, IMPACTS, AND SOLUTIONS
FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
__________
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD
JUNE 21, 2018
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
33-384
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fifteenth Congress
WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina
ADAM SMITH, Washington
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey
SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
ROB BISHOP, Utah
JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
RICK LARSEN, Washington
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama
JIM COOPER, Tennessee
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania
MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas
JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado
NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California
JACKIE SPEIER, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California
RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
RO KHANNA, California
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
MATT GAETZ, Florida
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIMMY PANETTA, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming
JODY B. HICE, Georgia
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan
(Vacancy)
Jen Stewart, Staff Director
Tim Morrison, Counsel
William S. Johnson, Counsel
Justin Lynch, Clerk
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................
2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................
1
WITNESSES
Bingen, Hon. Kari A., Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence, Department of Defense............................
8
Chewning, Eric, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Manufacturing and Industrial Base Policy, Department of Defense
10
Griffin, Hon. Michael D., Under Secretary of Defense for Research
and Engineering, Department of Defense.........................
4
Schinella, Anthony M., National Intelligence Officer for Military
Issues, Office of the Director of National Intelligence........
5
APPENDIX
Prepared Statements:
Griffin, Hon. Michael D., joint with Anthony M. Schinella,
Kari A. Bingen, and Eric Chewning..........................
42
Smith, Hon. Adam.............................................
40
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac''..........................
39
Documents Submitted for the Record:
Chart: China's Technology Development Strategy...............
55
Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:
[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]
Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:
Ms. Rosen....................................................
60
Ms. Speier...................................................
59
MILITARY TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER:
THREATS, IMPACTS, AND SOLUTIONS FOR
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
----------
House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Thursday, June 21, 2018.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in Room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES
The Chairman. The committee will come to order. In his
January 19, 2018, remarks on the National Defense Strategy,
Secretary Mattis warned that, quote, ``our competitive edge has
eroded in every domain of warfare, air, land, sea, space, and
cyberspace, and it is continuing to erode,'' end quote.
Now much of that erosion has been caused by things we have
done to ourselves; sequestration and continuing resolutions
come to mind. But part of the erosion in our competitive edge
is the result of adversaries and competitors obtaining American
technology and intellectual property by legal and often illegal
means.
In its January 2018 report, China's Technology Transfer
Strategy, DIUx [Defense Innovation Unit Experimental] found
that the People's Republic of China, for example, uses a
variety of methods to obtain U.S. technology, including
industrial espionage, where China is by far the most aggressive
country operating in the United States; cyber theft on a
massive scale, deploying hundreds of thousands of Chinese Army
professionals; academia, since 25 percent of U.S. STEM
[science, technology, engineering, and math] graduate students
are Chinese foreign nationals; China's use of open-source
information, cataloging foreign innovation on a large scale;
Chinese-based technology transfer organizations; U.S.-based
associations sponsored by the Chinese government to recruit
talent; and technical expertise on how to do deals learned from
U.S. firms.
That report noted that the cost of stolen intellectual
property has been estimated at $300 billion a year. Most
alarming, DIUx found that--again, I will quote--``[t]he U.S.
does not have a comprehensive policy or the tools to address
this massive technology transfer to China,'' and ``[t]he U.S.
government does not have a holistic view of how fast this
technology transfer is occurring, the level of Chinese
investment in U.S. technology, or what technologies we should
be protecting.'' That is the end of the quote.
Now I understand that the DIUx report is just one report,
but based on everything this committee has learned and heard
about over the course of this year, those conclusions sound
right to me, and it should be alarming. There are several
provisions in the upcoming NDAA [National Defense Authorization
Act] conference which relate to this issue, including the
modernization of CFIUS [Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States] and export control regime. This hearing will
better equip us to make important decisions in the days ahead.
Let me yield to the ranking member for any comments he
would like to make.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thornberry can be found in
the Appendix on page 39.]
STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the most
important part of your statement was at the end there, is that
we do not have a strategy to counter what is happening. I think
the chairman is right and the Secretary of Defense is correct.
Our advantage in a number of different areas has been eroding.
Now the biggest reason for that, I believe, is that the
rest of the world is catching up. I mean, there was a
substantial period of time there when it was really just the
Soviet Union and us who were building, on a significant level,
our military capacity. And we dominated the world economically
and militarily post-World War II for a long period of time.
That was never going to last forever. The rest of the world
was going to develop ways to grow their economies, grow their
technology, and eventually turn towards growing their defense,
and that is what has happened. But what has not happened on our
end is we have not responded to that. Our strategy still seems
to be based on the notion that we are still dominant, so we do
not have to worry about these details, and I think that is
dangerous and that we need to develop.
And I will just mention a couple of key areas, most of
which the chairman mentioned. But to begin with, the CFIUS
process of protecting our technology has long needed reform.
Items that were not thought of as being national security are.
Technology; how do we protect that? How do we make sure that
adversaries are not purchasing those companies and taking away
our technology?
I think what the Senate added to the defense bill is a
great opportunity for us to update that process to help protect
our technologies through the CFIUS process. And we have to get
that right, and we are going to try to do that in the next 5, 6
weeks, so we definitely want to be in touch, make sure the
language is right, make sure what we are doing in that part is
correct.
The second piece of this is on the cyber piece, and we had
a briefing yesterday on a cyber breach, and it was shocking how
disorganized, unprepared, and quite frankly, utterly clueless
the branch of the military was that had been breached. Even in
this day and age, we still have not figured out how to put
together a cyber policy to protect our assets. In particular,
with our defense contractors, who we work with, who store our
data, but do not have adequate protection. But even within the
DOD [Department of Defense], we do not have a clear, cohesive
policy to put in place.
And the third area of policy we do not have is we do not
have an industrial policy. And again, I think this is a legacy
of our dominance. We did not have an industrial policy because
we were dominant. In fact, an example from my own neck of the
woods, Boeing. Why is Airbus able to be subsidized and
competitive? Well because decades ago, we agreed to allow them,
in many instances, to do that. And we did that because at the
time, we had like 85 percent of the global aircraft
manufacturing market, and we thought, well, is it not cute?
Airbus wants to compete, whatever, it does not really matter to
us. Well, here we are with that flipped. They have stepped up
and competed.
And now, we have not come through with a sensible idea of
what technologies, what industries do we need to protect for
our own national security. As the chairman will relate, I do
not think it is flatware, but that seems to be the one thing
that we wind up debating in the NDAA every year. While,
meanwhile--no offense to those in the part of the world who
consider that important--but, you know, meanwhile, we are
losing core technologies that are critical to defense and no
one really understands exactly why.
The last piece of it, I will say, that I think is
important, is trade. Now, we have a somewhat--I do not know
what the word would be--unfocused approach right now to how we
combat a competitive trade environment. The one thing we
definitely should be doing is figuring out how to get on a more
level playing field with China.
It is not just our trade deficit with China, but it is the
strategies that they have put in place to capture core
technologies, to steal them in some instances. But, a lot of
it, they are doing within the WTO [World Trade Organization]
framework. Some of it, they are doing outside of the WTO
framework. But, we have not put together a comprehensive
strategy for changing that equation, whether it is bringing
trade actions against them, whether it is trying to get them to
change their policies. It is sort of a reactionary approach
right now. So, we need a strategy on this.
And, I think this hearing is incredibly important. I look
forward to the testimony of witnesses. And I thank the chairman
for convening it. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 40.]
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. I am pleased to
welcome our witnesses today: the Honorable Michael Griffin,
Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering;
Honorable Kari Bingen, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence; Mr. Eric Chewning, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Manufacturing and Industrial Base Policy; and Mr.
Anthony Schinella, National Intelligence Officer for Military
Issues. Thank you all for being here.
Without objection, your written statement, it looks like
there is just one to me, will be made part of the record. And
we will turn it over to you-all for comments you would like to
make.
Mr. Schinella, I--or, you are starting first, is that? Oh,
you all figure it out.
Secretary Griffin. I----
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary. Go ahead if you would like.
Secretary Griffin. I believe the earlier agreement was that
I would start, sir.
The Chairman. Great.
STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL D. GRIFFIN, UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Secretary Griffin. So thank you first of all, Chairman
Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith, members of this committee. We
appear before you to discuss the very real Chinese adversarial
behavior to which you have referred. And this is not about the
threat of such behavior; this is real behavior.
We are here to underscore the urgency with which all of us
must focus our actions to maintain our technological and
military dominance. I thank you for the trust you have placed
in myself and my fellow witnesses to discuss this topic in this
open setting as carefully as we can.
We did--yes, sir, we did submit a single joint statement
because we wanted to be together rather than separate. I think
we have a common view of this topic. But our conversation today
is only a handful of pixels in the entire picture of what we
face. It is my and I believe, our deep belief that we must act
now. But, at the same time, it is my duty to limit my comments
to those of a strictly unclassified nature. So, as we go
forward, I welcome, expect, and encourage more detailed
discussions in a more restricted environment. I believe this
will be necessary in the months and years ahead. This is not a
problem with a short-term fix, sir.
We are here, in part, to recognize that this is a whole of
government, indeed, a whole of society problem. And we are
here, in part, to recognize and draw distinctions between
adversaries and allies according to the behavior of the actor.
No one believes more strongly than I, in the value of
international partnerships and alliances, and in the value of
international commerce and fair exchange.
But the Chinese theft of technology and intellectual
property through the exfiltration of the work of others is not
unlike the Chinese construction of islands to encroach upon the
geographic domains of international waters and those of other
sovereign nations. It circumvents the autonomy of nations in a
departure from a rules-based global order. It is adversarial
behavior and its perpetrator must be treated as such.
The breadth and depth of Chinese malfeasance with regard
not only to our technology but also to our larger economy and
our Nation is significant and intentional. As referenced in our
written testimony, we are taking steps to counter it.
You, as the Congress, have established my office in
particular to regain and maintain the technological dominance
that we as a Nation have depended upon in the past. We pledge
to you to do that; and, with your help and support, we will.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions. And I yield
to my colleagues.
STATEMENT OF ANTHONY M. SCHINELLA, NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
OFFICER FOR MILITARY ISSUES, OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE
Mr. Schinella. Mr. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member
Smith and all members of this distinguished committee, good
morning and thank you for welcoming me here to discuss this
important topic.
As the DNI's [Director of National Intelligence's] National
Intelligence Officer for Military Issues, I am regularly tasked
with reporting on threats to the U.S. military. There are, of
course, the visible threats from foreign military forces and
weapons systems. But the U.S. intelligence community also sees
a less visible but dual threat from adversaries and competitors
that are deliberately working to acquire U.S. research,
technologies, and talent, to improve their own military
programs and erode the effectiveness of ours.
More broadly, the IC [intelligence community] assesses that
foreign countries' acquisition of U.S. technology through licit
and illicit means, as well as cheating on trade agreements,
joint ventures, and exploiting scientific collaborations, have
the potential to erode the U.S. competitive edge. Foreign
countries, most notably China, are able to acquire and transfer
critical U.S. technology through their intelligence services,
foreign direct investments, joint ventures, open-source science
and technology acquisition programs, use of insiders, front
companies, and scientific and business collaborations.
This has potentially far-reaching consequences. As we have
highlighted in the DNI's annual threat testimony, persistent
trade imbalances, trade barriers, and a lack of market-friendly
policies in some countries probably will continue to challenge
U.S. economic security. Some countries almost certainly will
continue to acquire U.S. intellectual property and proprietary
information illicitly to advance their own economic and
national security objectives.
China, for example, has acquired proprietary technology and
early-stage ideas through cyber-enabled means. At the same
time, some actors use largely legitimate legal transfers and
relationships to gain access to research fields, experts, and
key enabling industrial processes that could, over time, erode
America's long-term competitive advantages.
Foreign actors, notably China and Russia, recognize that
investing in and acquiring technology is absolutely essential
to achieve their strategic goals. They want to develop weapons
systems that strike farther, faster, harder, and more precisely
as a means to erode the traditional pillars of U.S. military
strength and challenge the United States in all warfare
domains.
This pursuit of advanced weapons systems could lead to new
means of warfare, especially robotic and autonomous systems
operating across land, sea, air, and space domains. In this
capacity, the U.S. intelligence community has long monitored
foreign countries' acquisition of technology outside of their
own indigenous development programs.
Analysis of technology transfer most intuitively includes
tracking a country's acquisition of a key technology or
component, openly or illicitly, but also includes understanding
of how actors assess technical specifications, design or
engineering skills, and manufacturing and production
techniques. These kinds of technology transfers can allow a
country to speed up or lower the cost of development projects
because they can bypass or trim the costly research and
development stages. These acquisitions can not only improve
foreign military capabilities, but can also accrue to them
economic benefits.
In this course, China is the embodiment of the military
technology transfer challenge. The Chinese government has a
comprehensive strategy for technology and modernization to
bolster China's international image, foster its national
economic growth, and improve its military modernization.
And technology acquisition from the United States is
definitely part of that comprehensive strategy. For some time,
Beijing has articulated industrial policies and long-term
objectives contained in a number of comprehensive national
development plans, such as its well-known 5-year plans and its
Made in China 2025 initiative.
In these plans, Beijing has shown that it is interested in
acquiring technology and expertise that is of critical economic
or national security importance to the United States. In its
most recent 5-year plan, Beijing identified its most critical
technology priorities, including clean energy, aerospace and
deep sea research, computer and information technology, and
manufacturing.
China is therefore prioritizing investment in and
acquisition of critical future technologies that will be
foundations for future innovations, both for commercial and
military innovations like artificial intelligence, robotics,
autonomous vehicles, augmented and virtual reality, financial
technology, and gene editing. These technologies are inherently
dual use, making it difficult to draw a line between commercial
versus military applications. These technologies are also
likely to be foundational to future innovations and essential
to the next wave of competitive high-technology products.
China's development strategy is multifaceted and its
supporting infrastructure is robust. China uses multiple
vectors to acquire the skills and know-how it seeks, and I
would like to highlight a few of these for you.
One is joint ventures, mergers, and acquisitions. Tech
transfer to China is occurring in part through increased levels
in investment and acquisitions of U.S. companies, which hit a
record level in 2016 before dropping somewhat in 2017 and again
in the first half of 2018. China's aggregate investment in U.S.
technology over the past decade, from 2007 to 2017, totaled
approximately $40 billion and was about $5.3 billion last year.
And because the Chinese Communist Party is intimately involved
in planning economic activity and supporting companies, there
is a great deal of coordinated investment, along with other
vehicles of technology transfer, to accomplish China's larger
stated goals.
Another vehicle are research partnerships and academic
collaborations. Foreign governments often use every means at
their disposal to secure an advantage in technological areas,
and their exploitation of academics and researchers at U.S.
colleges, the National Laboratories, and other institutions is
one of those means. China actively seeks partnerships with
government laboratories to learn about and acquire specific
technology and the soft skills necessary to run such
facilities. China also uses collaborations and relationships
with universities to acquire specific research and access to
high-end research equipment.
Another vector are science and technology investments.
Beijing has made sustained, long-term state investments in its
S&T [science and technology] infrastructure, and China
leverages international collaborations with key pieces of this
S&T infrastructure to gain technology and know-how. In 2017,
China's spending on research and development was estimated at
$279 billion, up more than 70 percent from 2010.
Another mechanism are talent recruitment programs. Beijing
runs multiple talent recruitment programs specifically focused
on recruiting global experts who can facilitate the transfer of
foreign technology, intellectual property, and know-how to
advance China's science, technology, and military modernization
goals. China uses these programs, such as its Thousand Talents
Program, to recruit Western-trained experts to work in China on
key strategic programs.
Beijing also has employed Western-trained returnees to
implement important changes in its science, engineering, and
math curricula that foster greater creativity and applied
skills at China's top-tier universities.
Another mechanism that it exploits is the legal and
regulatory environment. China consciously uses its laws and
regulations in ways that can disadvantage U.S. companies and
advantage its own companies. The Chinese government uses
foreign ownership restrictions, such as formal and informal
restrictions, to require or pressure technology transfer from
U.S. companies to Chinese entities.
The Chinese government also uses its administrative
licensing and approvals process to force technology transfer in
exchange for the numerous administrative approvals needed to
establish and operate a business in China.
We also assess China will use cyber espionage and bolster
its cyberattack capabilities to support national security
priorities, which include technology acquisition. The IC and
private sector experts continue to identify ongoing cyber
activity from China. Most detected cyber operations against
U.S. private industry are focused on cleared defense
contractors or IT [information technology] and communications
firms whose products and services support government and
private sector networks worldwide.
And China's technology transfer mechanisms are paired with
Beijing's parallel strategy of military-civilian fusion that
expands civil-military integration of defense and industrial
bases to facilitate the construction of a national
infrastructure connecting the PLA [People's Liberation Army],
state-owned defense research, development, and manufacturing
enterprises, and government agencies under the state council,
universities, and private sector firms. We assess that these
collaborative partnerships have well supported Beijing's rapid
military modernization.
What are the possible long-term consequences? Well, while
the most immediate and visible effects may be related to
particular military technologies, the long-term consequences
could be much broader.
A decline of the United States advantage in key technology
could affect our ability to set global norms and regulations
for technology, control access to technology for military
purposes, and reap the economic benefits we derive from
commercialization. If the United States were to lose its
technological edge, the associated loss of influence would have
far-reaching implications beyond scientific disciplines to
include economic, social, political, and security dynamics.
Within the ODNI [Office of the Director of National
Intelligence] we are facilitating the information exchange
among the organizations responsible for the analysis of
technology transfer because this issue is global and
multifunctional in reach and nature. We collaborate closely
across the intelligence, counterintelligence, and law
enforcement communities, as well as other national agencies in
multiple ad hoc groups and formal groups working on specific
technology transfer issues. We regularly develop collection
requirements and provide warning in the form of intelligence
products of threats associated with technology transfer.
This concludes my overview of the threats posed by military
technology transfers. And, I will now turn to my colleagues to
continue with remarks on the impacts of these foreign
activities on the United States and measures we are taking to
thwart and deter them. Thank you very much.
STATEMENT OF HON. KARI A. BINGEN, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Ms. Bingen. Thank you. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member
Smith, and members of the committee, it is a privilege to be
back although it is a bit of a different viewpoint from down
here. I was really honored to support you in all the vital
national security work you do, and was fortunate to see
firsthand the bipartisan approach that you took to national
security and providing for our military. So, thank you.
In my new role, I support the Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence [USDI] as he carries out his lead
responsibilities within the Department on behalf of the
Secretary for both intelligence and security, executing the
National Defense Strategy, including its direction to protect
the National Security Innovation Base. As you heard from my
ODNI colleague, the Department of Defense is facing
unprecedented threats to its technological and industrial base,
putting at risk the capabilities critical to maintaining our
military advantage.
China, in particular, has made it a national goal to
acquire foreign technologies to advance its economy and to
modernize its military. It is comprehensively targeting
advanced U.S. technologies and the people, the information,
businesses, and research institutions that underpin them. It is
playing the long game, using a variety of different methods to
steal our information, circumvent our processes, and exploit
our seams.
Across the defense intelligence and security enterprise
that the USDI oversees, we are making significant changes in
our approach to industrial and to information security, as well
as to counterintelligence. I welcome the opportunity to follow
up with you in classified session to discuss additional
initiatives we are undertaking that will provide you with a
more holistic picture.
In our unclassified forum today, I will touch briefly on
four key lines of effort. First, we are elevating the private
sector's focus on security, through an initiative called
Deliver Uncompromised. We must have confidence that industry is
delivering capabilities, technologies, and weapon systems that
are uncompromised by our adversaries, secure from cradle to
grave.
It is no longer sufficient to only consider cost, schedule,
and performance when acquiring defense capabilities. We must
establish security as a fourth pillar in defense acquisition
and also create incentives for industry to embrace security not
as a cost burden, but as a major factor in their
competitiveness for U.S. government business.
Second, through the Defense Security Service, we are
implementing a more comprehensive approach to industrial and
information security. We are transitioning from a compliance
checklist-based national industrial security program to a risk-
based approach, informed by the threat and the Department's
technology protection priorities.
However, safeguarding our cleared defense contractors only
protects part of our defense industrial base. The increasing
ease of access to large amounts of unclassified and
nongovernment data in the defense industrial base offers
opportunities for exploitation which, in aggregation, can be as
damaging as a breach of classified information. To narrow this
gap between protecting classified information and that
unprotected unclassified information, we are developing a
program protection plan to cover controlled unclassified
information, including identifying the policy and resources
necessary to do this.
Third, using authorities provided by this committee,
including section 806 of the fiscal year 2011 NDAA and section
1696 of last year's NDAA, we are strengthening the integrity of
the supply chain as well as establishing a pilot program to
enhance information sharing with cleared defense contractors.
And, fourth, we are enhancing our counterintelligence
capabilities to better address the nontraditional collection
methods being employed by our adversaries. We are adding
security and counterintelligence personnel resources to the
Defense Security Service, NCIS [Naval Criminal Investigative
Service], Air Force Office of Special Investigations, and the
Army CI [Counterintelligence]. Our defense intelligence
components are augmenting their collection and analysis
capabilities to gain a more comprehensive understanding of
threats to our technologies, which will improve our
intelligence support to export control reviews and CFIUS
transactions.
Lastly, we are increasingly relying on our partnerships
with FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]--not just
increasingly, but we must rely on our partnerships with the
FBI, Homeland Security, and other departments to actively
leverage both our individual and our collective authorities to
protect the Nation's critical technologies. Through these four
lines of effort, we can help mitigate the threats to our
technology and information critical to our military advantage.
And, by doing so, deliver uncompromised capabilities to our
warfighters.
We recognize that strong relationships with industry across
the interagency, with our allies and partners and with Congress
are essential to that success. We thank you for your continued
focus on the threat, your understanding of the impacts to our
warfighters and their capabilities, and your commitment to
support our policies, programs, and the resources necessary to
maintain our advantage. I look forward to your questions.
STATEMENT OF ERIC CHEWNING, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL BASE POLICY,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
Mr. Chewning. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you all this morning. I serve as the principal
adviser to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
Sustainment on DOD policies for the maintenance of the U.S.
defense industrial base. This includes assessing the national
security impact of foreign investments.
Our National Defense Strategy outlines a handful of
critical technologies necessary for maintaining U.S. military
dominance in an era of great power competition. For those
capabilities with unique military applications, like missile
defense and nuclear forces, the Department of Defense will
continue to act as our Nation's sole developer and
technological first mover.
But, for those emerging technologies with both military and
commercial uses, like artificial intelligence, we will also
need to be a fast follower and adapter of commercial sector
innovation. Therefore, force structure modernization requires
support from both our heritage and legacy, and commercial
defense industrial base.
Chinese industrial policies of economic aggression, such as
investment-driven technology transfer and illegal intellectual
property theft, pose a multifaceted threat to our entire
national security innovation base, a threat with the potential
to create both long- and short-term impacts. In the short term,
their attempts to steal intellectual property, compromise our
defense supply chain, and create economic dependence within the
sub-tier of our industrial base chips away our relative
military technological advantage.
Over the longer term, spurred on by strategic initiatives
like One Belt, One Road, Civil-Military Fusion, and Made in
China 2025, this potential for China to erode our underlying
innovation and industrial advantage. The engine of our national
defense has always been the strength of our economy.
Chinese policies seek to extract technologies from Western
institutions, leverage our educational system to develop its
own workforce, and use subsidies and nontariff barriers to
prevent competition and to enable the creation of national
champions. These national champions enjoy a protected domestic
market, which they will use to their relative advantage and
enable them to grow at speed and scale. And then, use all the
elements of the communist state to place their national
commercial champions at the top of critical markets and
industries globally.
These commercial national actors are then directed to
compete globally against United States and Western firms, while
being given every subsidy and benefit the authoritarian
communist government can devise, with the goal of marginalizing
U.S. companies. Combating these predatory economics require a
whole of nation approach to both protect and promote American
industry, as well as our like-minded allies and partners.
From a defense industrial policy perspective, this includes
modernization of the complementary protection measures of CFIUS
and export controls, as well as increasing the private sector's
focus on cybersecurity. On the promote side of the ledger, we
need to make sure the Department is a customer of choice for
emerging technology providers. This will require acquisition
processes that operate at the speed of relevance, as well as
budget stability so we can send a clear demand signal to
industry.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify on this
important topic, and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary Griffin, Mr.
Schinella, Ms. Bingen, and Mr. Chewning can be found in the
Appendix on page 42.]
The Chairman. Let me just ask, as I mentioned at the
beginning, one of the issues with which we will deal in
conference is a modernization of the CFIUS process. That has
been added to the Senate Defense Authorization Bill. There is
an effort in the House to not only update CFIUS, but also the
export control regime, which may be considered fairly soon in
the House floor.
But, regardless, this issue is before us. And, what
guidance can you, any of you, give us as far as the updating of
CFIUS and export controls?
Mr. Chewning. I am happy to take that first, Mr. Chairman,
and I am sure my colleagues would also like to add on. But we
think of CFIUS and export controls as complementary tools for
protecting national security.
The Secretary has identified three gaps in the current
regime, specifically around tech transfer through joint
ventures, access to technology through non-controlling
investments, and expanded review of leases and real estate
purchases so we can protect investments near sensitive military
sites. What I would suggest to you is that recognizing that
both CFIUS and export controls need to work in concert to
address these three gaps.
Secretary Griffin. The comment that I would like to make,
sir, is that in the CFIUS process historically, we look at one
deal at a time. We do not look at the overarching pattern of
such purchases or investments. I think it is the broader
pattern which is actually of greater concern.
We also do not look at CFIUS investments or investment
candidates from the perspective of, let me just say, the
intelligence gathering opportunities it offers. For example,
every firm today, which even if it is not in a technology-
critical sector--so, let me go to that extreme, but yet such
firms all have highly networked software systems controlled by
commercial operating systems.
Every time that there is a software update to such an
operating system, it affords another intrusion path into
domestic networks. We do not look at Chinese investments from
the perspective of the mischief that might be made simply by
having foreign ownership and, in some cases, control of such
avenues. So I will leave it that. I believe that is as far as I
would want to go at this point.
The Chairman. So my conclusion from that is, we need to
update CFIUS and export controls but it does not fix all the
problems?
Secretary Griffin. It does not remotely stop there, sir, in
my opinion.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. I mentioned in my opening remarks,
the idea of, you know, having an industrial policy as to what
key technologies we should protect. That is very easy to say;
it is incredibly complicated to implement in terms of how you
would do that.
But, just what ideas would you have in terms of what an
industrial policy would look like if we basically geared our
trade policy and our internal investments to make sure that we
were protecting certain core technologies? I realize you could
write a book in answer to this question; please do not.
But, if you could, just give us a little bit of a framework
of what an intelligent industrial policy would look like.
Because I do not think the President has the vague idea of the
problem, and then it is just like all over the place in terms
of how to solve it. What would a more coherent approach look
like?
Secretary Griffin. Well, I am not going to address any of
the back-and-forth chatter in the current environment because
we are talking about a long-term strategy here. We need to
recognize that whether they are specific defense products or
not, many things underlie our industrial base.
I might, from a large list, as you said, sir, I might pick
out, for example, microelectronics. We worry about that from
the point of view of having a trusted supply. Kari mentioned
that in her comments. We want to know that we have an end-to-
end supply of defense equipment, and I would also say
commercial equipment, that we can trust.
The difficulty in the microelectronics arena is that, an
area in which the United States once reigned supreme, thanks to
now 20-some years of Chinese investment, domestic U.S.
manufacturers no longer, in all cases, make the best
microelectronics. So we should be unsurprised when others
elsewhere or anywhere in the world no longer seek to buy from
us, but seek to buy the best.
Mr. Smith. Can I shift focus on my question a little bit--
--
Secretary Griffin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. To help with that. As I mentioned
early on, some of this is inevitable. I mean, the rest of the
world was going to catch up.
I think a lot of people underestimate the impact that World
War II had on, you know, several decades of us--the entire
industrialized world got blown off the face of the map and we
were the last ones standing, basically. If you are going to
fight a war, it is always good to win; it is even better to win
on the road. And, that left us in a very, very strong position
for several decades.
But that was highly unusual. So even if China was not doing
all this nefarious stuff--and I agree with the chairman, we
have got to go after the CFIUS possibly, we are going to have
to compete. And we are also--I think, part of our industrial
policy is some of what we are going to need, we are going to
have to get from someplace else.
So would you say that--in my conclusion, that is we need
allies. We need people who have--the--I do not think there is
anything built in America anymore that is entirely made of
American parts, or anything built anywhere, for that matter,
that does not rely on some sort of supply chain. What could we
do better to make that aspect of it work? To have part--you
know, countries that we can trust and work with?
Secretary Griffin. Well then I will get off that previous
path and refer to my opening remarks, where we are today not
drawing distinctions in our industrial policies between friends
and allies and partners, and people who behave in an
adversarial manner.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Secretary Griffin. It is in our interest to make it easy
for our allies and partners to cooperate and collaborate with
us as opposed to making it easy for them to collaborate with
China, and it is in our interest, in my opinion, for us to make
it more difficult for the Chinese to work with us.
During the Cold War, there was a whole of nation policy,
such that the idea of doing a commercial deal with the Soviet
Union were words that did not fit in one sentence. We do not
have such policies today.
Mr. Smith. Yes, I will stop there, because--well, keep it
quickly, I have gone on too long. Go ahead.
Mr. Chewning. Well--just very quickly, just to maybe give a
tactical example of where that collaboration is taking place.
You know, the NDAA enshrined the NTIB, the National Technical
Industrial Base, which is a partnership between the United
States, Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
We are using that to do a couple of things. One,
collectively, how can we work together to create a foreign
direct investment screen so we can work in concert against
predatory economics from unallied nations? But then also to
identify areas where we can do industrial-based collaboration
to benefit us more broadly.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you. Sorry, Ms. Bingen.
Ms. Bingen. Mr. Smith, if I can also tackle that, is from
the foxhole where I sit, I see it as my job to not make it easy
for China to get this technology. And so in my remarks, I hit
on four key pieces. Security has got to be a fourth pillar in
acquisition, in addition to cost, schedule, performance. And it
is not right now. And it will be incredibly complex to do. We
have got to put it into the regulations, into the contract
mechanisms, et cetera.
Second, DSS [Defense Security Service] in transition--and I
will hit on that in a moment, integrity of the supply chain,
and increasing our CI resources. DSS in transition: it was
amazing to me to see the approach we take to industrial
security today is very much checklist-based. You go into a
cleared defense contractor, ``Do you have the alarms, the
locks, the safe?'' It was not looking holistically at what is
the technology or capabilities that you are providing to the
government? What is the threat? What are your vulnerabilities?
And so they are now, based off of DOD's critical technology
priority list, going into these companies that work in these
areas to look more holistically at all those different pieces;
it is probably going to be uncomfortable for industry, but we
need them as a partner to do this if we are going to be able to
deliver on compromise.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Mac Thornberry, for holding
this hearing on such an important topic. Establishing and
maintaining our military's technological edge is imperative in
order to increase their effectiveness and lethality on the
battlefield while protecting our troops.
The Department must encourage and protect research and
innovation from being stolen by state and non-state actors. I
am concerned by the assessments provided today, but hopeful by
the attention being provided by Chairman Thornberry and the
House Armed Services Committee.
First I would like to welcome back Secretary Kari Bingen as
an alumna of this committee, and we appreciate your service and
wish you the best. And so appropriately the first question
begins with you. And the question is, is additional legislation
needed to protect particular technologies and associated
intellectual properties with military applications? If so, what
technologies are in the greatest need of protection, why would
legislation be necessary to protect them, and how should such
legislation provide such protections?
Ms. Bingen. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. Good to be back here. A
couple areas I would highlight, there--there is section 806
this year on extending the authority for us to strengthen the
supply chain. We think that is a very good measure, and we are
implementing those processes now to be able to do that and
excise out of supply chain vulnerabilities.
On the resource front--and we will have to work with the
committee on the specifics of this, but on the
counterintelligence areas that I talked about, the greater
analysis that we will have to do with our industry partners to
understand where their threats and vulnerabilities are, that
will require additional resources.
With these CFIUS reforms, whatever final legislation comes
out of that, that will place an increasing demand signal on our
intelligence capabilities, so that will require additional
resources. But then also, as we go through this delivering
uncompromised and DSS in transition, as we look at how we
implement control--how we implement protections on controlled,
unclassified information, we may need to come back to you with
specific legislative proposals, and we will work with you on
that.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. And if anyone else would like to
respond?
If not, a general question for everybody again. Is this
primarily a nation-state problem? What about transnational
criminal organizations, multinational corporations, or
terrorist groups? What risk do non-state actors pose in
transfers of U.S. intellectual property and technology?
Secretary Griffin. Well sir, those are important issues as
well, but the bulk of all the information we have gathered is
that China is the big problem. And I think we need to focus our
efforts on first taking care of the big problems and then
absolutely we cannot afford to neglect other areas, such as you
suggest. But we have to prioritize.
Mr. Wilson. And then in particular, identified in China,
the Confucius Institutes that are located at 103 colleges and
universities across the United States. Many of these are
located adjacent to research facilities. Is anyone familiar
with the Confucius Institutes, which has been identified by a
member of the--of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of China as a very important propaganda arm? Is anybody
familiar with what is being done to try to identify these
institutes as to their motives?
Mr. Schinella. Speaking to your original and second
question generally, I would agree with colleagues that this is
predominantly a state actor problem, or at least that is
certainly the largest and most looming problem. Within that,
China is the most pressing threat.
With the slight additional amplification that in the case
of a country like China, you asked about multinational
corporations. When you have state-owned enterprises, you know,
our framework does not necessarily capture the--that blurred
line between a multinational corporation and state actor
itself.
I--we are familiar with the Confucius Institutes as one
more visible representation of China's global presence,
including in the United States, and consistent with my earlier
remarks, I would just note that that is just one of many, many
footprints that Beijing has in, near, and on our campuses and
research institutes that it uses as ways to overtly and less
overtly collect on and maintain awareness of what is happening
on those campuses and institutions. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Wilson. And thank each of you, and we appreciate your
service to our country.
The Chairman. Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, to our
witnesses. Even before getting to Congress, I have been hearing
about this, reading about this, and now, even more sitting in
Congress, I am dismayed that I am hearing about the diagnosis
but not necessarily the way to fix this.
You know, in the Marine Corps, you have a couple options,
right? You know, to protect yourself, you have your Kevlar or
your body armor, more importantly though, you have your rifle.
And the best way to stop somebody from trying to attack you is
to look tougher and make sure they know the consequences if
they do attack you.
I feel when we are dealing with this issue that we are
talking about how to only play defense. But what are, actually,
are our offensive options to actually make our quote/unquote
enemy understand that if they do these types of actions that it
is going to be painful? And, obviously to a certain degree--I,
you know, I do not want to trigger a war--but we need to be
able to have some level of deterrence.
So, that way, they actually have to make a rational
calculation of whether or not they are going to engage in this
type of conduct. If not, I feel like this is just going to
continue to happen. Every year, I am going to have the same
briefing and all we are going to be talking about is what
happened and not what we can do to stop them.
So, I do not know who wants to take the question first, but
I would like to hear some ideas. Or, if we have to take this to
a classified setting, that is fine, too. But, I would love to
hear it. And, welcome back, too.
Ms. Bingen. Sir, thanks. If I can start, again, from an
industrial security perspective and that is what I am here to
represent, my focus is on cleared defense contractors. And I
outlined the four areas, security fourth pillar, DSS and
transition, supply chain integrity, counterintelligence. Two
other areas; we are branching out and, as Mr. Schinella
highlighted, there is a deep concern with the cyber data
exfiltration issue. And it is one that the Chinese in
particular are targeting.
So, one of the directions that my boss, the Under
Secretary, has given to Defense Security Service is to come up
with that program protection plan, come up with the policies
for how we control within industry that unclassified
information, yet still may potentially have some sensitive
technical information or personal information. So that is one
of the areas that we are hitting.
The other one is I absolutely agree with you on we are
playing defense right now, particularly in the cyber domain.
And we need to be playing more offense. We need to be working
with the FBI, leveraging their authorities on the law
enforcement front. But that will require a further conversation
with you, largely at the classified level, on some of the
authorities and resources that we might need to do that.
Secretary Griffin. At the unclassified level, I will say
that it is through CFIUS, and possibly FIRRMA [Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act] in the future and
other mechanisms, it is our choice as a nation as a matter of
national policy as to whether or not we allow investments of
any magnitude and scope by China in this country. It is our----
Mr. Gallego. And I apologize, not to cut you off, but my
point--the point that I guess I have made is that you are all
describing defensive protocols and methods, right? And it does
not really matter to the Chinese or to our foreign adversary if
they know that, you know, they can get around our defenses and
there is no consequences.
So, what are we actually doing to change the rationale, the
calculations that they are going to actually do these types of
things that ostensibly are illegal? What is our pushback?
Mr. Chewning. Well, I mean, obviously the administration's
Section 301 investigation into Chinese intellectual property
theft would be an example of that. I think more broadly, if we
think about the offensive measures we can take from an
industrial base perspective, what are we doing to promote our
own industrial base capabilities, right?
I think that, from a DOD perspective, starts with the
recognition that going forward we are going to have to not only
remain the sole developer for certain bespoke military
applications, but reform our acquisition processes in a way we
can leverage the benefit of our entire broader economy, right?
And, become a customer that is able to attract the best of both
the heritage defense industrial base as well as emerging
commercial technology providers.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for having
this important hearing. Thank you all for being here.
This is an occasion where I am going to agree with Mr.
Gallego 100 percent, which is not a typical, not a daily
occurrence necessarily. But, something on this important issue
I wanted to point out. And I was going to ask, and will ask the
same exact question. What are we doing offensively?
You have talked a lot about some great defensive measures,
and where we are buttoning up, and then making airtight the
secure and vital research and technology that our defense
contractors, our government has. And I applaud you 100 percent
for doing that. But I would like to see more in the way of
consequences to the Chinese when they do this adverse behavior.
I will just make an editorial comment here. I think for too
long, administrations of both parties have been rather passive
in light of what is going on. I want to applaud the Trump
administration that, at least in the area of trade, that there
is pushback going on now with talk of tariffs. I do not know
how that is all going to play out; but I am glad that that is
being discussed and made a serious issue in Washington. I think
that is an example of pushback that needs to happen.
Let me throw out an idea, if you want to comment on this,
you can. You do not have to if you do not want to. I think it
might be interesting to have a widespread and concerted policy
in our defense to put out wrong information, pretend like it is
great information, great technology, and they steal it and it
will not work for them. Or they go down a dead end and they
waste money, or it actually backfires somehow.
I think it would be an interesting thing to pursue, where
we start poisoning some of the technology that is ostensibly
vital, and healthy, and good, but it messes them up when they
start to pursue it. Any thoughts on that?
Mr. Chewning. Maybe I could answer the first part of the
question, then defer to my colleagues around that particular
issue specifically. But, just to elaborate, so the Section 301
investigation the USTR [Office of the United States Trade
Representative] led into Chinese theft of U.S. intellectual
property does have some offensive measures to it. And as was
publicly articulated in a memo from the White House on the 29th
of May, there is obviously the tariff action that has been
associated with that. There is potential for investment
restrictions into the U.S. economy. And then, there is the WTO
case that we have taken forward, specifically to dispute----
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, good.
Mr. Chewning [continuing]. What the Chinese are doing. So--
--
Mr. Lamborn. Good.
Mr. Chewning [continuing]. Just to be clear, there are
offensive measures that are being done in response to Chinese
economic aggression. I will defer about----
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, I am glad to hear that.
Mr. Chewning [continuing]. About the second question.
Mr. Lamborn. I am glad to hear that.
Ms. Bingen. And, Mr. Lamborn, I would love to follow up
with you in a classified session to talk more holistically, at
the classified level, about all the different things that we
are doing or looking to do.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Okay, good. And lastly, I will finish
up, there was an article in The Wall Street Journal today or
yesterday about some detected Chinese hacking on our space
operations. And it was on not research and development, but on
the operations side, which indicates that there is an intent in
the future perhaps to use that information to disrupt--to be
disruptive, to disrupt operations in an offensive way, possibly
in a time of conflict. Does that concern you?
Secretary Griffin. Sir, that is a topic that I really do
not want to discuss in a public setting. Broadly speaking, your
comment, taken on its face, is very concerning. It is, for me,
very concerning to have read about it in the papers. I would--
as my colleague, Kari Bingen, just said, I would welcome the
opportunity to discuss this stuff in a more closed setting.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Well, with that, Mr. Chairman, I
will yield back the balance of my time. Thank you for being
here.
The Chairman. Ms. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. While we have raised the issue of trade policies, I
am wondering if you could comment and you know, I am not trying
to make this into a debate here in terms of trade, but we
mentioned a number of areas, particularly related to China. So
was it a real missed opportunity to have not moved forward on
the Trans-Pacific Partnership when it comes to national
security?
Secretary Griffin. I am unable to offer you an opinion on
that, ma'am. I am sorry, I am not familiar--I just do not have
the expertise to comment on the Trans-Pacific Partnership
versus national security.
Mrs. Davis. Okay, because in many ways--maybe you would
like to comment, I think we lost that opportunity to have China
be more disruptive when it comes to that. Go ahead, did you
want to comment?
Mr. Chewning. I agree with the Under Secretary. That is not
an issue we have looked at specifically yet, so I do not have
any further comments.
Mrs. Davis. Really. Okay, maybe that is one of the
problems. I mean, I think that we were aware that national
security was an issue in this regard, and it is I guess sort of
surprising to me that there was not that kind of weigh-in when
it came to those issues.
So I wanted to ask you further, we talk about a whole of
government approach, we are often doing that, and yet when it
comes to the concerns that you are raising here, how important
is it, and are you monitoring that? Are we engaging those
elements of governance and government that historically or
traditionally we do not think of in this area of intellectual
property or endeavors?
Where do you think that is, I mean, and how do the
Department of State, Treasury, Justice, Homeland Security
contribute to technology protections, and are there other roles
that the Department of Education, Health and Human Services
could be playing in this regard?
I mean, it is a complex issue and I am just looking to
see--to what extent do you think that that is important?
Secretary Griffin. Well, I will start. I do think it is
important. I have said publicly, actually I believe in an
earlier hearing before this committee, that we somehow in the
years since the Berlin Wall came down and the Soviet Union
dissolved, we believed that great power competition was behind
us. The National Defense Strategy released this past January
makes a very clear set of points that we have returned to an
era of great power competition and we must treat it as such.
When we believed, throughout the, you know, several decades
of the Cold War, when we believed we were in a great power
competition for not only the hearts and minds of the world, but
possibly our very existence, we treated such all the matters
that you are talking about, State, Education, Commerce, the
Treasury, we treated all of that as if it were of existential
importance, which it was.
Today, we treat these individual matters as if they were
individual matters, and I think what you are hearing from us is
that they are not isolated issues, that they need to be treated
in the large.
As I was starting to answer to Mr. Gallego's question
earlier, we as a nation have choices. Do we wish to admit, as
we have today, 30,000 Chinese PhD students in STEM areas? Do we
wish to do that? Do we think the benefits outweigh the gains?
There is not a national decision in that regard as there was
when we were competing against the Soviet Union. We did not do
those things.
It us not for me to say whether we should or should not. I
am trying to put on the table that these apparently isolated
decisions in fact when taken together comprise a whole of
government strategy that we do not have.
Mrs. Davis. Yes, I do not know if anyone wants to comment
[inaudible]. Is there one particular example that you think
creates best practices in a more non-traditional way of working
together that we ought to be looking at more seriously?
Guess not. Thank you. Thank you.
Ms. Bingen. I would be happy to follow up, ma'am.
The Chairman. Dr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A huge problem,
national security issue, and the mentality of, why build it
when you can steal it? So we get that, and I was listening to--
Ms. Bingen, you had your four pillars, and one of those was a
program called ``delivery uncompromised,'' I think was what it
says.
And my question is, for these contractors and
subcontractors, is there an MBO, a management by objectives
policy, that if they do not meet objectives they are penalized
or punished, or if they do not reach that security level they
are kicked out of the system? Is there any accountability
today?
Ms. Bingen. Well sir, you have actually hit on the
challenge and why we are taking this different approach. When a
contract is awarded to a company, it is based on cost,
schedule, performance. It is not based on security.
And so part of this delivery uncompromised initiative is
working through all the details of what would that look like,
what are the standards, is there an independent verifier that
does the--you know, the good housekeeping seal of approval on
it, how do we work with our acquisition colleagues on infusing
security into acquisition policies, into the regulations, into
the actual--in the COTRs [Contracting Officer's Technical
Representatives], the contracting officials that help drive
those decisions?
So those are all the details that we are working through
now. But then also, industry cannot look at it the way they do
today, which is, this is a cost center and it is a loss to my
bottom line. They have to be incentivized to look at security
as, this is actually going to help me make more profit.
Dr. Abraham. But are they held to that standard now?
Ms. Bingen. They are not.
Dr. Abraham. Okay, and I will just go to a quick second
question. Classified versus unclassified, we understand that
today's classified data is yesterday's outdated data, or vice
versa, but it--this data evolves so quickly and this technology
evolves so quickly that it is hard to keep up with. And that,
if you take two unclassified pieces of data and perhaps marry
them together, then it becomes a classified document.
My question, just for my understanding, who actually has
the authority to make the call as to whether a piece of data or
a piece of technology is classified. Is it the project
managers? Is it somebody in DOD? Is it somebody--what
wheelhouse makes that decision on a daily basis?
Ms. Bingen. The Under Secretary for Intelligence has the
policy responsibilities. So, we set the framework and the basic
standards for what those differentials are.
Dr. Abraham. So you have the responsibility. And you have
the authority. But do others under you also have the authority?
I understand the responsibility, and that is where the bullet
does stop there. But the authority can be delegated out to
other people. Is that a lot of fingers going out, or is it two
or three people, how does that work?
Secretary Griffin. Well, in the technology arena, for
example, I have original classification authority, should I
make a determination that a particular set of technologies upon
which we're working needs to be protected. And many others do
as well. Those authorities can be delegated and are delegated
downward. I know there have been breaches, we had reference to
that earlier on today, of actual classified information.
But I will go on record, sir, as saying that I believe this
hearing, and our witness statements and responses to questions,
are more about the amalgamated effect of the industrial base
and technology levels as a whole, not whether or not a
particular exfiltration attempt by the Chinese was successful
in a particular case. But rather, the whole pattern of Chinese
investment in our industrial base, extraction of data,
predatory joint ventures, predatory trade practices, the whole
spectrum of Chinese adversarial behavior with respect to our
economic and industrial base, I believe that is--actually the
larger concern, sir.
Dr. Abraham. Oh, I understand the 30,000-foot view. But, I
also understand the ground-level view, that if we have that one
breach on a national security issue, it can certainly parlay
into something much bigger, so.
Secretary Griffin. Absolutely, sir.
Dr. Abraham. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, on the debate
about whole-of-government approach, I am just concerned that
you throw the term around like it is candy at a parade. Because
at the same time, you have testified that--someone, one of you
did--that the Belt Road Initiative is problematic for U.S.
policy.
At the same time, you testify that our Department of
Commerce is holding bimonthly meetings with U.S. companies and
the U.S. embassy in China to figure out ways for those U.S.
companies to access projects in the Belt Road Initiative, at
the same time you talk about whole of government approach.
I am not asking you to be experts on trade or TPP, but to
have some concept of how--what the argument was on Trans-
Pacific Partnership, how it fit into leveraging U.S. economic
policy and strength in Asia vis-a-vis China. Just that basic
understanding would be helpful for you all.
And so, I do not think you are talking about a whole of
government approach. I think you are talking about--you may be
talking about a whole of Pentagon approach. So, if there is a
whole of government approach, I would like to know--and not
from you today.
But, just another example, if we are in an era of great
power competition, you talk about the last one we had and we
are not doing those things we--today that we did in the last
one. Well, in the last one we had, we fought for open markets.
We put human rights near the top of the list when we talked to
North Korea. And we are not doing that today, so does that not
apply to this era of great power competition?
So, again, I think you are throwing the term around to try
to make it sound like you are doing it. But I do not think you
are. And you need to get on it. If you have--you need to have
a, you know, a mechanism. If we only had a National Security
Council mechanism that could develop the whole of government
approach that is used by the White House, then we might have
one.
So that is--I usually do not give speeches. I usually ask
questions in my 5 minutes. But, it has just been--frustrating
to hear this term being thrown around, again, like candy at a
4th of July parade; and I do not think you are living up to it.
So, Ms. Bingen, I wanted to ask you about a couple
questions on your five--you made four points on what you are
doing. Specifically on, I think it was your third or second
point, about section 806 and 1696 authorities and strengthening
supply chain security in the Defense Department. That is great,
that might favor larger contractors. And so, because they have
the capacity to, you know, absorb the costs, if you will.
How are you going to ensure that smaller companies, smaller
businesses that maybe have more innovative ideas, can bring
more flexibility to the table at the Pentagon, how are you
going to ensure that they do not get tossed aside because they
do not have that capacity to do the kinds of things perhaps on
supply chain security that you might be asking them to do?
Ms. Bingen. Yes, Mr. Larsen, that is a great question and
that is something that we will have to work through. We are
really just at the front end of that. And on 1696, we are
putting together the plan for right now. I think it was--it
is--the pilot has to be established by next--I think early next
year, 2019. So, that is something that we absolutely will have
to consider. I do not know that I have a good answer for you
today. But, it is something that we are looking into and I
would be happy to follow up with you.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, if you could. Your staff and the committee
when we did a tour around the country with small businesses,
Chairman Schuster, at the time, and I went around the country
and tried to find ways that we could bring small business more
into Pentagon contracting. So, I just would ask you to watch
that.
Ms. Bingen. And then, we will also have to work with them
as we do the delivering uncompromised pieces. They do not--you
are right, they do not have the capacity that a lot of these
large folks do. So, it is, how do we incentivize them, and,
also, how do we work the liability issues to encourage them to
report and to make these fixes, when they just do not have that
big capital that the large folks do.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, and, again, for me, the crux of it is that
this is where some of that innovation that we need to have
happen, and that Dr. Griffin wants to have happen, a lot of
this is going to take place in smaller companies. But we do not
need be building hurdles to make it more difficult for them to
do that. So I just would ask you guys to watch that. Thank you.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Gallagher.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This a great
hearing to have. I think sometimes we overlook the issue of
technology transfer. And just to follow up on what was said
about the need to go on offense: as we are considering a few
initiatives, obviously the need to strengthen CFIUS, but I
would also like to call your attention to section 217 of the
Senate NDAA, which provides the USD(R&E) [Under Secretary of
Defense for Research and Engineering] with the authority to
establish or fund a nonprofit entity to help facilitate
research and technology development in critical hardware-based
technologies that the private sector has tended to
insufficiently support and could help meet emerging security
needs.
And I know it is a long bill, but have you all, maybe
starting with Mr. Griffin, been able to take a look at this
provision? And from your initial read, do you support it?
Secretary Griffin. Yes, sir, I have read that section. I
have worked with some of the folks that are promulgating that
initiative, and I support it.
Mr. Gallagher. And Mr. Chewning, I know we have had
discussions on this. I would just be interested in your
thoughts on sort of that angle of the need to invest in
hardware. I mean, we spent so much time talking about software
and not the hardware angle.
Mr. Chewning. Yes, sir, it is a great point. And--and to
build on it, about 92 percent of our venture capital investment
is in software. And as we think about our need for
modernization roadmaps, we know hardware and company formation,
in particular, hardware technology is going to be critical. And
so I think taking that language in addition to exercising the
authorities given to us by Congress in section 1711 in last
year's NDAA, we can pull together a response.
Mr. Gallagher. Great. I appreciate that. I could not agree
more. I look forward to helping this provision get over the
line. I think one of the biggest challenges we face is that
those of us in the room here today may understand the scope of
the challenge, but much of the broader society does not.
And in fact, I think our competitive edge in many cases
hinges on more people just getting it from--you know, the
promising researcher who takes a second look at an attractive
offer to join a state-connected Chinese firm, or a graduate
student who decides maybe they should not conduct PhD STEM
research in China.
And I know this hearing's about solutions for DOD, but I
would be fascinated to hear your thoughts on how we can better
communicate the story we are hearing today to the broader
population. And reading sort of the DIUx report on technology
transfer, I mean, one of the key proposals is outreach to the
private sector and academia.
And so I guess maybe a question--let us just go down the
panel that way. I mean, how can we more effectively conduct
that outreach to the private sector, to academia, and to
society more broadly? I know it is a big question, but.
Mr. Chewning. Well, I think--and it is a great question. I
think increasingly through our industry association engagement,
and not just with the types of folks who you think we would be
talking to, but more broadly, increasingly we are hearing those
concerns from the industry associations.
And I think it is the need to begin to separate the need
for an incremental revenue opportunity, where you may be going
into a new market, to the longer lens necessary, recognizing
that you are going to be doing business with someone who
eventually wants to put you out of business, and the need to
get that message across.
Mr. Gallagher. Yes. And can I just put a finer point on it.
I mean, we have had these recent stories about certain Silicon
Valley companies not wanting to do business with DOD because of
sort of the intersecting with lethal drone operations, right? I
mean, that is a huge problem, if at the time when we need to be
working more closely with the Googles or the Amazons, with the
Facebooks of the world, that is sort of the cultural reaction
to working with DOD.
I am just wondering if you could just comment on that
briefly, and how do we turn that conversation around? If that
makes any sense. Yes?
Ms. Bingen. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Gallagher. Yes?
Ms. Bingen. We are disappointed in that, but we also know,
in particular in artificial intelligence, that is where the
talent, that is where the technology is. The government is not
leading in this area, so we need to be able to leverage that.
You know, when I think about the numbers of transactions, the
data sets that they have--some of our problems may be pretty
straightforward for them, given what they do in the commercial
sector, and we have got to be able to leverage that.
So for us, from an intelligence perspective, you know, we
have a clear mission imperative, we have manual, labor-
intensive processes that our analysts undertake every day. We
have got to make it better for them and use their brainpower
more effectively. But Department-wide, there are a lot of other
challenges that we have, you know, logistics, business reforms,
et cetera, that would benefit from them, and we have got to
believe that there are folks there that, you know, bleed red,
white, and blue and want to participate in hard national
security--well, want to participate and support national
security, but also that the engineers like our problems and we
have got good ones for them to work on.
Mr. Gallagher. Sure. Sure. Well, I have run out of time. I
have a bunch of other questions that we will not get to, but
thank you for what you are doing. This is an important subject.
I yield the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
our witnesses for your testimony here today. Like many of my
colleagues, I believe a comprehensive, whole of government
approach is really needed to maintain U.S. technological
superiority, as you have heard from many of my colleagues.
And there is the problem we have run into is that less
democratic states have no trouble marshalling their collective
resources to their advantage. So what are your recommendations
to Congress for policies that maintain our technological edge
in critical areas by countering activities of other nations
while also fostering a culture of innovation in the United
States?
Secretary Griffin. Well, I am fond of saying that the best
way to get ahead and stay ahead is to work harder, run faster.
We believe that our free-market, capitalist system, capitalist-
based system, is the seed of innovation to a far greater extent
than any command economy can achieve. And indeed, the entire
topic of this hearing is about China stealing from us, not
about us stealing from China.
So if we can provide the kinds of incentives that my
colleagues have been talking about, we just mentioned 217 for
new authorities for hardware-based venture companies. If we, in
the DOD, can, using the authorities that you have given us,
learn to deal with our industrial base on a more commercial
basis, on a quicker and more responsive manner that is not so
burdensome to our companies, I think those actions will help us
stay ahead.
The mere recognition that we are in a competition and that
we should not be making it easier for our adversary will help
us. My colleague Kari Bingen outlined and our statement
outlines four broad areas that we are very serious about.
So other than those and more general statements, I do not
know that I have any very specific things to recommend to you.
Mr. Langevin. Okay, thank you. Ms. Bingen, do you have
anything to offer?
Ms. Bingen. I think I would just echo what Dr. Griffin just
highlighted.
Mr. Langevin. Okay, let me----
Ms. Bingen. But my job, sir--I look at my job as slowing
the Chinese and others down from getting our stuff. You know,
his job is to push the envelope on that, our own technology
investment and our own R&D [research and development].
And my fear right now, or my big concern is what is being
taken from us now, the R&D that we are both--and that S&T--we
are both competing for, we are both interested in the same
things right now; that is what is going to show up on the
battlefield 5 to 10 years from now. And that is what we--we
need to slow down our adversaries and then speed up our own
capabilities.
Secretary Griffin. Let me amplify my comments, sir, with
just one short statement. One of the best assets we have is, in
fact, the openness of our society and our alliances and
partnerships with our Western--with our Western allies. The
more that we can find ways to do things jointly with them and
binding them to us, that will--that is a positive step we can
take, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. So, let me ask you this. There--
there are many promising ideas that the Department has invested
intellectual equity in, only to see those ideas and programs
end up in the valley of death.
So, recognizing the remaining utility, other entities
certainly can swoop in and swoop up any gains made at that
point and move forward from there. So, I find this troubling. I
am sure you do as well.
You know, with programs like hypersonics and directed
energy, where we invested but our competitors have taken our
ideas and our investments and continue to innovate. So, do you
deem it a risk when we worked on and developed a technology but
failed to fund the transition? And--or, also, are there policy
impediments that slow technology transfer to our own forces?
Secretary Griffin. Well, sir, the National Defense Strategy
released in January, frankly, makes a big deal out of the point
you have just raised. And has specific modernization--force
modernization goals for the future fight that are outlined in
that strategy. And we are working today, this week, this month,
next month to enshrine these and to codify these in the
upcoming budget preparation.
We have done groundwork, important groundwork in directed
energy, especially, and hypersonics, especially--that we have,
if you will, let lie for a while when we should have been
turning it into actual force. We are trying to reverse that
trend. We are working with all deliberate speed to do that.
The two areas that you mentioned, hypersonics and directed
energy, are our major candidates for re-vectoring. I am working
on that as we speak.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, well the sooner the better. I know
my time is expired----
Secretary Griffin. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. So I will yield back. Thank you for your
testimony.
The Chairman. Mr. Hice.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Griffin, in the
written testimony earlier it was discussed and brought up the
need to better balance risk with speed when it comes to
prototyping. Can you expound on that a little bit and explain
why that is so important?
Secretary Griffin. My favorite topic, sir. That is because,
in my more useful years, I did that for a living. I now hope to
enable others to do it for a living.
I think the key point that I would make is that if we can
return to what used to be this country's ace in the hole, our
ability to try out new ideas, cobble them together in prototype
fashion, take them to the test range, fly them off, see how
they work, fix them where they break and plump them up where
they are doing good, then, let operators interact with them
because designers and operators need to work together.
When we can develop new things in that fashion, that is the
best of this country. We have left our processes get in our
way; and by that I mean our legal and contracting processes.
The Congress has bent over backwards to offer broader
permissions by which we might undertake these developments.
And if I have a single mission in life as the new Under
Secretary in this area, it is to get our guys in the field
working, again, on these new ideas and let nature tell us which
ones are good. The key point is, it is important to recognize
that a test failure is not a failure. The failure is when we do
not stick to the goal and get the product to the finish line.
Mr. Hice. Very good. Well, I am glad to hear that. And,
secondly, I would like to kind of follow up on where Dr.
Abraham was going a little bit earlier. And I am not sure
exactly who this would be addressed to, so maybe even a couple
of you have an answer. But, how do we incentivize companies to
comply with the Deliver Uncompromised?
Ms. Bingen. Sir, that is something we are working through
right now. We have had actually FFRDC [federally funded
research and development centers] come onboard and do a study
for us. And we are working through those recommendations.
But, some of this is going to be outside our area, too.
Where it comes back to, you know, how do they look at this so
it is not a cost, but--but it is a profit for them. How do we
get them to--encourage them to self-report, but not think that
there is going to be a liability or penalty associated with
that?
So, are there tax incentives we can pursue, regulatory
incentives, safe harbor ideas? So, we are working through all
of those right now. But, we do think that there are some
concrete ideas that we can explore to do those incentives.
Mr. Hice. Well, and I think that is extremely important to
solidify this, would you agree?
Ms. Bingen. Absolutely, sir, and the sooner the better.
Mr. Hice. Does anyone else have a comment?
Secretary Griffin. Yes, sir. I mean, we need, through
combination of public policy, tax code, selection criteria for
our procurements, we need to make it in the interests of our
industrial base to protect their own intellectual property from
theft. When it is in their interest to do so, when it is a
profit center rather than a cost center, when they care about
it is much as we do, then that will turn around.
Mr. Hice. Okay, well while you are going on that, how--how
well integrated is the executive branch on the whole threat
here?
Secretary Griffin. That might be above all of our pay
grades put together, sir.
Mr. Hice. I mean, but you all are dealing with this, just
from your observation.
Secretary Griffin. Well, it depends upon who you talk to,
really. The primary interest of the Commerce Department is to
promote commerce. The primary interest of the intelligence
community, I will not speak to that, we have intelligence
community representatives. But, as Kari has said a couple
times, their goal is to protect what we have. Those two
interests can be in conflict.
Mr. Hice. So is DOD and the intelligence community
cooperating, at least?
Secretary Griffin. We, I think we are, sir.
Ms. Bingen. Daily, weekly, monthly basis.
Mr. Hice. Okay.
Ms. Bingen. I go to all those meetings.
Mr. Hice. All right. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. Ms. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much. Thanks for being here
on this very, very important topic. There was a recent article
in Foreign Policy magazine that discussed how China has created
a sophisticated state surveillance system with facial
recognition technology, specifically to target minorities and
what they call anti-China behavior. And they developed the
system with the help of Chinese surveillance firms like
Hikvision.
Now, Hikvision is about 42 percent owned by the Chinese
government. And, the chairman of Hikvision's board was quoted
as saying that the board must ensure the company, quote,
creates a state-owned enterprise, and that it remains quote,
under direct control of the Communist Party's Central
Committee. In fact, Hikvision received a $3 billion line of
credit from the state-owned China Development Bank and this is
one of the three so-called policy banks whose financing
objectives follow political motives.
And I am sure you can imagine that I was alarmed when I
learned that Hikvision cameras were operated at a military
installation in my district. The cameras have since been
removed, but I am disturbed that the Federal Government
willingly purchased these cameras knowing that China is
actively engaged in espionage against the United States.
So my question is, I am deeply concerned that video
surveillance and security equipment sold by Chinese companies
exposes the U.S. government to significant vulnerabilities due
to potential built-in back doors, creating a video surveillance
network for China purchased by the taxpayer and installed
courtesy of the U.S. government.
I would like each of you to discuss the security
vulnerabilities posed by Chinese surveillance cameras, and
whether or not you believe it is a security risk to have them
operating at U.S. government facilities.
So Mr. Schinella, you want to start?
Mr. Schinella. Sure, everything you have laid out there is
consistent with some of the threats which we tried to point the
flashlight at in our opening statement. You have got
essentially a state-owned, or a certainly state-invested
company, and you have got an example of the sort of--you could
characterize it as an insider threat, if you will, but the
Chinese government's relationships with these kinds of
companies, which have a worldwide commercial presence, poses
exactly the sort of threat you have identified.
And as my colleague articulated, it is also an indication
of the different kind of world we had. We were not buying
surveillance cameras from the Soviet Union in those days, but
when you have got Chinese companies making world-class
equipment on a global market, they pose a threat that is
different than we faced during the Cold War.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Chewning. And ma'am, if I might. It is obviously a
concern, and something that we are actively working. There are
other additional examples like that, that we would be happy to
take you through in a classified setting to discuss similar
vulnerabilities that we have identified and then what we are
doing to remediate them.
Mrs. Hartzler. That would be great.
Ms. Bingen. And Ms. Hartzler, if I could also just add,
going back to the supply chain discussion we had and the
policies associated with that and the congressional engagement
and the direction that you have all provided us. You know,
there are three areas of the supply chain I worry about. It is
going through the front door, the cyber exfiltration and us
making it easy for them.
It is--two, exactly what you highlighted, it is the
backdoor piece. But then third, there is also the counterfeits
part piece, and we need to be able to look holistically at all
of those and mitigate threats along all three of those vectors,
which the authorization you provided us helps us to start
doing.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Mr. Griffin, you have anything to add?
Secretary Griffin. Shockingly for me, I have nothing useful
to add. Thank you, ma'am.
Mrs. Hartzler. You bet. Mr. Schinella, and also Mr.
Griffin, you mentioned in your comments concerns about the
universities and the Chinese using the universities. That is
something I am very concerned as well. The National
Intelligence Council, you have provided us with this chart that
shows the different programs that China has in talent
recruitment, and of the snapshot that is provided here,
approximately two-thirds of these individuals worked or studied
in the United States and are employed in China in areas such as
defense, research, technology, state-owned enterprises,
academia, and things.
Now, Mr. Griffin, you said it is not up to me to give a
recommendation, so I will ask Mr. Schinella. Do you think we
should change our visa system to deny Chinese students being
able to participate in PhD programs?
[The chart referred to can be found in the Appendix on page
55.]
Mr. Schinella. Well, as part of the U.S. intelligence
community, it is even less my mandate to make policy
recommendations, but as the intelligence product you have
illustrates, and as my opening remarks indicated, China,
through a state-directed policy, absolutely is trying to make
the most licit and illicit, but often through absolutely legal
mechanisms, exploitation of their ability to take advantage of
the U.S. university system.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you very much. We appreciate your-all's
time today. I wanted to ask you a question about some of the
areas that we are seeing bigger advances with technology. Of
course, we keep seeing advances in stealth, we are seeing
higher capacity computing power, which is changing a lot of our
weapon systems, hypersonics, robotic type of investments, but
also nanotechnology.
So a few of these--I just want to ask you a question--how
did we fall behind, in your mind, in the hypersonics side?
Because that is what I keep reading. And what can we learn from
that? And I just open it up to anybody.
Secretary Griffin. Well, let me take that one first. We
fell behind because while this nation was pioneering in that
era, we decided some years back that we did not face a
significant threat requiring the delivery of force by means of
hypersonic weapons.
Mr. Bacon. Yes.
Secretary Griffin. So we--as an earlier questioner asked,
we did not transition this.
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Secretary Griffin. We could have. We just chose not to. Our
adversary, China, has gone on to develop a very, very startling
capability in that area. We certainly can match and exceed that
capability, and we are setting about that task. But we fell
behind because we elected to make other choices, sir. I----
Mr. Bacon. And it was probably focused on the Middle East I
would assume. Afghanistan, Iraq probably preoccupied our
bandwidth.
Secretary Griffin. There is always the tyranny of the
urgent----
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Secretary Griffin [continuing]. Versus the long term, and
truly, I lived through all of this.
Mr. Bacon. Yes.
Secretary Griffin. Cold War competition and such. One of my
political adversaries once labeled me as an unreconstructed
cold warrior. It was not offered as a complement, but I took it
as such. So we have, for 25 years, believed----
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Secretary Griffin [continuing]. That the era of Great Power
competition was over, and it is not.
Mr. Bacon. Well, let me ask you--I have been reading about
robotic technology, and that Russia's investing a lot into
that. Would you say that we are--where are we at with that
compared to the Russians? If you can elaborate? If anybody
wants to?
Secretary Griffin. I do not believe that I know. I can give
you an assessment for the record later, sir. I will say that in
the area of autonomy, machine learning, robotics generally,
that as my colleague said earlier, and quite well, deserves
emphasis, the DOD is a small player with regard to where
commercial industry is. Now, that is not bad. Our commercial
industrial base is the biggest single asset----
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Secretary Griffin [continuing]. That we have for national
security. But we need to make it attractive for them to
continue work in this area, and we need to make it attractive
for them to partner with us so that we can reap those
advantages.
Mr. Bacon. Right. One last question in this line, unless
some--and I will give somebody else a chance to answer any of
these, but on nanotechnology. I keep reading of the importance
that maybe 23 years from now what miniaturization will be able
to do to the battlefield. Can you all talk about that at all?
Because it fascinates me that we will be able to maybe have
weapons systems that are quite a bit smaller and harder to
detect, and perhaps just as lethal as what we have today.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bacon. Yes.
Mr. Chewning. I mean, I think the innovations you are
describing are exciting on a lot of fronts because of the
warfighting applicability that they have. I also think it draws
on an important distinction that we have talked a lot about the
type of innovation that we are expecting industry to push to
us.
There is also a pull effect. And, the innovation of our
warfighters to take technologies like you are describing,
experiment with them so we can determine how they will impact
doctrine going forward, and then providing that feedback to
industry. And so, I think this push-pull concept around how we
divine this innovation, we take commercial insight, figure out
what the military applicability are is an important part of the
equation.
Mr. Bacon. Anybody else want to jump in on any of those
questions?
Ms. Bingen. Mr. Bacon, I will go outside my line a bit. No,
that is probably dangerous. You know, I do want to bring this
back to China a bit as well. And when I look at some of the
trends out there, and frankly it is less about us protecting
ours, but this is really us making it a national priority in
some of these technology areas.
They have got 16 megaprojects; these are Manhattan-style
projects. Their global share of R&D expenditures, the U.S.
dropped 11 percent between 2000 and 2015, China increased 21
percent. STEM degrees, this is 2014 data, but Chinese
universities are putting out 1.3 million students with STEM
backgrounds; we are 525,000.
So, just when I think of those numbers and what that
portends for the future, you know, the onus is on us to really
make these challenges and these technologies a national
priority.
Mr. Bacon. Okay. Well, thank you so much. And, Mr.
Chairman, if we have got time at the end, I have got about one
more minute of question if you come back around. But I yield.
The Chairman. Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Griffin, I, along
with 25 Members of Congress, this week sent a bicameral and
bipartisan letter to the Secretary of Education on--earlier
this week on Tuesday that expressed our concern about Huawei's
links to the Chinese government.
Huawei has so-called quote, research partnerships, with
over 50 U.S. universities and is likely using these
relationships to exploit the open and transparent culture of
our schools and communities as well as gain access to critical
next-generation technologies. We know that China has used
relationships like these for spying, conducting cyber attacks,
and committing industrial and economic espionage.
Meanwhile, the DOD policy that governs technology transfer
is dated back to 1999. At that point, we had no idea what an
iPhone was, we were worried about Y2K, and the USB flash drive
was not even invented. The world, as I am sure you would
acknowledge, is very different technologically now than it was
19 years ago.
So, Dr. Griffin, considering the emerging nature of
strategic competition with China and the increasing need to
protect our critical investments in both academic and private
partnerships, what is the DOD doing to protect the DOD-funded
research from foreign threats and unvetted members with
uncertain loyalties? And, what specifically are you doing to
assist the Secretary of Education in mitigating risk to
universities and other schools, and help the Federal Government
to protect and advance the United States technological
advantage?
Secretary Griffin. Sir, that is a bigger question than I
believe I can answer here for, the record. I think Eric might
be more capable than I. I share your concern. I have several
times alluded in this hearing to the number and, in fact, the
existence of so many Chinese STEM students in the United
States.
I completely share your concern. And, it is well documented
that this is an avenue of access for the Chinese that we would
not want them to have. Beyond that, I do not have any detail
for you. Eric----
Mr. Banks. Aside, before we move to Eric, are you, too,
concerned about the dollars that fund academic research on
universities in America that, on our behalf, are engaged in
classified research for DOD?
Secretary Griffin. I am concerned that we----
Mr. Banks. That have ties to Huawei and other----
Secretary Griffin. I am concerned that we are not yet as
vigilant as we should be about making sure that that research
does not go to places that have those ties. Certainly,
universities have a very long, multi-decade history of
collaboration with the national security community writ large
on problems of national interest. It is one of our greatest
strengths. But doing so in an environment that can be
penetrated by adversaries is not wise. And we are looking more
closely at that.
Mr. Banks. So, Mr. Chewning, you would agree that we are
not as vigilant as we should be, as Dr. Griffin said?
Mr. Chewning. Yes. No, I agree 100 percent. We are
concerned. We are reviewing the contract language associated
with those research projects at the universities. And I think
more broadly, this hits on the hard issue of we have an open
innovation model.
And, we have an adversary that is within that model, and
operates a closed model on their own side. And that we need to
experiment to find what structural fix is for that without
breaking what makes our system work the best in the world.
Mr. Banks. Are either of you aware, at all, of any interest
by the U.S. Department of Education in these ties or this
subject at large? Have you had any conversations with any
leaders at the Department of Education?
Secretary Griffin. I have not. I would be happy to do so;
but I personally have not. And, of course, another difference
between now and 1999, which you cited, was that China had not
been admitted to the World Trade Organization in 1999. And I
might make the point that that was truly a seminal branch point
that allows many of the types of intrusions of which you speak.
Mr. Banks. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Let me follow up with just one question for
Mr. Schinella and probably Ms. Bingen. As a practical matter
for our purposes is should we see any distinction between a
Chinese company and the Chinese government? So, if a Chinese
company is investing in some technology, some business,
something going on--for our, as a practical matter, for our
purposes is that--should we see that as the Chinese government
doing it?
Mr. Schinella. I would say there is a gradation. But
whether you have got a wholly owned state-owned company that
essentially is an element of the Chinese government, or largely
a genuinely private company that the Chinese government still
has leverage over back within China, there may be a spectrum of
risk. But, I would say, that at no point on that spectrum is
the risk zero.
The Chairman. Okay. Ms. Bingen, do you have anything to
add?
Ms. Bingen. Mr. Chairman, I would just add the China
National Intelligence Law from 2017 says that all organizations
and citizens shall support, cooperate with, and collaborate in
national intelligence work.
The Chairman. Yes, that is kind of what I thought. Mr.
Bacon, you had a quick question?
Mr. Bacon. One quick follow-up. I know CFIUS has a very
important role, and we need to protect our technology and make
sure it is not being, you know, sold or exported, particularly
prematurely.
But, I have a concern. I have heard from a couple of
companies where they thought there was some--they were unfairly
limited. So, when I have asked CFIUS about this, they go, well,
``we are our own appeal authority.''
I am wondering, from the DOD perspective, should we not
have an appeal authority somewhere in the DOD to say--in case
CFIUS gets it wrong once or twice on whatever company that they
hold back. You got any thoughts on that?
Mr. Chewning. Well, Congressman, if there is any specific
case, of course, we are always able to provide briefings to
members explaining the rationale and the logic behind why a
decision occurred the way it did. I will say, as the
representative for the Department on--on the interagency
committee, companies may not be aware of the full fact-base
that we have because----
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Mr. Chewning [continuing]. We conduct the RBAs [risk-based
assessments] as they are informed by the intelligence
community. And so, I could see why certain companies may not
think we got it right because they do not have the picture that
we do, based on the work from the intelligence community.
Mr. Bacon. But--and, I got that. I think--and I would say
99 percent of the time, that is probably the case. But, should
there not be a one--some kind of recourse, outside of CFIUS,
because it is--because what I am hearing is you are your own
appeal authority. And granted, I am sure you get it right 99
percent of the time.
But I still think from a, just a fairness, that there has
got to be some kind of board at the DOD-level. Just to--and it
gives you a chance to say, this is why we made that case. And
people could agree or disagree. But I think some of the
companies would say, they do not--there is no other appeal
authority other than CFIUS itself.
And I just--it seems to me there needs to be a check and
balance there. And I just--I throw that out as a suggestion.
Mr. Chewning. Sure, no. Thanks. No, well, I am certainly
happy to take that feedback back to the committee and discuss
it.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you.
The Chairman. As luck would have it, votes have been
called. So this worked out just right. Thank you all for being
here, and for your insights. We will obviously continue to have
conversations on this topic.
The hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================
A P P E N D I X
June 21, 2018
=======================================================================
PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
June 21, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
June 21, 2018
=======================================================================
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING
June 21, 2018
=======================================================================
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. Our adversaries see academia as a soft target for
recruitment, collection, and influence, as indicated by countless cases
where college campuses were used to acquire sensitive information and
influence sensitive conversations. What role can and is DOD playing to
help develop a strategy that protects our intellectual property and
sensitive technology on college campuses when many of China and
Russia's activities are considered par-for-the-course, normal
activities in an academic setting?
Secretary Griffin. I am personally concerned that we are not as
vigilant as we should be about making sure that that our research
doesn't go to into the hands of our adversaries. Academic institutions
specifically have a very long, multi-decade history of working on some
of our nation's most interesting research challenges and in that
environment our research is currently open to all students of those
institutions. We are building an information campaign to educate our
academic institutions on the potential threats to national security
being pursued by our adversaries. We are establishing forums with
Universities to discuss how best to mitigate these threats and yet
retain access to the bright minds of students and researchers from
around the world.
Ms. Speier. Who oversees dealing with technology transfer and
technology protection within the Intelligence Community? How do the DOD
and IC roles and responsibilities with respect to technology transfers
and protections fit within a whole-of-government approach to protect
sensitive technology?
Mr. Schinella. [Response recorded elsewhere.]
Ms. Speier. Our adversaries see academia as a soft target for
recruitment, collection, and influence, as indicated by countless cases
where college campuses were used to acquire sensitive information and
influence sensitive conversations. What role can and is the ODNI
playing to help develop a strategy that protects our intellectual
property and sensitive technology on college campuses when many of
China and Russia's activities are considered par-for-the-course, normal
activities in an academic setting?
Mr. Schinella. [Response recorded elsewhere.]
Ms. Speier. Who oversees dealing with technology transfer and
technology protection within the Department of Defense? How do the DOD
and IC roles and responsibilities with respect to technology transfers
and protections fit within a whole-of-government approach to protect
sensitive technology?
Ms. Bingen. Oversight of technology protection is a shared
responsibility the Department, including the Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence (USD(I)), the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisitions and Sustainment (USD(A&S)), the Under Secretary of Defense
for Research and Engineering (USD(R&E)), and the Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy (USD(P)). The Military Departments and the
individual program managers also play a key role in safeguarding
critical technologies. Specifically, the Office of the USD(I), oversees
a number of efforts to protect the Department's critical technologies.
Through the ``Deliver Uncompromised'' effort, the OUSD(I) is working to
elevating the private sector's focus on securing its capabilities,
technologies, and weapons systems from our adversaries. OUSD(I) also
plays a role in cross-DOD efforts, such as the Joint Acquisition
Protection and Exploitation Cell (JAPEC). JAPEC seeks to integrate
intelligence, counterintelligence, security, law enforcement, and
acquisition efforts across the Department. We also leverage interagency
partnerships with the FBI, Commerce, Homeland Security, and the Office
of the Director for National Intelligence. These collaborative
partnerships are necessary not only to increase the Department's
understanding and awareness of the threat, but also to leverage
additional authorities that are external to the Department. The Defense
Security Service (DSS) is central to protecting DOD technologies that
are developed under classified contracts by our industrial partners.
The ``DSS in Transition'' initiative is an effort to shift DSS from a
compliance-based approach to a risk-based approach of industry
oversight. Through an understanding of a company's technologies and our
adversaries' methods to acquire that technology, DSS is facilitating
and collaborating with private industry to develop tailored security
plans.
Ms. Speier. Our adversaries see academia as a soft target for
recruitment, collection, and influence, as indicated by countless cases
where college campuses were used to acquire sensitive information and
influence sensitive conversations. What role can and is DOD playing to
help develop a strategy that protects our intellectual property and
sensitive technology on college campuses when many of China and
Russia's activities are considered par-for-the-course, normal
activities in an academic setting?
Ms. Bingen. From a counterintelligence perspective, the Office of
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (OUSD(I)) is involved
in three major efforts to protect DOD's critical technologies and
intellectual property that are being targeted by our adversaries
through collection on college campuses. First, OUSD(I) is adjusting
security and counterintelligence resources and approaches to strengthen
our ability to apply counterintelligence protections, conduct outreach,
and carry out fieldwork. Second, we are focusing on engaging our
interagency partners to leverage a whole-of-government response against
such efforts by our adversaries. Third, OUSD(I) is working with
Congress to explore additional authorities and programs that would
strengthen DOD's capabilities to respond to the threat. One such
example is to prohibit foreign students and researchers who have taken
part in foreign talent recruitment programs (such as China's Thousand
Talents Program) from participating in DOD-funded or sponsored research
programs on college campuses.
Ms. Speier. Our adversaries see academia as a soft target for
recruitment, collection, and influence, as indicated by countless cases
where college campuses were used to acquire sensitive information and
influence sensitive conversations. What role can and is DOD playing to
help develop a strategy that protects our intellectual property and
sensitive technology on college campuses when many of China and
Russia's activities are considered par-for-the-course, normal
activities in an academic setting?
Mr. Chewning. It is imperative that U.S. academic institutions and
research and development (R&D) labs are made aware of the serious
threat posed by the widespread collection of sensitive U.S. science and
technology (S&T) information through open academic and recruitment
channels. Academic and R&D stakeholders must understand that this
threat potentially erodes broad swaths of our society, including our
academic and S&T excellence, economic vitality, industrial base, and
national security. DOD's Manufacturing and Industrial Base Policy
(MIBP) office recently initiated a campaign to inform S&T universities
nationwide of the relentless tactics aimed at acquiring information,
transferring critical technologies, and recruiting top talent to
ultimately apply this knowledge to advance their own foreign interests,
to include military and dual-use capabilities. MIBP's academic outreach
campaign, which is coordinated with the Office of Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence, will include discussions with researchers to
identify over-the-horizon technologies that would be of great interest
to our adversaries. An informed U.S. academic and research body at
large will be more disposed to consider DOD and U.S. Government (USG)
solutions to the pervasive threat of foreign collection. Solutions
range from guidelines on restricting and monitoring access to
information and facilities to oversight, protection, and support of
select programs. Positive, proactive engagements with academics and
others at the leading edge of U.S. technology R&D will be paramount to
DOD's success in constantly modernizing and protecting the defense
industrial base and, ultimately, future warfighting capabilities.
______
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. ROSEN
Ms. Rosen. The National Security Strategy of December 2017 states
that ``The United States will reduce the illicit appropriation of U.S.
public and private sector technology and technical knowledge by hostile
foreign competitors.'' How can we use blockchain--or other encryption/
verification technology--to improve our cybersecurity and identify how
foreign actors are illicitly acquiring U.S. intellectual property?
Secretary Griffin. The Department continues to investigate methods
of encryption technology to improve our cybersecurity and identify how
foreign actors are illicitly acquiring U.S. intellectual property. The
use of blockchain to improve our cybersecurity is still in its early
stages and is not a guaranteed solution. Blockchain is built on widely
understood and sound cryptographic principles that may help improve
identity access and management/trusted credentials. However, there are
issues with blockchain and similarly with current encryption/
verification technology that must be considered as we continue to
improve our cybersecurity and identify how foreign actors are illicitly
acquiring U.S. intellectual property. These include how to deal with
malicious users, how controls are applied, and the limitations of any
encryption/verification technology implementation Technological
advancements promise the development of computers that process
information not according to the rules of classical physics and
probability, as they today, but according to the rules of quantum
mechanics. While quantum information itself is not yet developed to a
high technology readiness level, neither are the defenses against the
algorithms that quantum computation promises. Both are subjects of
active research and may show interesting developments in the next
decade.
Ms. Rosen. The National Security Strategy of December 2017 states
that ``The United States will reduce the illicit appropriation of U.S.
public and private sector technology and technical knowledge by hostile
foreign competitors.'' How can we use blockchain--or other encryption/
verification technology--to improve our cybersecurity and identify how
foreign actors are illicitly acquiring U.S. intellectual property?
Mr. Schinella. [Response recorded elsewhere.]
Ms. Rosen. The National Security Strategy of December 2017 states
that ``The United States will reduce the illicit appropriation of U.S.
public and private sector technology and technical knowledge by hostile
foreign competitors.'' How can we use blockchain--or other encryption/
verification technology--to improve our cybersecurity and identify how
foreign actors are illicitly acquiring U.S. intellectual property?
Ms. Bingen. Blockchain is one of many evolving encryption/
verification technologies that the Department is exploring to improve
the protection of our critical technologies. We recognize the value of
technology to improve our cybersecurity posture. However, technology
alone does not sufficiently address the threat posed by our
adversaries. To properly address this threat, DOD must employ a number
of different approaches, including enhanced counterintelligence
resources, collaboration with interagency partners, and outreach to our
partners in industry.
Ms. Rosen. The National Security Strategy of December 2017 states
that ``The United States will reduce the illicit appropriation of U.S.
public and private sector technology and technical knowledge by hostile
foreign competitors.'' How can we use blockchain--or other encryption/
verification technology--to improve our cybersecurity and identify how
foreign actors are illicitly acquiring U.S. intellectual property?
Mr. Chewning. The Department is aware of foreign countries' efforts
to exploit vulnerabilities in our networks to access information about
U.S. technology and intellectual property and is evaluating innovative
ways to secure critical information and avoid compromise or
manipulation of cyber-enabled systems. Blockchains are public ledgers
that securely store records of transactions in a way that is permanent
and unalterable. Blockchain technology provides strong protection from
malicious data tampering, and can be used to validate provenance of
items within complex supply chains. Blockchain's distributed and
decentralized network architecture is inherently resilient. When every
node has a complete copy of the ledger there is no single point of
failure, which means network operations can proceed even if some nodes
are under attack. Although this technology is relatively new,
blockchains with sound underlying cryptographic algorithms and adequate
protocol implementation could be a successful tool to help secure DOD
information, limit the impact of cyber-attacks, and facilitate the
identification of the foreign actors trying to acquire U.S.
intellectual property. This year the Chief Information Officer
submitted a briefing to Congress, as requested in Section 1646 of the
2018 NDAA, highlighting potential uses of blockchain to protect DOD as
well as commercial data and transactions. Across the Federal
government, identified opportunities include citizen services, identity
management, benefits management, contract management, regulatory
compliance, and disaster recovery.
[all]