- PRIVACY RIGHTS AND DATA COLLECTION IN A DIGITAL ECONOMY
[Senate Hearing 116-120]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-120
PRIVACY RIGHTS AND DATA COLLECTION IN A DIGITAL ECONOMY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
EVALUATING CURRENT APPROACHES TO DATA PRIVACY REGULATION, INCLUDING THE
EUROPEAN UNION'S GENERAL DATA PROTECTION REGULATION, AND ITS
APPLICATION TO FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
__________
MAY 7, 2019
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: https: //www.govinfo.gov /
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-483 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
JACK REED, Rhode Island
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
JON TESTER, Montana
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
DOUG JONES, Alabama
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Laura Swanson, Democratic Staff Director
Joe Carapiet, Chief Counsel
Brandon Beall, Professional Staff Member
Elisha Tuku, Democratic Chief Counsel
Corey Frayer, Democratic Professional Staff Member
Cameron Ricker, Chief Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Charles J. Moffat, Hearing Clerk
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
TUESDAY, MAY 7, 2019
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
36
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
3
Prepared statement.......................................
37
WITNESSES
Peter H. Chase, Senior Fellow, German Marshall Fund of the United
States.........................................................
5
Prepared statement...........................................
39
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
66
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
69
Jay Cline, Principal and U.S. Privacy and Consumer Protection
Leader, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC).......................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
52
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
73
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
75
Maciej Ceglowski, Founder, Pinboard..............................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
56
Responses to written questions of:
Senator Menendez.........................................
78
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
79
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
Letter submitted by Susan K. Neely, President and CEO, The
American Council of Life Insurers..............................
82
Letter submitted by Richard Hunt, President and CEO, Consumer
Bankers Association............................................
85
Letter submitted by Jim Nussle, President & CEO, Credit Union
National Association...........................................
89
Prepared statement of Rebeca Romero Rainey, President and CEO,
Independent Community Bankers of America.......................
90
(iii)
PRIVACY RIGHTS AND DATA COLLECTION IN A DIGITAL ECONOMY
----------
TUESDAY, MAY 7, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met at 10:04 a.m. in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Mike Crapo, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. This hearing will come to order.
On February 13, Senator Brown and I invited feedback from
the public on the collection, use, and protection of sensitive
information by financial regulators and private companies in
light of the immense growth and use of data for a multitude of
purposes across the economy.
The Committee appreciates the insights and recommendations
of respondents, who expressed a range of views on the topic of
data collection, use, and sharing and how individuals can be
given more control over their data.
Building on that effort, today the Committee will look
closer at the European Union's General Data Protection
Regulation, or GDPR, and other approaches to data privacy,
including the impact on the financial services industry and how
companies collect and use information in marketing and
decisionmaking related to credit, insurance, or employment.
Providing testimony to the Committee today are three data
privacy experts, including Peter Chase, Senior Fellow at the
German Marshall Fund of the United States; Jay Cline, Privacy
and Consumer Protection Leader, a Principal,
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) US; and Maciej Ceglowski--close
enough?--Founder of Pinboard.
Each witness brings a unique perspective on the practical
implications of implementing and complying with new data
privacy laws; what has worked and what has not worked to give
individuals more control over their data; and considerations
for the Committee as it explores updates to Federal data
privacy laws within the Banking Committee's jurisdiction.
My concerns about big data go as far back as the creation
of the CFPB, which was collecting massive amounts of personal
financial information without an individual's knowledge or
consent.
In 2014, the GAO reported that the Bureau alone was
collecting information on upwards of 25 to 75 million credit
card accounts monthly, 11 million credit reports, 700,000 auto
sales, 10.7 million consumers, co-signers, and borrowers, 29
million active mortgages, and 5.5 million private student
loans.
Consumers deserve to know what type of information is being
collected about them, what that information is being used for,
and how it is being shared.
Financial regulators are not the only ones engaged in big
data collection; private companies are also collecting,
processing, analyzing, and sharing considerable data on
individuals.
The data ecosystem is far more expansive, granular, and
informative than ever before.
As the U.S. economy becomes increasingly digital, people
are using the internet, including search engines and social
media, mobile applications, and new technologies to manage and
carry out more parts of their everyday lives.
The digitization of the economy allows for seamless access
to both more generalized and granular pieces of data on
individuals and groups of individuals, including data
collected, with or without consent, directly from individuals,
tangentially to individuals' activities, or gathered or
purchased from unrelated third parties.
In particular, data brokers play a central role in
gathering vast amounts of personal information--many times
without ever interacting with individuals--from a wide range of
public and private sources, which is then sold or shared with
others.
In 2014, the Federal Trade Commission issued a report
entitled, ``Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and
Accountability,'' in which it highlighted data brokers' big
role in the economy and concerns around their transparency and
accountability.
In many cases, an individual's data or groups of
individuals' data is used in ways that provide value, such as
risk mitigation, fraud prevention, and identity verification,
or to meet the requirements of laws and regulations.
However, in many other cases, that data can be used in ways
that have big implications for their financial lives, including
to market or to make decisions on financial products or
services that impact a consumer's access to or cost of credit
and insurance products, or in ways that impact their employment
prospects.
In any case, the way that an individual's or a group of
individuals' data is used matters immensely.
As its rightful owner, an individual should have real
control over his or her data.
A complete view of what data is collected, the sources of
that data, how it is processed and for what purposes, and who
it is being shared with is vital to individuals exercising
their rights.
People should also be assured that their data will be
reflected accurately and have the opportunity to opt out of it
being shared or sold for marketing or other purposes.
In 2016, the European Union took steps aimed at giving
individuals more control when it replaced a 1995 Data
Protection Directive with the General Data Protection
Regulation, or GDPR.
The European Union's principles-based GDPR is broader in
scope, applying to a more expansive set of companies, including
some based in the United States, and more types of personal
information than its previous directive.
The GDPR also imposes specific responsibilities on both
data controllers and data processors and enumerates rights for
individuals with respect to their personal information.
In contrast to the European Union, the United States has
adopted Federal laws focused on data privacy within particular
sectors.
Two such Federal laws in the Banking Committee's
jurisdiction are the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the Fair Credit
Reporting Act.
Today I look forward to hearing more about the principles,
obligations, and rights underlying GDPR and how those differ
from the previous 1995 Data Protection Directive; how GDPR
addresses data brokers and other companies that collect and
disseminate personal information, often without an individual's
knowledge, and the ways the Fair Credit Reporting Act may be
adjusted to account for activities by such entities; challenges
that U.S. financial institutions have faced in implementing and
complying with GDPR; how financial institutions' privacy
practices have evolved since its enactment; and how individuals
have responded to this additional information and rights with
respect to their data; whether individuals actually have more
control over their data as a result of GDPR, and what the
European Union did right and wrong in GDPR; and considerations
for the Banking Committee as it looks to update and make
improvements to Federal laws within its jurisdiction.
Again, I thank each of our witnesses for joining the
Committee today to discuss GDPR, data privacy, and individual
rights.
Senator Brown.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am excited to be working in a bipartisan way with
Chairman Crapo on protecting Americans' sensitive personal
data--an issue everyone agrees is important.
As we start to think about this subject, we need to do it
with an open mind. Technology has advanced rapidly. We should
have some humility to admit that we do not even know all there
is to know about what happens when personal information is
collected on a large scale. As it turns out, personal
information can be far more than your name, address, and Social
Security number. Sometimes harmless data, once it becomes big
data, can reveal big secrets, as you have all pointed out in
your testimony.
Take, for example, a fitness tracking app that became
popular among U.S. soldiers stationed abroad. Many of those
service-women and -men tracked their daily workouts. When the
aggregated fitness tracking information became public, heatmaps
of common running paths revealed the locations of secure
military facilities all over the world.
Even when we agree that data is sensitive, we are often not
good at protecting it.
Most of us still remember the Equifax breach that exposed
the detailed financial information of more than half the U.S.
adult population--information that will remain useful to
potential criminals for the rest of those 147 million
Americans' lives.
The Equifax case reminds us that we cannot fix this by just
warning people they should share less personal data on the
internet. People were not putting their Social Security numbers
on Facebook. Equifax had collected data from various sources,
and in many cases people were not even aware Equifax knew
anything about them or had even heard of Equifax.
There is a lot of data floating around that can be compiled
and analyzed in creative ways to make shockingly accurate
predictions about our lives.
What you think of as your ``personal data'' is not limited
to bank passwords and credit scores.
As we learned several years ago, even if you do not have a
Facebook account, Facebook builds a shadow profile of your
activities and your interests and your preferences from
digital, shall we say, bread crumbs spread by your friends and
associates online.
Sometimes you may not realize that data is being monetized.
Businesses can pay to have Pokemon show up near them in the
game, herding customers into their stores.
There is a common saying that ``if you are not paying for
the product, then you are the product.'' Services that appear
free make money from your personal data.
It is not easy for consumers to protect themselves. ``Buyer
beware'' is not a particularly helpful warning since most
people cannot afford to protect themselves by opting out of
internet services just like they cannot opt out of banking
services with arbitration clauses in them.
In today's world, telling people to look out for themselves
when it comes to protecting their personal data is about as
useful as telling people to look out for themselves when it
comes to food safety.
We cannot tell people to avoid the internet and avoid
having their data collected any more than we can tell people to
stop eating dinner. We cannot abandon the people we serve when
it comes to protecting them.
If we do not take this seriously, a handful of big
corporations and financial firms will continue to strong-arm
customers into sharing their most intimate details.
So in addition to talking about ownership and control of
our data, I hope we can talk about where Government needs to
step in and create rules about the appropriate uses of personal
data, regardless of whether a customer opts in. And I hope we
can talk about what kind of data should be collected and should
not be collected and for how long it should be stored. This
problem is not just important to our personal privacy; it is
also critical to our democracy. As the Cambridge Analytica
scandal demonstrated, a big enough pile of seemingly
meaningless data can give a bad actor ways to meddle in our
elections.
The Banking Committee is responsible for one slice of the
data ecosystem. I hope to work with the Chairman of Banking as
well as the Chairs and Ranking Members of the other committees
to set some commonsense rules on the use of Americans'
sensitive personal data.
Thank you all for weighing in.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Brown, and I appreciate
working with you on this issue as well. It is critical to our
country and to our American citizens.
We will now move to the testimony. I have already
introduced each of you. I ask you to please pay attention to
the clock so you can keep your oral remarks to 5 minutes. We
have got a lot of Senators who are going to want to ask
questions, and so we would like to have adequate time for that
as well.
Let us go in the order I introduced you, and you may begin,
Mr. Chase.
STATEMENT OF PETER H. CHASE, SENIOR FELLOW, GERMAN MARSHALL
FUND OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. Chase. Thank you so much, Chairman Crapo.
Chairman Crapo, Senator Brown, Members of the Committee,
good morning and thank you for providing me an opportunity to
provide some perspectives on the European Union's General Data
Protection Regulation--GDPR, as you have put it. My
perspectives are based on over a quarter century of working in
U.S.-European economic relations, including with the State
Department, with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and now at the
German Marshall Fund. My views obviously are my own.
I was asked to provide an objective description of GDPR as
background, content, and implementation. My written statement,
which I request be made part of the record, provides more
information on each of these.
First, GDPR is in many ways unique given its context as a
law of the European Union. The European Union was created to
create peace in Europe after World War II, to integrate it. And
the GDPR tries to bring together and find a unified basis for
28 very, very different countries on how they approach data
protection, and this is to preclude them from doing things that
would actually block commerce.
Second, I think it is important to remember that in the
evolution of the European Union, privacy and data protection
have become much more important over time, most importantly, I
think, in 2009 when data protection was formally recognized and
incorporated into EU law as a fundamental right.
Third, it is also important to remember that while the GDPR
was being considered, the Snowden revelations came out about
NSA's ability to access data held by U.S. companies, and that
fueled, added to the political dynamic in the European
Parliament and member states.
Although long, GDPR is simple. It lays out six principles
that govern the protection of personal data in the European
Union and derives from those a number of rights for individuals
and obligations for those who have the data.
The principles affirm that data of any identified or
identifiable person, including an IP address, must be collected
and used only for specified purposes; processed in a legal,
fair, and transparent fashion; limited only to what is
necessary for the specific processing purposes; accurate;
retained only for as long as is required; and securely
protected. Of these, one of the most important is the legal
basis for processing data. GDPR Article 6 provides an
exhaustive list of the legal grounds on which data can be
processed, with the consent of the individual, of course, which
must be freely given, informed, unambiguous, and specific; to
perform a contract with the individual; to comply with the
legal obligations spelled out in law; for the vital interests
either of the individual or other individuals; for a public
purpose, again, spelled out in law; and in the legitimate
interest of the controller or a third party, as long as those
interests do not supersede those of the individual. Legitimate
interest is the one that is the most expansive in many ways.
Under these principles, Article 9 also prohibits the
processing of any sensitive personal information, including
about racial origin, sexual orientation, health, political
beliefs, biometric information, unless one of 10 specific
exceptions are made.
These principles lead to the rights for the individual,
including the right to transparency, which get to all of the
things both the Chairman and the Ranking Member mentioned in
their opening statements, knowing who is collecting the data,
what they are using it for, very importantly what the legal
basis of any processing is, and how long it will be kept, who
it is going to be shared with; access to the data that is held
by companies; rectification, amendment, and even erasure;
portability; and the right to object, including, very
importantly, to automated decisionmaking and profiling that
would be used for advertising and direct marketing.
The principles lead to obligations on the companies,
including that they have to facilitate all the rights noted
above. They have to have a specific legal basis for any
processing. They must use technical means such as protection by
design to ensure that they minimize data use. They have to
conduct data protection impact assessments if they are going to
process large amounts of data, particularly sensitive data or
other data, in a way that would affect the rights of
individuals. They have to keep records. They have to provide
appropriate security. And, of course, for many companies that
do do a lot of data processing, they have to appoint a data
protection officer.
GDPR is not a year old, but companies have spent a billion
dollars preparing for it over the past 2 years, not least
because the maximum fine is 20 million euros or up to 4 percent
of their global turnover. So far, very few fines have been
levied. The most notable one is against Google in France. This
is mainly because the GDPR data protection authorities are
trying to help companies comply rather than punish.
I have gone into some of the guidance documents that have
been issued that have helped define some words like
``contract'' and ``consent,'' ``legitimate interest,''
``automated data processing.'' Maybe we can talk about those in
the question-and-answer period. But I thought also that it is
important to note that GDPR gives organizations the right to
bring--to raise inquiries into companies, and there has been a
recent case, inquiry against a lot of the data brokers,
including some of the financial credit rating agencies, that
has been lodged in the United Kingdom in November that has not
yet come out. But I think that in the end, it will take years
before we have a really good sense of the impact of the GDPR.
And there are some who argue that its prescriptiveness could
stifle innovation to an extent. But I think that certainly
companies whose business model is based on monetizing personal
data, those are the ones that will probably have to take care.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Mr. Cline.
STATEMENT OF JAY CLINE, PRINCIPAL AND U.S. PRIVACY AND CONSUMER
PROTECTION LEADER, PRICEWATERHOUSE-
COOPERS LLP (PWC)
Mr. Cline. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to appear today as the Committee considers privacy
rights and data collection in a digital economy. As previously
mentioned, my name is Jay Cline, and I am the U.S. Privacy and
Consumer Protection Leader at PwC. I appear before you today on
my own behalf and not on behalf of PwC or any client. The views
I express are my own.
My oral testimony today will highlight some of the
observations contained in my written submission to the
Committee on the experience of U.S. financial institutions with
the EU General Data Protection Regulation. It is an experience
marked by large-scale technical and organizational change to
afford new privacy rights to EU residents in an evolving
regulatory environment. It is my hope that my testimony will be
useful to the Committee as it considers the collection, use,
and protection of personally identifiable information by
financial regulators and private companies in the United
States.
GDPR caused many U.S. financial institutions operating in
Europe to undertake their largest-scale privacy program
initiatives in two decades. Beginning after the ratification of
the GDPR in April 2016, these initiatives often rivaled the
scale of U.S. financial institutions earlier mobilizations to
prepare for the Privacy Rule of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and
other related U.S. data privacy laws and regulations.
I think it is worth noting that the GDPR's requirements are
focused on individual rights and program accountability and do
not introduce detailed information security specifications. It
is more of a data privacy law than it is a security law, as we
understand those terms in the United States.
My written testimony provides more detail on lessons I
learned helping financial industry clients implement privacy
programs. I would like to take a few minutes to discuss some of
those observations.
Almost 1 year since the GDPR implementation deadline of May
25, 2018, some top industry challenges identified for your
consideration include completing a data inventory. To comply
with the GDPR's record of processing requirement, U.S.
financial institutions embarked on extensive projects to record
details about thousands of applications, databases, devices,
and vendors. These initiatives involved thousands of labor
hours and in turn became the foundation for providing Europeans
their new rights of data portability and erasure.
Another top challenge of the GDPR was the 72-hour data
breach notification requirement. A challenge for all companies
was providing meaningful notifications to regulators within a
relatively short period of time within which forensics
investigations would normally still be underway. Sometimes
after 72 hours of detection of a potential incident, for
example, there are more unanswered questions than confirmed
facts.
Two operational insights I have submitted for the
Committee's consideration about the initial experience of U.S.
financial institutions with the GDPR include:
First, some privacy rights appear more popular with
individuals than others. The GDPR provides eight privacy rights
for individuals, but when European residents started to
exercise their GDPR rights after May 2018, those most chosen in
my experience generally were the rights to access, erasure, and
objection to use for marketing.
Second, a formalized data governance program is critical
for data privacy success and forward progress. The GDPR
emphasizes the need to have strong controls for personal data
throughout its life cycle of collection, storage, use,
disclosure, and deletion. Because personal data often moves
horizontally across vertically structured financial
institutions, there is a heightened need in the financial
industry to identify data governance leaders and develop
enterprise plans for data use that support privacy regulatory
compliance.
I would like to share for the Committee's consideration one
major unanswered question many of the clients I serve are
struggling to answer during their long-term planning
initiatives. That question is: Will the GDPR become the global
standard? To plan for a future where consumers around the world
may generally expect the core rights of access, correction, and
deletion, many U.S. financial institutions are redesigning
their privacy organizational models and capabilities as a
contingency.
However the Committee chooses to address these difficult
questions, I submit to you that the highest level of privacy
protection in the digital age will result when both companies
and consumers exercise their roles to the fullest.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ceglowski.
STATEMENT OF MACIEJ CEGLOWSKI, FOUNDER, PINBOARD
Mr. Ceglowski. Thank you, Chairman Crapo, and to the
Committee for inviting me to speak today. My name is Maciej
Ceglowski. I run a small online business called ``Pinboard,''
and I operate what in Silicon Valley is considered an extremely
exotic business model. I take a small amount of money, $11 a
year, for a useful service.
As you know, in my world the economic basis of the internet
is mass surveillance. We all have some sense to the extent to
which our behavior is being constantly monitored, not just the
data we provide to the services that we use, but the
observations that computers make about us in every aspect of
private and public life.
This data is simply not regulated. As a tech person, I am
not used to wearing a necktie. Putting mine on this morning, I
saw that there was a small tag on the back of it. I realized
that my necktie is better regulated than my entire industry. We
collect this data. We have no transparency in what we do with
it. And we are simply deceiving the American people because, as
a technologist, I know that we lack the technical capacity to
keep large collections of user data safe over time. And I think
you have seen in the news the litany of data breaches year
after year, time after time, whether from industry, from
Government. It is simply easier to attack computer systems than
it is to defend them, and that reality is going to hold for the
foreseeable future.
I worry that we are in the same position as the nuclear
industry was in the early 1950s. We have an amazing new
technology with real potential, but we are not being honest
about the risks and our incapacity to store a wasteful and
harmful byproduct for periods of time much longer than how long
the companies storing them have existed. The last reactor in
the United States was built in 1977, and the reason that we do
not have new ones is in large part because we do not have the
public trust.
As a small business man in a big industry, I worry that we
are losing the trust of our users. It is hampering our ability
to innovate because every time someone uses a computer service
or product, they have to ask themselves: What am I giving away?
Where is it being stored? And they are not getting clear
answers. People are being asked to make irrevocable decisions
about their online lives over and over again.
The pattern that I have seen in my industry is one of
deceit. We are not honest about what we collect, the uses we
put it for, and we are ashamed, frankly, of our business
models. I am not ashamed of mine. Like I said, I take a small
amount of money, I provide a service, and if you do not like
it, I refund your $11. But you will never get someone from
Google or Facebook to speak honestly about what it is they are
actually doing with our data and the uses they put it to.
Instead, what Silicon Valley seeks to do is evade. They see a
regulation, and they find a way around it. We do not like
banking regulations, so we invent cryptocurrency and we are
going to disrupt the entire financial system. We do not like
limits on discrimination in lending, so we are going to use
machine learning, which is a form of money laundering for bias,
a way to blame mathematical algorithms for the desire to simply
avoid rules that everybody else has to play by in this
industry. And we see now that Facebook is about to enter the
banking system again through the side door by releasing its own
cryptocurrency.
I worry about this because Silicon Valley has been a force
of
dynamism. It is one of the great success stories of American
capitalism, and we are putting it at risk right now by not
having sensible regulation in place that creates the conditions
for innovation.
I came to the United States as a kid from communist Poland,
and I remember calling my father sometimes, a very expensive
phone call, and every few minutes it would be interrupted by a
recording that said, ``Rozmowy kontrolowane,'' and that was the
Polish Government informing us that the conversation was being
listened to by the secret police. At least the Polish state had
the courtesy to say that it was eavesdropping.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Ceglowski. We should at least give people that
courtesy, have openness into what is being collected, what is
being done with it, and give some sense of agency so that
people no longer feel like their data is being extracted from
them, and we can have new business models and a new flourishing
again of innovation in an industry that was once famous for it.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you very much, Mr. Ceglowski.
I will start out with the questioning, and there is so much
to ask, I am only going to get a couple of my questions in. But
I would like to start on the question of--I appreciate the
description of the European Union's system as one giving rights
to individuals and obligations to those who collect and manage
data.
With regard to the right, one of the rights that I think is
most central is that people should be allowed to give consent
to the use of their data. There is a lot of privacy consent
requests going around in the United States, probably more in
Europe, but I have had the experience of looking at the privacy
statements that different companies or internet websites use
where you give consent and agree to move forward. They are
phenomenally long. They are incomprehensible. And when you do
get to the actual parts of them that say what data is being
collected, the description is like meaningless.
One of the questions I have--oh, and some of them say,
``You cannot go forward unless you agree,'' so you cannot even
access the site unless you agree to something that is giving
you virtually no information.
How is it handled, is this issue handled--how is the
consent required to be obtained in the GDPR? And how is that
working? Anybody. Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. There is a requirement to make sure that
individuals know what information is being collected on them.
There is a specific requirement that the descriptions of the
privacy obligation be done in a way that is easy to understand,
clear language, and I think that what they are trying to do is
trying to say you can put it up front in very useful language,
but then if people want to go deeper, they can, rather than
being addressed with 10-hundred pages of something that is
incomprehensible. So they are talking a lot about the
presentation.
It is interesting, though, that the European Union, because
it requires consent for a specific and each specific use, in a
way you can get many more questions, but they are supposed to
be clear. It is going to be interesting to see how all of that
is balanced between them.
One of the things for the requirement for specific,
informed, unambiguous consent is that you are not meant to
bundle things. So if you are entering into a contract with
someone, you need to get permission to use or you need to tell
them what information they need for you to objectively
undertake that specific contractual purpose. You cannot tie
that to also collecting information, by the way, to provide to
data brokers. And it is interesting how that requirement for
specific consent has been spelled out.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
I will just use the rest of my time to follow up on this
and invite anyone on the panel to respond to this. But you just
kind of
referred to it, Mr. Chase, in your last comment. There are a
lot of folks who collect data on individuals who do not
actually interact with the individual. So, obviously, the
individual is not being
provided a very clear, obvious consent opportunity. How is that
issue addressed in the GDPR or how should we address that
issue?
Mr. Ceglowski. Senator, I went to visit a weather website
from an EU IP address. I was asked to opt into 119 separate
services and trackers.
Chairman Crapo. I have had the same experience. Go ahead.
Mr. Ceglowski. The consent requests become disempowering. I
am an expert in the domain. I do not understand what I am
consenting to, and I spent an hour reading all of the
materials. So I think it is being used as a bludgeon against
users and saying, ``Hey, you wanted regulation? Well, here you
have it. Everything is less convenient.'' And I see it as a
weapon by the people who really do not want their data
practices to be closely examined.
Chairman Crapo. OK. Mr. Cline, were you interested in
commenting?
Mr. Cline. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the excellent
question. In the GDPR, you see a model that you see in many
privacy laws around the world where there is a combination of
an opt-in and an opt-out approach, where the opt-in threshold
is set for the most sensitive or important data processing. For
example, the collection of sensitive personal data requires an
explicit consent or the sharing with third parties for
secondary purposes requires an opt-in consent. I think Mr.
Ceglowski presented testimony, in his written testimony, that
even the opt-in approach has its limitations if you do not
understand all of the things that you are reading.
So what I think is useful and the model I personally like
and advise clients on is like when you download an app on your
phone, it asks you if you allow that app to act as your
contacts or track your geolocation. Even my kids understand
this. I like how it is unbundled and presented in a short
question. And so I think that is the challenge, is how to
present these questions simply and understandably.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ceglowski, let me start with you. There is a concern
that data collection does not just hurt individuals' privacy.
You cite in your testimony a New York Times experiment, a sort
of inadvertent New York Times experiment, and in light of
recent reports, the entire staff of the New Orleans Times-
Picayune lost their jobs. We know what has happened to print
newspapers around our country.
Does the shift to targeted online advertising and data
collection contribute to that decline?
Mr. Ceglowski. I very much believe so. We had a business
model for many, many decades where ads were targeted to
content, and that was lucrative and fine. We had a show about
Batman. They paid for the Batmobile with advertising that was
targeted to content. They paid the salaries of the people on
that production.
As the targeting has shifted to individuals, we have seen
that the money has started pouring into the ad networks first
and ultimately Facebook and Google. It is a great shift of
revenue away from publishers, and the New York Times experience
shows what we suspected, that this is--publishers are better
off without the targeted advertising.
Senator Brown. It has not changed behavior?
Mr. Ceglowski. Behavior by whom?
Senator Brown. Behavior by the newspaper industry?
Mr. Ceglowski. Very much so because the newspapers are now
targeting--every article has metrics on it, so every time you
publish something, you have to chase clicks, you have to chase
eyeballs. It creates different incentives for reporters, for
editors, and it takes away their power, the very basic power of
the purse. Their revenue comes from an outside source, and they
have to do whatever----
Senator Brown. They change their behavior online, not
change their behavior in print.
Mr. Ceglowski. The print edition now follows the online
edition, so the newsroom behavior is affected very much by the
economics of it.
Senator Brown. You said machine learning is money
laundering for bias. Would you explain that?
Mr. Ceglowski. That is correct, because machine learning
algorithms are opaque. You feed them data, but then their
behavior is not something that you can open the hood and look
at the workings of and explain. It becomes a powerful way to
circumvent restrictions. So, for example, if I wanted to lend
only to women in their 30s who do not have a child and are not
going to have a child, there are laws in place that prevent me
from doing this directly, but if I can train a machine
algorithm on enough data that it can identify those people
without looking at any of the protected categories, I have
effectively evaded the regulation, and my hands are clean if I
do it in a clever enough way. So that is the sense in which I
mean it.
Senator Brown. GDPR focused on giving individuals ownership
and control of their personal data. Is that working?
Mr. Ceglowski. I think it is too soon to tell, and I would
defer to the people who know more.
Senator Brown. Anybody else? Too early? Mr. Cline? Mr.
Chase?
Mr. Chase. One of the things GDPR was supposed to do was to
increase trust in the internet and, interestingly enough, trust
in the internet has actually been going down since the
implementation of GDPR, probably because people are becoming
more aware of what companies do.
So the question will be whether or not they start acting on
that, and I think that there is some indication that they are.
Mr. Ceglowski. I would say it is hard to trust foreign
companies from the perspective of a European. Imagine if every
online service was provided by people from outside the United
States how we would feel trying to regulate it and seeing it
not regulated at home.
Senator Brown. Mr. Ceglowski, one more question. Is there
any entity, public or private, that has done a good job
protecting people's sensitive data over a long period of time?
Mr. Ceglowski. I think the closest we have seen to that is
the IRS. However, even they, I believe, were infiltrated by
Scientology at some point in the 1970s. I do not recall the
details. But that is the best example I can think of. Basically
highly regulated industries and Government have done the best
job that they could, but even they have slipped.
Senator Brown. A handful of huge tech companies have
dominated the data collection landscape. Can regulation give
small businesses the ability to compete with them?
Mr. Ceglowski. Absolutely. Small companies in the sector,
they cannot compete on price when things are free. They cannot
compete on engineering when, you know, they are outnumbered.
But they can compete on privacy very effectively. We need the
tools, however, to be able to compete on privacy, and those
tools include some legal basis for making credible commitments
to customers. Right now we just have terms of service that can
change at any time. But if there was a basis in law where I
could commit to certain privacy practices and my users could
believe that commitment because I would go to jail if I broke
it, I think we would see a flourishing of innovation and
privacy-friendly smaller companies.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brown, for having this hearing. Thank you all for being here
very, very much.
I think that some of you have pointed out, if not all of
you, that the public trust is being lost, and I could not agree
with you more, and it is somewhat distressing.
I want to touch a little bit on the consent forms. I have
the impression--and correct me if I am wrong--that the consent
forms are complicated because there is an agenda behind them.
They could be made much more simpler if they wanted to. Is that
correct? I am talking about the consent form to opt in or opt
out on whether you want your information shared or utilized.
Mr. Ceglowski. I believe part of the complexity is the
extreme complexity of the middlemen intermediaries, data
brokers, ad networks.
Senator Tester. So let me ask you this: Why can't there
just be a consent form at the beginning, similar to what I
think Mr. Cline talked about, that just says, ``Will you allow
me to use your information in any way that I want? Yes or no.''
Mr. Ceglowski. That is the de facto state of affairs.
Senator Tester. And so why isn't it that way? Why can't we
regulate it to that effect? What is the downside of saying,
``You know what? Your consent form statement is going to be
clear,'' just like a pack of cigarettes, ``This will kill
you,'' basically is what it says on it. Why can't we do the
same thing with the internet, with the websites that we use,
with the programs we use?
Mr. Ceglowski. Because one aspect of consent is the ability
to say no, and we really do not have that ability. Opting out
of the online world is really not an option for anybody.
Senator Tester. So what you are saying is even if they--in
the consent form, if you had--if we required that at the very
beginning, if you are working on--if you are utilizing Wells
Fargo's bank account, it says, ``You cannot utilize this
information except for me, my purposes,'' in other words, if I
want to get on a website, I can, but you cannot export it to
anybody else, that is impossible?
Mr. Ceglowski. That is a very different question. They are
only allowed to use the data for themselves.
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Ceglowski. It is very different from the current----
Senator Tester. Right. It would change the current system.
Mr. Ceglowski. Understood.
Senator Tester. Could it be done?
Mr. Ceglowski. It would have an enormous impact on the
online economy, but it could be done.
Senator Tester. And so you think it would tank the online
economy?
Mr. Ceglowski. As currently built around collecting all
information about everybody, yes.
Senator Tester. OK, but would--I know, but does that mean
it would tank the economy?
Mr. Ceglowski. We would bounce back.
Senator Tester. OK. That is better.
Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. You know, there is a lot of discussion about
consent. In the GDPR, there is a difference between
transparency, which the consumer should always know what is
happening----
Senator Tester. Right on.
Mr. Chase.----and consent as a legal basis for processing
data. So there are a number of different legal bases, and it is
interesting because the data protection supervisors have
basically said consent in some ways is the least useful way of
doing it because it means that there is no other legal grounds
for processing the data. And it was an interesting way that
they put it.
But getting back to Senator Crapo's earlier comment, when a
company scrapes all my information off the internet and then
creates something with it, they actually have to inform me that
there is a whole article about indirect collection and
processing of data. They have to inform me that they are doing
it either when they have collected it or when they, for
instance, sell that information, sell my clients----
Senator Tester. This is through the GDPR, you are talking
about?
Mr. Chase. Yes, that is correct.
Senator Tester. And how do they inform you?
Mr. Chase. They have to write to you and make a public
announcement----
Senator Tester. And what happens if you do not like it?
Mr. Chase. Particularly if it is being used--you can
object. You can object to the data processing----
Senator Tester. And did they stop it then? Does that stop
it from being shared?
Mr. Chase. If they do not stop, then they have to--then
they are liable to fines.
Senator Tester. All right. So this is for anybody who wants
to answer it. There were a couple breaches that were pretty
high profile, in Target and Equifax. Would the outcome of--I do
not know if you are familiar with them or not, and if you are
not, that is fine. But would the outcome of those situations
have been different here if GDPR had been--if something like
GDPR had been implemented?
Mr. Chase. Just very briefly, Europe has lots and lots of
data breaches as well. The existence of GDPR does not stop it.
But if companies----
Senator Tester. Has it reduced it? Or has it not been in
effect long enough to know?
Mr. Chase. Actually, reports of data breaches have been
going up because people are over-interpreting the requirements
of the law.
Senator Tester. Well, I have got a whole bunch of stuff on
this. I have just got to tell you that I am really, really,
really old school. In fact, when I get out of this job, this
baby [indicates phone] is going away, OK?
[Laughter.]
Senator Tester. Because I do not like people tracking me on
it, and I say ``Do not track me,'' but I am not sure that has
any effect. I do not like when I use a website that I get
telephone calls from telemarketers on something entirely
different, which is total B.S. And I just think we have got
to--the point that was made that we are losing the public trust
is critically important. I think the internet can be used to do
some marvelous things and is being used to do some marvelous
things. But I think there are other people out there--and their
names have already been mentioned--that are using it to make
themselves into billionaires, and I get no benefit from it. All
I get is the nuisance of all this B.S.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Tester.
Senator Warner.
Senator Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brown.
Before Senator Tester leaves, I think, you know, you have
hit on the right things. But the first-party consent alone is
not going to get it done. I would argue that particularly some
of the social media platform companies use levers of
psychological manipulation that would blow you away no matter
how clear-cut your first consent form is. So I have got
legislation with Deb Fischer called ``The DETOUR Act,'' which
basically looks at the dark patterns and the tools these
platforms use to psychologically manipulate. The 17 arrows
pointing at ``Click here, I agree,'' and you can never find
``Unsubscribe'' is the most kind of basic notion. And we do
need some rules of the road in this space and some guardrails,
I would argue. This would be de minimis, a starting point.
Your questions to Mr. Chase, GDPR would not stop the
negligent behavior of Equifax. The fact that we are almost 2
years after Equifax, 150 million Americans' personal
information out there. They took a small dip in the stock
price, and that there has not been a penalty paid in terms of a
fine is outrageous. The fact the stock has recovered and this
is being built into the cost of doing business--and the FTC is
going to come out a little bit later, sometime over the next
couple of weeks, and do a few billion dollar fine on Facebook.
Facebook makes $18 billion a quarter top-line revenue. If we do
not find a way to put some rules of the road in place--you
think you are getting hosed now?
Senator Tester. I know I am getting hosed now.
[Laughter.]
Senator Tester. The problem is there has got to be some way
to stop it. And, by the way, psychological warfare is one
thing, but it is tough to do that when there is not a lot of
psychology----
Senator Warner. Well, let us go with Mister--your last
name, sir, again?
Mr. Ceglowski. Ceglowski, sir.
Senator Warner. And for the whole panel, but one of the
things that makes me crazy is that a number of individuals
think, ``Oh, gosh, Facebook, Twitter, Google, they are free.''
They are not free at all. They are giant sucking sounds,
sucking personalized data out from each and every one of us,
and then marketing that to a whole series of entities. I know
there are people that are grossly concerned about what the
Government knows, but if the KGB had had the kind of data
collection tools that Facebook and Google and Twitter have, the
Soviet Union would have never fallen because they would have
been able to have that level of control. And they will shortly
have this level of control in China because the Chinese
Communist Party does scrape the information from Alibaba,
Baidu, Tencent, and a host of other companies most of us have
not heard of.
So starting with you, sir, is there not a way, if we put
requirements in place, that we could have--I am going to give
you three notions.
One, shouldn't our data be portable? As a former old telcom
guy, it used to be really hard to move from one telco to
another until we did number portability. Shouldn't we have data
portability? We are tired of Facebook? Shouldn't we be able to
pick up and move all our data in an easily usable form to
another platform?
Two, shouldn't we have a right as a consumer to actually
just know what data points are being collected on us on a
regular basis and easily access that?
And, three, because I want to make sure I get everybody on
the panel to respond, shouldn't we know--and this is kind of
the Holy Grail, but I think they will end up giving you the
data points. But the Holy Grail is we should know what that
data, our personal data, how much that is worth on a monthly or
quarterly basis to a Facebook, a Google, or a Twitter. And they
will say they cannot give you that. Baloney. We have got
documents that show that. But shouldn't we be able to know
portability, what the data points are, and data valuation?
Mr. Ceglowski. Being able to download data, absolutely, we
should have that right.
Portability is a tricky issue in a situation where you have
an oligopoly because what you will have is you will have
companies like Facebook that dominate a market, they will just
suck the rest of the data in, and they will find ways to
undercut anybody----
Senator Warner. Well, portability along with
interoperability, because you do not want to be able then not
communicate with people who are on the previous platform.
Mr. Ceglowski. I think in principle it is a great idea, but
it can lead to further concentration.
And then finding out where the money is coming from, these
free services that have lavish headquarters, I would love to
know what the real Facebook business model is----
Senator Warner. Or how much your data or my data--yours may
be worth 15 bucks a quarter, and mine may be worth 12.
Mr. Ceglowski. At what point does it go ``ka-ching,'' I
would love to know that.
Senator Warner. Well, part of it would be that would also
potentially allow people to disintermediate because there might
be a business proposition.
Mr. Chairman, could I get the other two to answer? And I
will not say another word.
Chairman Crapo. Yes, please do answer. I want to know your
answers. But we need to keep moving.
Mr. Cline. Senator Warner, thank you for your question. I
think it gets to the heart of the answer, the heart of the
issue. From my experience helping primarily banks and insurance
companies get ready not only for GDPR but laws around the
world, I have seen some commonalities go in the direction that
you indicated. So, for example, the GDPR, the California
Consumer Privacy Act, the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and other
privacy laws around the world do share one thing in common:
giving people a right to access their data. GDPR and CCPA also
share a right to delete data. And the financial institutions
that I serve that are operating globally are making contingency
plans for the day when people worldwide will expect these
rights, whether or not they are legally required in the
jurisdictions where they live. So there is a customer
experience question that the clients I serve are dealing with.
Mr. Chase. I have nothing further to add. It has been
pretty much covered.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So companies like Equifax vacuum up and profit from
mountains of sensitive data, including Social Security numbers,
passport numbers, driver's license numbers, and there is no way
for consumers to say, ``No, thanks. Leave me out of this.'' You
need a credit report to buy a home, to rent an apartment, even
to get a job nowadays.
So consumers also cannot withhold the information. Banks
and other companies send it directly to credit report agencies,
which package it together and then sell it for a profit.
So 20 months ago today, Equifax announced that hackers
broke into the Equifax treasure trove and ransacked it. The
hackers stole personal and sensitive information for almost 150
million people. So, Mr. Ceglowski, millions of American
families are struggling to figure out how to protect their
identities in the wake of this hack. My office issued a new
report showing that Equifax-related complaints to the CFPB have
nearly doubled since the breach was announced, but data like
birth dates and Social Security numbers cannot be changed
easily in order to thwart the scammers or identity thieves. Is
there any way to actually put consumers back in the position
they were in before the hack?
Mr. Ceglowski. No. That ship has sailed, and it holds even
more for the OEM hack where you have very sensitive
questionnaires that were leaked about people with security
clearances. That is going to have an impact for decades.
Senator Warren. OK. So once the data has been stolen,
families are vulnerable to identity theft basically forever. My
office launched an investigation a week after the breach was
announced and found that Equifax routinely failed to patch
known cybersecurity vulnerabilities, including the one that was
exploited by the hackers in this breach 20 months ago. The
company also failed to segment data into different systems,
meaning that once Equifax's outward defenses were breached,
hackers had access to almost everything.
Mr. Cline, you advice a lot of companies on cybersecurity.
Are these the types of practices that you would expect to see
at a company like Equifax that holds huge troves of sensitive
data?
Mr. Cline. Senator Warren, I appreciate your question. My
experience is in helping financial institutions build the
privacy controls and privacy rights for laws like GDPR and not
so much on cybersecurity. But it is my experience that writing
a foolproof privacy policy is difficult because hackers keep
changing their tactics. The company----
Senator Warren. I am sorry. The question was just pretty
simple. You know, they did not patch known vulnerabilities, and
once you got in, you could go through the whole thing. Is that
what you would expect from a company like Equifax or any
security company that has this kind of sensitive information?
Is that what you think is best practices?
Mr. Cline. I think the companies I have seen have the most
success preventing breaches are those----
Senator Warren. That is not the question I am asking. The
companies that have the most success preventing breaches are
those who do a better job. The question I am asking is: Did
Equifax follow best practices here?
Mr. Cline. I----
Senator Warren. I will take that as a no. You are saying
that it was--so let us think of it this way. It does not
surprise me that Equifax is not doing this. For companies like
Equifax, hardworking Americans are products. They are revenue
sources, bundles of information to sell. And it does not matter
if the customers get hurt. As long as the consumer data are
still there and they can sell it, Equifax will keep doing fine.
And unless companies actually take a financial hit when there
is a breach, there is no incentive for them to invest in
cybersecurity.
So we are now a year and a half out from the Equifax
breach, and what has happened financially to Equifax? According
to Bloomberg, the company suffered ``no major defections'' of
clients and with a year of the breach was on track to make
record profits. Equifax's revenue went up by over $200 million
in 2017 and went up by another $50 million in 2018. And the
Federal agencies that have jurisdiction over the breach, the
FTC and the CFPB, have done nothing. Equifax put nearly half of
American adults at risk of identity theft for potentially the
rest of their lives, and they got away with it.
I have a plan to change that. Senator Warner and I are
reintroducing the Data Breach Prevention and Compensation Act,
which will impose mandatory penalties on credit reporting
agencies for every piece of data they lose and will compensate
the victims. The bill will also give the FTC new tools to help
keep data safe.
The only way the credit reporting agencies are going to
adequately invest in cybersecurity is if we make it too
expensive for them to ignore, and Congress should pass our
bill.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much, Chair Crapo and Ranking
Member Brown. And I want to thank all of you for being here,
especially thank my colleague from Minnesota, Mr. Cline, for
joining us today. I appreciate that.
So, you know, as I listen to this, it just seems so clear
that this system, this business model, is set up for the
benefit of the data and tech companies, and basically our
personal data is basically fuel for this incredible money
machine that has been created. And the GDPR is attempting in
Europe to set up some guardrails to protect how that data gets
used and what people know about their data, but yet it seems
that that is sort of layered on top of this system that is for
the benefit of making tons of money off of people's personal
data.
And so my question is: First of all, if the GDPR were to
become the global standard, do you think that that would solve
our challenges here? And I know you think it is a little too
early to say, but do you think that that is going to fix this
issue for us?
Mr. Ceglowski. I would say that the GDPR is an important
step, but it is not adequate basically because of this problem
of consent. How do you consent to something that you do not
even understand?
Senator Smith. Right.
Mr. Ceglowski. How can you withhold consent in a world
where you have to be online? So I think that is the challenge
that the GDPR does not address?
Senator Smith. As somebody said, you know, it has created
more friction, I think, for the user, but fundamentally it is
just--I think you said it is like this baroque system of
consent that is completely confusing to everybody. Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. GDPR recognizes that direct marketing is
legitimate, but it does create, I would say, frictions in a lot
of how that is done, and it does create a very strong ability
for customers to opt out of it--not to opt out of advertising
per se, because it is advertising that brings in the revenue,
but to opt out of personalized advertising. And so I think that
that distinction is interesting.
Senator Smith. So what if we were to set up a system that
actually put privacy--you know, either a system that allowed
for companies to compete on privacy or required them to compete
on privacy, what would that system look like?
Mr. Ceglowski. One very effective place to begin is to put
limits on the amount of time that you can retain data. So if
you are hoovering up everything in the world about people, at
least do not store it permanently, reduce the chances of a
breach, and it means I can try your service without forever for
my lifetime knowing that you know my location or that you keep
recordings of what I said into the home microphone that you
sold me.
Senator Smith. So a lot of that is around how long you save
the data, and that would be a system that rewards protecting
privacy. What would be some other things that we could do?
Anybody.
Mr. Cline. Senator Smith, it is an honor to meet you in our
Nation's capital. I can point to two things that I have seen in
operation that have moved things in a positive direction as a
result of the GDPR. The GDPR elevated two industry best
practices to the status of regulatory requirements: completing
a data inventory and conducting privacy impact assessments.
Now, these things are not seen by consumers, but they are
happening in the background, and they are necessary in order to
provide privacy rights. I encourage my clients to do these two
things whether or not they are legally required because they
are so essential for giving transparency and having control
over the data they have.
Senator Smith. OK. Thank you.
I want to just switch to another topic which I think is
really interesting. Mr. Ceglowski, you talk about how tech
startups in the highly regulated areas of health, finance, and
banking, how they should be required to compete on the same
regulatory footing as established businesses in those areas,
and so think about the data privacy laws that are required
around HIPAA, for example, yet you note in your testimony how
machine learning can identify based on people's images on
Instagram whether or not they are likely to be suffering from
depression, and what they do with that learning is not guided
by HIPAA. The same issues in another category of financial
services about how machines can decide whether or not you are
eligible for a loan, but you do not have the same credit
protections.
What should we do about that? Where does that lead you in
terms of what steps we ought to take?
Mr. Ceglowski. I think the issue here is that those
protections were determined by democratically elected
representatives. They represent years of effort and thought,
and they are being circumvented by people who are accountable
to no one. So introducing the accountability so that regulation
about how machine learning is used does not come from
idiosyncratic founders but it actually part of the regulatory
conversation is important. But that principle that you do not
get to go around regulation you do not like I think is a vital
one.
Senator Smith. It is essentially a fundamental question of
fairness.
Mr. Ceglowski. Yes.
Senator Smith. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Member, for this conversation. I really
appreciate it.
Let me just follow up on some of the conversation of my
colleagues. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the Fair Credit
Reporting Act are two data privacy-focused Federal laws under
our jurisdiction right here that we are talking about. My
understanding is the privacy provisions of the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act are really based on two things--notice and choice
model--which we have said are ineffective. Would you all agree
at this point in time that there needs to be more done than
just a notice and choice model? Just for the panel members, yes
or no. Let us start here, Mr. Chase.
Mr. Chase. Looking from the GDPR point of view, they would
say that it is nowhere near effective enough.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Mr. Cline?
Mr. Chase. My job is to help companies operationalize
whatever Congress and the States deem is the best for the
American people.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Mr. Ceglowski. I would say yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Yes, it is effective enough, or no,
it is not?
Mr. Ceglowski. Yes, it needs to change. It is not
effective.
Senator Cortez Masto. It needs to change, right. And so you
would all agree--let me ask you this: Would you all agree that
the rules for the financial sector should be the same as every
other broader business in the economy as well? As we address
this issue with respect to data privacy and security, they
should all be treated equally, including the financial sector?
Mr. Chase, yes or not.
Mr. Chase. No. If you want my personal opinion, just for--
--
Senator Cortez Masto. Why should the financial sector be
treated differently?
Mr. Chase. The GDPR, which is what--I am trying to come in
from the point of view of what the European law requires, and
the European law provides an omnibus law for everything, so it
provides in a way a minimum. But there can be additional
requirements for some information. And there is a difference, I
think, here between types of information and--focusing on types
of information or focusing on institutions. I think the GDPR
focuses on the type of information more than just the
institution and its location.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Mr. Cline?
Mr. Cline. Senator, I do not have an opinion on that
question.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Mr. Ceglowski. I do not understand financial regulation
enough to give a qualified answer.
Senator Cortez Masto. All right. Thank you. So let me ask
you this: Would you all agree that what we are trying to
achieve here, it requires a comprehensive approach, is what I
am hearing to addressing data privacy and security? Would you
all agree with that? Is that a yes?
Mr. Ceglowski. Yes.
Mr. Cline. Yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Yes? OK. So let me ask you a couple
of things. Would you support the need for, if we were looking
at doing some sort of data privacy legislation, that it require
entities to practice reasonable data minimization practices?
Would you support that? Yes or no.
Mr. Ceglowski. Yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Mr. Cline?
Mr. Cline. I can tell from my observations in serving
companies that have been helping to do GDPR, data minimization
is a foundational principle for their programs.
Senator Cortez Masto. That is yes. Thank you.
Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. Yes, and what he said about minimization
requirements under GDPR.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. And would you also agree that
anything that we come up with must be for a legitimate business
or operational purpose and must not subject an individual to
unreasonable privacy risk? Yes or no.
Mr. Ceglowski. ``Legitimate'' is the loaded word there.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Mr. Cline?
Mr. Cline. Again, I think from the European perspective,
where legitimate interest is a foundational principle now under
GDPR, the clients that I serve are operationalizing that
principle.
Senator Cortez Masto. Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. That is the approach the Europeans took, and
sometimes I wonder if they were actually--if they did not need
a better problem definition.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Mr. Chase. What was the problem they were trying to solve?
Senator Cortez Masto. That is helpful. Thank you.
What about this? Would you agree that the data practices
may not discriminate against protected characteristics,
including political and religious beliefs? Yes or no.
Mr. Ceglowski. That is a foundational American value.
Senator Cortez Masto. That is a yes.
Mr. Ceglowski. That is a strong yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Mr. Cline?
Mr. Cline. Yes.
Senator Cortez Masto. Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. Of course. That is current law.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
Now--and I have only got a few minutes left--let us talk
about the consent piece because I think that is our biggest
challenge. And I hear what you are saying today in the
conversation today.
What about this? What if we were to look at kind of a
bifurcated approach here and we had two things: one, we allowed
entities--required entities to provide users with reasonable
access to a method to opt out for data collection, processing,
storage, or disclosure; but we also required affirmative opt-in
consent in two circumstances: one, collecting or disclosing
sensitive data, such as generic, biometric, or precise location
data; and disclosing data outside the context of the consumer
relationship, as I talked about earlier. Are we getting closer
to addressing the consent concerns that you addressed earlier?
Mr. Ceglowski. I think given the realities of machine
learning, you can no longer talk about some data being
sensitive and other data not being it, because you can
reconstruct the sensitive data from the other stuff. So opt in
across the board is what I would urge for.
Senator Cortez Masto. Opt in across the board for
everything.
Mr. Ceglowski. For everything.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Anybody disagree with that?
Mr. Chase. Yes, I disagree.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. Why do you disagree?
Mr. Chase. Because I think that there are a lot of
processes that are undertaken that are not intrusive and that
do not affect a person but can be useful for a company or the
data processor or controller. And, also, I think that there is
a question of the difference between inferred data and actual
data. And to all our credits, to the technologists, not 100
percent of their inferences are right, and that is one of the
problems, in fact, that they are sometimes not as good as they
like to make it out to be.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I notice my time is up.
Thank you so much. I appreciate it.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Do any of you disagree with the proposition that if I go on
the internet and generate data that I own my data? Does anybody
disagree with that?
Mr. Ceglowski. I do disagree.
Senator Kennedy. You do. OK. Well, I think I own it. I
think I have a property right in it. I have a right to license
it. Let us take Facebook, for example. When I go on Facebook,
and in return for giving up all my data rights, I get to see
what my high school friends had for dinner Saturday night. I
think I still own my data. That is my opinion, anyway. But I
license it to Facebook.
Problem number one, it seems to me, is the user agreement--
not to pick on Facebook. Their user agreement has been
improved, but for the longest time you could hide a dead body
in there and nobody would find it.
Why don't we just require social media companies to write
user agreements in plain English? Would that help with the
problem?
Mr. Ceglowski. I think that that user agreement would just
say, ``We are taking all your data. Yes or no.''
Senator Kennedy. Well, I think we can do better than that.
Maybe you cannot, but I think most people can.
Would a clearer user agreement help, gentlemen?
Mr. Chase. The European approach would say yes, there has
got to be a clear agreement, but more than that, there are
limitations on the data that can be collected and----
Senator Kennedy. I understand that, but I want to take
this----
Mr. Chase.----and how it can be used.
Senator Kennedy. I want to take this--well, let me just put
it this way: What if we just passed a law that says, number
one, I own my data, I have a property right to it. Number two,
I have the right to license it, but it has to be knowing and
willful. Number three, the user agreement through which I
license it has to be written in plain English so that a person
of average intelligence can understand it. Number four, I have
the right to change my mind about licensing it. Number five, I
have the right--and the social media companies can do this by
just putting a simple icon on their platform. I have the right
not only to know what data the social media company has about
me, but the analysis, their analysis of that data. Number six,
or wherever we are, I also have the right to know what the
social media company is doing with my data. Number seven, I
have the right to transfer my data. And, number eight, I have
the right to be notified immediately if my data is breached.
Now, what if we just did that? Isn't the problem solved?
Mr. Ceglowski. It comes back to the ownership of data. If I
am part of a group conversation, who owns that conversation? Is
it just me? Is it evenly split between participants? That is
the part that I stick on.
Senator Kennedy. I understand. We just disagree on that.
Mr. Cline?
Mr. Cline. So I help companies write some of those privacy
notices that are long and difficult, and I can say that the
goal is to be extremely precise and detailed for the purpose of
being very transparent and I can understand----
Senator Kennedy. No, it is not. The purpose is not to be
transparent. The purpose is to cover the rear end for the
social media company. You and I both know that. Let us not kid
each other.
Mr. Cline. I approach that part of my job with that goal of
transparency.
Senator Kennedy. Well, you are paid by whom?
Mr. Cline. My firm.
Senator Kennedy. Who is your firm--who is your firm's
client? You are paid by your client, aren't you? Isn't your
client the social media company?
Mr. Cline. I focus in the financial services industry.
Senator Kennedy. Are you telling me that when the user
agreements are written, the main purpose of the user agreement
is not to protect the social media company? Is that what you
are saying?
Mr. Cline. Senator, as a private----
Senator Kennedy. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Cline. That is not what I am saying.
Senator Kennedy. OK, good. Because if you believe that, you
will never own your own home because it is just not true. Go
ahead.
Mr. Cline. In the privacy profession, I think it is
widely--the privacy notices are widely seen as a contract
between the company and the individual.
Senator Kennedy. I agree with that. Would my idea work,
Mister--I am sorry. I cannot see that far. Peter?
Mr. Chase. Chase.
Senator Kennedy. Mr. Chase.
Mr. Chase. Thank you very much, Senator. You put too many
things in there at one time. The question of ownership I think
is a different issue than access. The Europeans are trying to
make a clear distinction between ownership and access, because
I think that not all property rights come from all knowledge
about me. Indeed, a lot of the public--a lot of information
about me is in the public domain. It is public. It is not owned
by anyone.
But more to the point, your point that companies must
clearly tell customers, people, what they do with the
information, who they share it with, all of that is something
that the Europeans push for. Further, I think one of the things
they also try to emphasize is the need to minimize the data
collected and that the data is collected only for the purpose
that is necessary. They would argue--they do argue, in fact, in
papers--that it is not in your legitimate interest to vacuum up
all the information that you can find about me.
Senator Kennedy. Well, I will end on this note. I was in
Brussels not long ago with our Chairman, and we had a meeting
with a lot of the folks who are implementing the European
Union's General Data Protection Regulation. They do not know
what is in it. They do not know what is in it, and the people
who have to comply with it do not understand it. It is a mess.
I just think we need to aim for something simpler.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Reed.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I must
associate myself with many of the comments by Senator Kennedy.
I thought he was very thoughtful and got right to the heart of
the matter, so thank you.
Let me commend you all for your testimony. I was
particularly impressed with Mr. Ceglowski's testimony, its
eloquence and its thoughtfulness. One of the rules of thumb
that I learned in the Army was, ``Keep it simple, stupid.'' And
there might be three ways in which we can deal with this issue,
reflecting some of the comments before: first, require opt-in
so people get the choice from the beginning whether they are
going to give their data, because like Senator Kennedy, I
believe people own their data, particularly sensitive data;
second, as has been suggested, forget the data over a certain
period of time, 6 months, a year, whatever is reasonable--
probably closer to 6 months than a year--and then give people
the right, if their rights are violated, to go to court and
demand their rights.
Now, that is a pretty straightforward solution which I hope
will address this. I think our tendency is to get into nuanced
regulatory directives that are taken by agencies and further
nuance so it is a fine powder and not a strong protection
against privacy violations.
So first let me go to Mr. Ceglowski. Your comments?
Mr. Ceglowski. I definitely agree that much of the language
around regulation is intentionally obfuscatory. People do not
want to show how the sausage is made, to what extent data is
being used. I do think there is a degree past which we cannot
simplify these things. For example, it is fine to say I own my
data, but if you can reconstruct everything you want to know
about me by looking at my friends, by looking at their
behavior, then to what extent is that now your data or is it
still mine because it is identical? Those are the kind of
things that I think make it difficult to regulate here. But I
welcome any attempt at simplification.
Senator Reed. It seems to me that you are exactly right,
but if, for example, your data expires, it disappears in 6
months, and your friends' data disappears 2 months after that,
it is hard to--and, in fact, we have to take--I think what you
are suggesting, we have to take a further step. The synthetic
data created, the second-stage data created by this merger of
data, that, too, has to be, you know, eliminated. Because I
think you are exactly right. What the companies will do, create
their models of the person's behavior and projections and then
claim it is not the person's data, it is this synthetic data we
have created. So that is in addition to what we should do.
Mr. Cline, your thoughts?
Mr. Cline. Senator, I think the model that you have
proposed is the trend that we are seeing worldwide, even
outside the United States and Europe in countries like Brazil.
And the clients that I serve are preparing for these trends,
this very simple model.
Senator Reed. Interesting, because your comments before,
Mr. Cline, is that they are preparing for these trends,
anticipating them, and also are expecting to still profit from
their business. Is that correct?
Mr. Cline. The clients I serve are primarily for-profit
companies.
Senator Reed. Many times we get this, ``You cannot do this
because it will ruin the internet. We will have to charge
exorbitant fees. No one will get access to it.'' You know,
there is a lot of weeping and gnashing of teeth about how
terrible it is going to be, this is a free platform, et cetera,
when, in fact, these commonsense approaches can be adapted to a
profit-making enterprise that will still be significantly
profitable. Is that your view? Thank you.
Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. It is understandable--and it was certainly the
case in Europe--that when people were regulating, they were
focusing just on the large social media companies. But the
internet and the people who are in this ecosystem who were
involved are, of course, everyone. I have done a lot of work in
the energy area. The energy system is becoming highly
digitalized. When you are regulating, in order to keep it
simple, you also have to realize that there are many different
issues and applications of data.
Second, in terms of retention, going directly to that, if I
am a member of Facebook, I want them to remember everything
that I have had on there forever. I want that record. They are
my custodian of my life. So----
Senator Reed. You want that record until they bring up your
conviction for drunken driving when you were 17-years old. That
is when you say, ``I did not want that''----
Mr. Chase. Obviously, you feel that you should have the
right to change the record that you have created. But I think
that the point here is that--is it that they have the
information or is it how they use the information and
specifically if they use it toward targeting advertising or
targeting messaging? And I think that this goes to the point I
made earlier about not always having a clear problem definition
in Brussels when they were doing the GDPR.
Senator Reed. I think it also goes to--and let us be
honest--the capacity of Government. If we try to go and
anticipate all the myriad ways in which these companies can use
information and regulate it, we will be in a disaster. I think
we have to have simple rules--they work pretty good--that can
be enforced effectively.
One other caveat I will make, because this is a very
complex issue, is that I can anticipate some areas, for
example, if you are following a group of children who have a
pediatric disease, you probably want that data to stretch over
many, many, many, many years because that is where you will
find out what the effects are. And in that case, you can carve
out an exception, which they would have to agree to, which
presumably they would because they are in the trial. But it is
a lot different than the purchases you are making, the
locations you are driving to, things like that which are being
woven together in very intricate ways. You know, the way--
again, we cannot anticipate some of the ways that this is being
done, but locations are being coordinated so they can put the
right sign up to advertise Adidas on the highway because they
know there are, you know, crowds and crowds of 30-year-olds
going to their high-tech companies that way every day. You are
not going to put, you know, old people's medicines on that
billboard. It is Adidas.
So I think we have got to take a very simple but very
effective--we have got to do it soon. We are running out of
time. So thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
the witnesses for coming here.
Just to follow that up a little bit, Mr. Ceglowski, this
whole thing about inferences, a world of inferences, and
everything that Senator Reed was talking about, are we actually
having the wrong conversation? If all companies, if all they
need is publicly available data, are we really having the wrong
conversation here? And what impact does this have on the
European Union and other jurisdictions? Have they addressed
this issue? And what can we do? Because that just seems to be a
different issue than disclosure, because this is publicly
available stuff.
Mr. Ceglowski. The power of inference, it does not come
from the publicly available data. It comes from behavioral
data, the incidental data, the observations about what did you
click on, where were you at this time of day, who communicates
with you. All of this digital exhaust that our lives produce
that is collected then and tabulated. So it is only available
to the very large tech oligopoly companies who can store it and
can mine it.
Senator Jones. So going back real briefly--well, no, let me
change directions a little bit and use some of that as well as
this. What is to prevent or how can we prevent--there was a
question a minute ago about discrimination, and I know all the
laws. I mean, I follow them, I have practiced, and I tried to
enforce them as a prosecutor and as a private lawyer. We have
got laws about doing this. But as a practical matter, it still
exists, and it exists every day. And in some instances, it is
getting worse.
What can we do in this whole realm of data collection to
try to ensure that people--whether it is businesses or
whoever--do not collect this data and use it in a way that
discriminates against Americans, or whatever, puts them in a
protected class and then uses that data to discriminate? How
can we prevent that? Anybody. Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. We have laws on the books here in the United
States now against discrimination in many, many respects. You
do not necessarily need to see the inside of how the algorithm
is working to look at the outcomes of decisionmaking. And
often, I think probably many of the cases you were involved in,
it was looking at the outcomes of the decisions that created
the presumption, actually, that discrimination was going on.
Senator Jones. Yes, but looking at the outcomes is not the
prevention. I mean, that is maybe a deterrent if you do some
things. I am talking about trying to prevent discrimination to
begin with.
Mr. Chase. You know, I think the Europeans tried very hard
not to stop artificial intelligence, AI, machine learning, all
of these things. They were trying instead to much more narrowly
focus on how you use profiling, whether or not there is
automated decisionmaking, because some things you cannot stop.
I would argue that humans are pretty biased in many respects,
too, and so it is not just the agent. You really do have to
look at what the outcome is.
Senator Jones. All right. Anybody else?
Mr. Cline. Senator, some of the clients I am working with
that are furthest ahead in their thinking on data ethics are
putting in place some tools of processes. For example, policies
and ethical impact assessments to identify--before they deploy
a new machine learning or artificial intelligence capability,
they will bring in a scientist, a mathematical scientist to
look at the algorithm to identify if it could have disparate
impact. So I am seeing some examples of tools that could
address that.
Mr. Ceglowski. I would just say that the bias is always in
the data. The mathematical techniques that are being used are
simple, they are well known. It is the data where the patterns
live that they surface from. I think we need better visibility.
I think we need strict limits on data retention. And we
especially need research. We need access for people to be able
to look and see what are the impacts of these algorithms, and
nobody knows that. It is not just a question of people trying
to do end runs around regulation. We genuinely are not familiar
with how this will affect and impact society.
Senator Jones. All right. Thank you all.
The last thing I want to ask, how do we stop--how can we
prevent a company, Facebook--Senator Kennedy talked about
Facebook and not picking on Facebook. It could be anybody. And
the end user agreements, and we have talked a lot about the
disclosure. And I tend to agree with Senator Kennedy that my
data is a basic property right that should be protected. But
yet I have also got a lot of other rights that should be
protected, like the right to a trial by jury that every day in
this country somebody is buying a new car that has to give up
that right in order to get that new car. Every day somebody
gets employed, and they are having to give up a right to a
trial by jury to go into arbitration.
My question is: How can we stop that? How can we stop
Facebook or anyone else from saying if you want to get on
Facebook, as are the billions of people around this world, you
have got to give us your data and let it go? How do we stop
that if they want to do that?
Mr. Ceglowski. We pass laws.
Senator Jones. We have passed laws about a number of
things, but if the Supreme Court will allow forced arbitration
on things, there are always ways to get around the laws. Is
there a way to adequately stop that from happening if you look
at the historical precedent?
Mr. Ceglowski. I am not able to answer that at this time.
Senator Jones. That is my biggest concern, that if we pass
these laws and we do these things like that, then all of a
sudden somebody will go around and big companies and big
businesses will be able to do whatever the heck they want to
do. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member Brown.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all
for your testimony. I have not been here for the whole hearing.
I was at another hearing. So forgive me if I am plowing old
ground.
But it seems to me as we look for what kind of structure or
law we want to apply in the United States, we should look first
to other countries that have implemented it, and so the GDPR is
obviously something important to look at and see whether it is
meeting its goals. We also have the California law.
So a very quick question to all of you, because we have had
a lot of discussion about opt in/opt out. What has the
experience been so far in Europe with this law, which is
designed to give consumers rights? Are people exercising those
rights, or are they deciding, look, I really need to use this
system so much that I am going to opt in, not opt out? I am
curious about your observations on how this law has been
implemented so far and how it is working.
Mr. Chase. Speaking more generally, it really is too soon
to tell because some of the big cases that are coming through
and a lot of the discussion has been about data brokers and
decisions made by the--there have been complaints filed, but
they have not been adjudicated. There has been guidance
provided, but it is not yet there.
I think that there has been some belief that the data
inventorying, the data hygiene practices that companies have
undertaken has been useful in and of itself. There clearly has
been a lot of increase in people's awareness of their data.
Those parts are good. But at the same time, as I mentioned
earlier, in part because of that, some of the mistrust of the
internet has also gone up, and I think that that is natural.
Senator Van Hollen. Are we finding people exercising their
rights in terms of the choices they are given or not so much?
Mr. Cline. Senator, I can tell you what I have seen
operating in the day-to-day trenches. GDPR gives about eight
rights to consumers, but when we look at the logs, the ones
that are most exercised are the right to access, the right to
erasure, and the right to opt out of marketing. These requests,
though, are falling in an uneven way across the financial
services industry. So those financial services companies that
have the direct relationships with the consumers, like direct
insurers or retail banking, they are feeling the most, perhaps
sometimes thousands of those so far in the first year. Those in
commercial banking or reinsurance on the back end sometimes may
even have received less than 100 of these rights in the first
year. So it is an uneven story so far 11\1/2\ months out.
Senator Van Hollen. Got it.
Mr. Ceglowski. I would say consumers are seeing a lot of
benefit from the work being done internally to protect data.
Part of finding out where data is in the system means making it
safer. So I think there is a lot of internal reform that will
have a long-term impact.
Europe is in the strange position of trying to regulate
from across the Atlantic Ocean. The main tech companies are all
here in the United States, and so we have seen them move lots
of data out of the European Union. There is a lot of evasion of
the GDPR that makes it harder to evaluate its impact.
Senator Van Hollen. So, really quickly, are you all
familiar with the California law?
Mr. Ceglowski. Yes.
Senator Van Hollen. So is there anything in the California
law that is not in the GDPR that you think that we should look
at as a positive thing or vice versa? Just to each of you,
comparing the two, strengths and weaknesses, as we look to
different models.
Mr. Ceglowski. It is very hard to say with the GDPR because
so many issues are still open to interpretation, especially
around automated decisionmaking. I do not think that is in the
California law, but I think that should be a strong focus. But
it is hard to know what the decisions are going to be.
Mr. Cline. When we look across the world's privacy laws and
then compare those to California's new law, the one provision
that does stand out is the prevention of--or the requirement
for nondiscrimination.
Senator Van Hollen. OK.
Mr. Chase. I do not know enough about California.
Senator Van Hollen. Got it. All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I appreciate it.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Sinema.
Senator Sinema. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
our witnesses for being here today.
Arizonans want to access the modern technological
conveniences that make our financial lives easier, like online
banking and apps for budgeting and for small finance. This
technology helps Arizonans be more fiscally responsible in
their everyday lives, plan and save for the future, and invest
for retirement or help their kids go to college. But more than
most, as Arizonans we value our privacy. Sometimes we just want
to be left alone.
So I am committed to finding a thoughtful solution that
protects fundamental privacy rights while ensuring continued
access to the financial technology that makes life easier and
better for Arizona families.
So with respect to privacy, it frustrates me that we still
have not had a legislative response to the Equifax data breach.
It affected nearly all of us, and yet Congress did actually
nothing to tighten the Fair Credit Reporting Act and prevent
another breach of our privacy.
Most people do not know that credit bureaus have a great
deal of information about us, even before we apply for our
first credit card or our student loan. We do not affirmatively
consent to give that information. So I have a few questions
about credit bureaus.
Mr. Ceglowski--did I say that correctly?
Mr. Ceglowski. Close enough.
Senator Sinema. Well, sorry. Thank you for being here. When
examining the relationship between credit bureaus and consumers
under current U.S. law, would you say that consumers are more
like the customer or more like the product?
Mr. Ceglowski. With respect, I do not know enough about
credit bureaus to be able to answer you.
Senator Sinema. OK. So what challenges does this
relationship pose for individuals who are dealing with identity
theft or financial fraud? And what rights conferred under GDPR
could be helpful to consumers here?
Mr. Ceglowski. I think the Equifax lesson to everybody else
is that there are no consequences to data breaches, that you
can get by with impunity. I think that is a very dangerous
lesson to send. The GDPR at least has quite long teeth that it
can sink into offenders, and I think that would be desirable in
any regulation here, to be able to actually punish these kind
of blatant acts of either incompetence or just not caring about
your customer.
Senator Sinema. Thank you very much. You know, this issue
matters a lot to me because of an Arizonan I know named Jill.
Her daughter was a victim of synthetic identity theft, so this
is the type of theft that occurs when criminals use a stolen
Social Security number with little or no history on it to open
bank accounts or credit cards under a new assumed name.
So the initial record is typically rejected, but once that
denial occurs, a synthetic person is created, one that does not
actually exist, and that synthetic person can be used to open
up credit cards and other accounts, and they often rack up
significant debt.
In 2011, someone did this to Jill's daughter, so last year
we teamed up with Senator Scott of South Carolina and passed a
bill called the ``Protecting Children from Identity Theft
Act.'' Our bill was signed into law last May, and so we are
following its implementation. What our law does is strengthen
the Social Security Administration's ID verification regime by
modernizing it so it can be used for everyday financial
transactions. We also called on SSA to cut through red tape
that prevented Jill's family from getting a fresh start for
their daughter.
So there is more to do because these kinds of financial
crimes targeting our most vulnerable are becoming more
prevalent with every data breach, and I hear from Arizonans
every day about how they feel helpless and overwhelmed when it
comes to protecting their privacy, safeguarding their finances.
This is particularly true for seniors and those raising
families. So we want to ensure that consumers have greater
control of how their data is used and effective recourse should
there be a breach.
So I would like to hear from all three of you: Do you think
it is possible to keep our credit scoring system in the United
States that has generally served us well over the years to make
sure that Americans can get mortgages, buy cars, build their
financial futures, but also advance some new commonsense
reforms that protect people's privacy in a way that they are
not currently protected?
Mr. Ceglowski. Let me start by saying that many of the
functions that credit reporting offered are now moving into the
unregulated area of the online economy. So you are seeing
Silicon Valley companies that have much bigger collections of
personal data that are able to make decisions that have similar
effect. For example, landlords now want to see people's
Facebook accounts. These are things that--I welcome
strengthening the regulations around credit reporting. I think
they should be extended in a similar spirit to where they are
being practically applied in the same sense.
Mr. Chase. Did you want to----
Mr. Cline. Senator, I do not have personal experience in
the credit reporting industry, but the companies I have served
who have had the most success preventing data breaches and
identity theft are those that conduct regular risk assessments
and fix the vulnerabilities that they find.
Mr. Chase. If I may, I wanted to mention earlier, but
Equifax actually has paid a fine, at least one that I know of,
but that was in the United Kingdom, 500,000 pounds, I believe.
That was the maximum that was allowed under the old law. The
data breach law in the General Data Protection Regulation could
indicate a much higher fine. Also, there are other things that
the regulator can do, including forbidding someone from doing
data processing. That is point number one.
Point number two----
Senator Sinema. Just to that first point, a fine is an
important part of compensation, but what it does not do is
increase privacy for consumers.
Mr. Chase. I agree. The second thing, one of the points
that you made in your opening remark, Senator, it would not be
allowed under the GDPR for someone to say, ``Here is a
financial service''--you enter into a contract for a financial
service--``and, oh, by the way, you have to sign this too
because I want to be able to use all the data I can from you
and use that separately.'' It is interesting to me that some of
the credit reference agencies are also agencies that are very
much in the data brokering and reporting businesses. I find it
interesting, although I am not sure--I think that there is a
wall between the information.
Senator Sinema. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. And that concludes the
questioning, except that Senator Brown and I would like to
ask--Senator Brown will ask the question. We have a joint
question.
Senator Brown. And any of you can answer, but particularly
if you would, Mr. Ceglowski. Your back-and-forth with Senator
Jones was a bit unfulfilling because you were sort of talking
in different ways. He was asking you to sort of take our
profession for a minute and tell you what to do legislatively.
Obviously, we do not expect legislative language from you. What
should Congress do? How do you regulate without stifling
innovation? Take as long as you want and just kind of give us--
fairly briefly, but give us your thoughts on what we actually
prescriptively should do.
Mr. Ceglowski. Absolutely. So----
Senator Brown. One more thing. I think that there is enough
agreement here--you could see it from Senator Kennedy, you
could see it from Senator Crapo's and my comments that we
really, unlike some issues that we have had greater differences
on, this is something we can really do. So instruct us, if you
would.
Mr. Ceglowski. Absolutely. Well, I would say first that
this seems to be a rare bipartisan opportunity where we can
really kind of speak with one voice about what should be done
to improve things.
I mentioned before data retention and lifetimes on it.
There is something deeply inhuman about saying that, something
that you did haphazardly one day is going to be kept forever in
a computer system that you do not have any visibility into. I
think we need to bring humanity to how data is retained about--
as one example, Google has now announced that they are going to
allow people to delete location data after 3 or 18 months,
proving that it is not really necessary to their business model
to have this forever. I think that should be the default state
of affairs, that things are forgotten unless you specifically
ask for it to be remembered. You do not want Facebook deleting
your wedding pictures, but you do want them deleting what your
search queries were 7 years ago. Nobody needs to remember that.
I think there is an aspect in which we can have positive
regulation where we create a legal basis for making credible
commitments about privacy. So, for example, my company, I do
not offer third-party tracking. I do not sell people's data. I
would like to be able to promise that in a way that my
customers can believe.
We had the example a few years ago of Snapchat. There was
an application that showed--let you send videos that would
disappear after you viewed them once. It turned out they did
not really disappear. It turned out they were collecting all
kinds of location data when they said they were not, and they
got a slap on the wrist. If that slap on the wrist were much
more than that, if people could go to jail for willful fraud,
if people could face stiff fines, then we could compete on the
basis of privacy, including small companies that can compete
against the giants. So I think that is a second important way.
And then, finally, visibility. We have no visibility right
now into what is being collected. Things like Facebook shadow
profiles, if you are not a member of the site, what exactly do
they know about you? What do they get from data brokers? How
does the advertising economy work? All of these things are
questions that we cannot regulate them until we have at least
some sense of how they work under the hood. And I think one of
the key steps toward visibility is this idea that if you are a
user of a site, you should be able to get all of the
information that that site has on you. You should be able to
make that request like under the GDPR and receive an answer
that is not 6,000 pages on a CD or whatever it is that people
used to get from Facebook when they made this request, but
something intelligible so that people can begin to understand
what is being stored, and then we can start to have a
conversation about how to limit that or how to make it--at
least make its use safer.
Chairman Crapo. Do either of the two of you want to
respond?
Mr. Chase. Just very quickly, I think that the United
States has another particular to learn from Europe's
experiences with the GDPR. So in this sense, maybe having the
first mover advantage may not the worst thing.
I think once again I will just reiterate that it is
important to bear in mind what problem you are trying to solve.
It is not all data and all uses and all functions. But that is
what the GDPR covers. You need to be able to say, ``What are
you trying to do in this case?'' And I think that that goes for
your mention of retention, that different--data can be used
differently, and sometimes different retention requirements
make a lot of sense. If you are talking about a social media
platform, maybe it is different.
Finally, I think on the innovation part that you asked,
Senator Brown, there are a lot of people who talk about the
requirements of GDPR as putting a burden on small firms, that
it is harder for them to comply. And I think that there is some
truth to that. I think that there is also--in GDPR they have
tried to make that less burdensome, but they also recognize
that small firms, too, can have very sensitive data and can be
a source of real grief for individuals if that data is out. So
I think you have to regulate small firms, but I think that the
enforcement thing that GDPR creates is much more risk-based; it
is much more going toward companies that have lots of data and
do lots of processing, and that makes a certain sense.
And, finally, Mr. Cline has mentioned a number of times the
data protection impact assessments. There is a lot, I think,
that can be looked at, learned from that.
Chairman Crapo. Mr. Cline, did you want to add anything?
Mr. Cline. A tool I have seen companies use to balance or
to achieve both goals of consumer rights protection as well as
encouraging innovation is the impact assessment. You know, the
employees of the clients we serve all want to do the right
thing, and when presented with competing goals, how do we
innovate? How do we achieve the business purpose in a way that
impacts privacy the least? These impact assessments document
the rationale and the thinking and help get everybody on board
toward competing goals.
Chairman Crapo. Well, thank you. And, Mr. Ceglowski, your
answer has prompted one more question to me, and I would just
toss this out to see if any of you could briefly respond to it.
When you mentioned the shadow files that in this case Facebook
creates, those are files being created, I assume, without any
connection with the individual whose data is being utilized,
and the information has been collected elsewhere. If an
individual knows that that data is being collected in that way,
then I guess they could be given a right by the law to demand
that that stop or be identified or made transparent. But it
seems to me that that could be happening and is happening in
many, many different circumstances and in different ways.
How does the individual know in order to opt out?
Mr. Ceglowski. My understanding is that we simply do not
have that right now, and we do not have the visibility. I might
be wrong. I am not an expert.
Chairman Crapo. Mr. Chase?
Mr. Chase. I draw your attention to Article 14 of the GDPR,
which I mentioned previously. There are obligations. For
Facebook in that sense to do a synthetic personality on someone
in Europe, they would essentially have to tell that person that
they are doing it. And there are three specific times when they
have to do it. If they are doing it internally and they are not
doing anything with it, that is one thing. But if they start
taking that information and providing it to third parties for
advertising and direct marketing, then that would be
problematic. But the article itself has fairly
detailed requirements about what needs to be notified to any
individual when they are doing profiling businesses--profiling
work on individuals without having gotten the information
directly from the individual himself or herself.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. So does the GDPR require that
any time a company sells an individual's data that the
individual be notified that it is being utilized in that
fashion?
Mr. Cline. It requires their consent, so more than a
notification.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you.
Again, I want to thank each of the witnesses for coming
here and sharing your insights as well as your written
testimony, which will be made a part of the record. As you can
see, there is a lot of not only bipartisan but strong interest
here in getting this issue resolved, and we appreciate--I
suspect you will get some more questions from us, and to the
Senators who wish to submit questions for the record, those
questions are due to the Committee by Tuesday, May 14. And we
ask each of the witnesses if you would respond to them as
promptly as you can.
Again, we thank you for your efforts on our behalf to be
here and to give us your insights, and this hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements, responses to written questions, and
additional material supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
On February 13, Senator Brown and I invited feedback from the
public on the collection, use and protection of sensitive information
by financial regulators and private companies in light of the immense
growth and use of data for a multitude of purposes across the economy.
The Committee appreciates the insights and recommendations of
respondents, who expressed a range of views on the topic of data
collection, use and sharing and how individuals can be given more
control over their data.
Building on that effort, today the Committee will take a closer
look at the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, or
GDPR, and other approaches to data privacy, including the impact on the
financial services industry and how companies collect and use
information in marketing and decisionmaking related to credit,
insurance or employment.
Providing testimony to the Committee today are three data privacy
experts, including Peter Chase, Senior Fellow, The German Marshall Fund
of the United States; Jay Cline, Privacy and Consumer Protection
Leader, Principal, PwC US; and Maciej Ceglowski, Founder, Pinboard.
Each witness brings a unique perspective on the practical
implications of implementing and complying with new data privacy laws;
what has worked and what has not worked to give individuals more
control over their data; and considerations for the Committee as it
explores updates to Federal data privacy laws within the Banking
Committee's jurisdiction.
My concerns about big data collection go back as far as the
creation of the CFPB, which was collecting massive amounts of personal
financial information without an individual's knowledge or consent.
In 2014, the GAO reported that the Bureau alone was collecting
information on upwards of 25 to 75 million credit card accounts
monthly, 11 million credit reports, 700,000 auto sales, 10.7 million
consumers, co-signers and borrowers, 29 million active mortgages and
5.5 million private student loans.
Consumers deserve to know what type of information is being
collected about them, what that information is being used for and how
it is being shared.
Financial regulators are not the only ones engaged in big data
collection; private companies are also collecting, processing,
analyzing and sharing considerable data on individuals.
The data ecosystem is far more expansive, granular and informative
than ever before.
As the U.S. economy becomes increasingly digital, people are using
the internet, including search engines and social media, mobile
applications and new technologies to manage and carry out more parts of
their everyday lives.
The digitization of the economy allows for seamless access to both
more generalized and granular pieces of data on individuals and groups
of individuals, including data collected, with or without consent,
directly from individuals, tangentially to individuals' activities, or
gathered or purchased from unrelated third parties.
In particular, data brokers play a central role in gathering vast
amounts of personal information--many times without ever interacting
with individuals--from a wide range of public and private sources,
which is then sold or shared with others.
In 2014, the Federal Trade Commission issued a report entitled,
``Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and Accountability,'' in which
it highlighted data brokers' big role in the economy and concerns
around their transparency and accountability.
In many cases, an individual's data or groups of individuals' data
is used in ways that provide value, such as risk mitigation, fraud
prevention, and identity verification, or to meet the requirements of
laws or regulations.
However, in many other cases, that data can be used in ways that
have big implications for their financial lives, including to market or
make decisions on financial products or services that impact a
consumer's access to or cost of credit and insurance products, or in
ways that impact their employment prospects.
In any case, the way that an individual's or groups of individuals'
data is used matters immensely.
As its rightful owner, an individual should have real control over
his or her data.
A complete view of what data is collected, the sources of that
data, how it is processed and for what purposes, and who it is being
shared with is vital to individuals exercising their rights.
People should also be assured that their data will be reflected
accurately, and have the opportunity to opt out of it being shared or
sold for marketing and other purposes.
In 2016, the European Union took steps aimed at giving individuals
more control when it replaced a 1995 Data Protection Directive with the
General Data Protection Regulation, or GDPR.
The European Union's principals-based GDPR is broader in scope,
applying to a more expansive set of companies, including some based in
the United States, and more types of personal information than its
previous Directive.
The GDPR also imposes specific responsibilities on both data
controllers and data processors, and enumerates rights for individuals
with respect to their personal information.
In contrast to the European Union, the United States has adopted
Federal laws focused on data privacy within particular sectors.
Two such Federal laws in the Banking Committee's jurisdiction are
the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the Fair Credit Reporting Act.
Today, I look forward to hearing more about the principles,
obligations and rights underlying GDPR and how those differ from the
previous 1995 Data Protection Directive; how GDPR addresses data
brokers and other companies that collect and disseminate personal
information, often without an individual's knowledge, and ways the Fair
Credit Reporting Act may be adjusted to account for activities by such
entities; challenges U.S. financial institutions have faced in
implementing and complying with GDPR; how financial institutions'
privacy practices have evolved since its enactment; and how individuals
have responded to this additional information and rights with respect
to their data; whether individuals actually have more control over
their data as a result of GDPR, and what the European Union did right
and wrong in GDPR; and considerations for the Banking Committee as it
looks to update and make improvements to Federal laws within its
jurisdiction.
Thanks to each of you for joining the Committee today to discuss
GDPR, data privacy and individual rights.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
I'm excited to be working in a bipartisan way with Chairman Crapo
on protecting Americans' sensitive personal data--an issue everyone
agrees is important.
As we start to think about this subject, I hope we do it with an
open mind. Technology has advanced rapidly, and we should have some
humility to admit that we don't even know all there is to know about
what happens when personal information is collected on a large scale.
As it turns out, personal information can be far more than your name,
address and Social Security number. Sometimes harmless data, once it
becomes big data, can reveal big secrets.
Take for example a fitness tracking app that became popular among
U.S. soldiers stationed abroad. Many of those servicewomen and
servicemen tracked their daily workouts, and when the aggregated
fitness tracking information became public, heatmaps of common running
paths revealed the locations of secure military facilities all over the
world.
Even when we agree that data is sensitive, we're often not good at
protecting it.
Most of us still remember the Equifax breach that exposed the
detailed financial information of more than half the U.S. adult
population--information that will remain useful to potential criminals
for the rest of those 147 million Americans' lives.
The Equifax case also reminds us that we can't fix this by just
warning people they should share less personal data on the internet.
People weren't putting their Social Security numbers on Facebook--
Equifax had collected data from various sources, and in many cases
people weren't even aware Equifax ever knew anything about them.
There's a lot of data floating around that can be compiled and
analyzed in creative ways to make shockingly accurate predictions about
our lives.
What you think of as your ``personal data'' isn't limited to bank
passwords and credit scores.
As we learned several years ago, even if you don't have a Facebook
account, Facebook builds a shadow profile of your activities,
interests, and preferences from digital breadcrumbs spread by your
friends and associates online.
Sometimes you may not realize that data is being monetized.
Remember Pokemon Go? Did you know that businesses can pay to have
Pokemon show up near them in the game, herding customers into their
stores?
There's a common saying that ``if you're not paying for the
product, then you are the product.'' Services that appear free make
money from your personal data.
It's not easy for consumers to protect themselves. ``Buyer beware''
is not a helpful warning, since most people cannot afford to protect
themselves by opting out of internet services just like they cannot opt
out of banking products with arbitration clauses in them.
In today's world, telling people to look out for themselves when it
comes to protecting their personal data is about as useful as telling
people to look out for themselves when it comes to food safety.
We can't tell people to avoid the internet and avoid having their
data collected any more than we can tell people to stop eating dinner.
We can't abandon the people we serve when it comes to protecting them.
If we don't take this seriously, a handful of big tech corporations
and financial firms will continue to strongarm customers into sharing
their most intimate details.
So in addition to talking about ownership and control of our data
today, I hope we can also talk about where Government needs to step in
and create rules around the appropriate uses of personal data--
regardless of whether a customer opts in. And I hope we can talk about
what kind of data should or should not be collected, and for how long
it should be stored.
This problem isn't just important to our personal privacy and our
economy--it's also critical to our democracy. As the Cambridge
Analytica scandal demonstrated, a big enough pile of seemingly
meaningless data can give a bad actor ways to meddle in our elections.
The Banking Committee is only responsible for one slice of the data
ecosystem--I hope to work with the Chairman of the Banking Committee as
well as the Chairs and Ranking Members of the other committees of
jurisdiction to set some commonsense rules on the use of Americans'
sensitive personal data.
Thank you.
PREPARED STATEMENT OF JAY CLINE
Principal and U.S. Privacy and Consumer Protection Leader,
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC)
May 7, 2019
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and distinguished Members of
the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear today as the
Committee considers privacy rights and data collection in a digital
economy. I am currently a Principal and the U.S. Privacy and Consumer
Protection Leader at Pricewaterhouse-
Coopers LLP (PwC). I am appearing on my own behalf and not on behalf of
PwC or any client. The views I express are my own.
Lessons learned from U.S. financial institutions' GDPR experience,
2016-2019
My testimony today will examine the experience of U.S. financial
institutions (FIs) with the European Union (EU) General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR). It is an experience marked by large-scale technical
and organizational change to afford new privacy rights to EU residents
in an evolving regulatory environment. It is my hope that my testimony
will be useful to the Committee as it considers the collection, use,
and protection of personally identifiable information by financial
regulators and private companies.
GDPR caused many U.S. FIs operating in Europe to undertake their
largest-scale privacy program initiatives in two decades. Beginning
after the ratification of the GDPR in April 2016 and generally
accelerating a year later, these initiatives often rivaled the scale of
U.S. FIs' earlier mobilizations to prepare for the Privacy Rule of the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) and other related U.S. data privacy laws
and regulations. As a result, U.S. FIs generally used all of the GDPR's
2-year grace period to prepare for the law's ``go live'' date in May
2018.
Impact of GDPR requirements on U.S. FIs
The GDPR introduced several new obligations on U.S. FIs.
New requirements on data-subject rights most affected
retail banks and direct insurers--because of their direct
exposure to fulfilling data-subject requests (DSRs)--and least
affected commercial banks, re-insurers, payment-card companies,
and asset-management companies that generally had indirect
exposure to DSRs.
New requirements on data privacy program accountability by
comparison most affected larger, diversified groups of
companies that had to allocate more resources to accommodate
their business variations and least affected more homogenous
FIs.
The effects of the GDPR requirements included increases in headcount,
changes in information systems, and alterations in products and
services.
The GDPR also introduced several new organizing principles to U.S.
FIs. Concepts such as ``personal'' data including data indirectly
identifiable to individuals, ``sensitive'' personal data,
``pseudonymized'' data, ``high-risk'' data processing, ``large-scale''
data processing, ``original purpose'' of data collection, ``cross-
border'' data transfer, ``data controller,'' and ``data processor''
materially affected the policy regimes of all U.S. FIs operating in the
European Union. The GDPR also introduced a new enforcement environment
for U.S. FIs. This environment resulted in new and uncertain risk
exposures. In the United States, for example, class-action lawsuits
related to the Telephone Consumer Privacy Act (TCPA) are a significant
driver of data privacy-related economic risk for U.S. FIs. The private
right of action for GDPR-related issues, however, is a new and untested
citizen-led enforcement channel in the European Union that could have
broader impact than the TCPA because of the broader scope of covered
data. Moreover, the new powers of EU data-protection authorities (DPAs)
to impose fines of up to 4 percent of annual global revenues has
expanded the potential risk exposure of the largest corporations into
the billion-dollar range for the first time. Similarly, the EU DPAs'
power to issue injunctions to stop data processing that runs counter to
the GDPR could have the result of ending revenue-generating commercial
activities that depend on that data processing. As the GDPR and its
enforcement regime influence how other jurisdictions in the United
States and around the world take their next steps on data privacy law
and enforcement, U.S. FIs operating globally are re-evaluating their
approaches to privacy-risk management.
Challenges, insights, and questions
The U.S. FI experience with addressing the GDPR can be grouped into
three categories: top challenges, implementation insights, and
unanswered questions.
Seven GDPR implementation challenges for U.S. FIs
Financial institutions use personal data to provide most of their
products and services. Whether to set up a bank or investment account,
install a mobile application on a smartphone, underwrite an insurance
policy, or process an insurance claim or payment-card transaction, data
related to individuals are the linchpin for servicing these orders. As
a result, the GDPR's impact on U.S. FIs' handling of personal data was
destined to have a widescale impact on operations. That impact tended
to materialize in the following ways:
1.
Completing a data inventory. In order to comply with Article 30
of the GDPR requiring a ``record of processing'' of all EU
data, U.S. FIs embarked on extensive projects to record details
about hundreds and thousands of applications, databases,
devices, and vendors that often operated in clusters
independent of each other. Because no single technology on the
market could do all of this automatically, these initiatives
necessarily involved hundreds and thousands of labor hours
answering data-inventory surveys and completing in-person
interviews. To better automate this capability, many U.S. FIs
are exploring new technologies that rely to different degrees
on ``machine learning'' to scan and classify their data assets.
2.
Operationalizing data-subject rights. GDPR enhanced or created
DSRs for EU residents to access, receive a copy of, correct,
restrict processing of, or delete their data and to withdraw
consent previously given to process their data. In the largest
FIs, a single person's data could exist across dozens and even
hundreds of systems often not synchronized with each other.
Facing an uncertain volume of incoming DSRs after GDPR's
effective date in May 2018--and lacking a single technology in
the market to fully address this need--U.S. FIs developed
predominantly manual processes to operationalize GDPR DSRs. To
better automate this capability, many U.S. FIs are exploring
updating or enhancing workflow-software solutions.
3.
Completing DPIAs. GDPR introduced to U.S. FIs a requirement to
document a data-protection impact assessment (DPIA) of new
technology change involving EU personal data and to remediate
risks to the ``rights and freedoms'' of individuals that are
``high'' as defined and understood by EU DPAs.\1\ Remediating
risks could involve reducing the data collected or how long it
was retained, for example. For large FIs, this could mean
conducting dozens or even hundreds of these assessments and
related remediation projects each year. To better automate this
capability, many U.S. FIs are exploring or enhancing workflow-
software solutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Article 29 Working Party WP247, Guidelines on Data
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing
is ``likely to result in a high risk'' for the purposes of Regulation
2016/679, October 2017, for examples of these ``high-risk'' criteria.
4.
Updating third-party contracts. The GDPR required ``data
controllers'' to have contractual provisions holding their
``data processors'' accountable to the relevant provisions of
the GDPR. The newer DSRs and data-breach notification threshold
were among the more important provisions many opted to add
explicitly to their contract addendums and service-level
agreements. For U.S. FIs, the number of contracts needing
updating could range from dozens to hundreds and even
thousands. To better automate this capability, many U.S. FIs
are exploring workflow-software solutions that rely to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
different degrees on machine learning.
5.
Appointing a DPO. GDPR requires that organizations meeting
certain conditions appoint a data protection officer (DPO), an
``independent'' person with direct access to leadership. For
large FIs, addressing this could involve a single, full-time
position or multiple positions that were internal staff or an
outsourced firm. The GDPR offers further practical advantages
for placing these DPOs in the FI's ``main establishment'' or
main EU country of operations where they could more easily
interact with their ``lead'' local data protection authority
(DPA). In the run-up to the May 2018 deadline for GDPR, demand
for DPOs grew rapidly and the available supply of qualified
candidates diminished, complicating U.S. FIs' decisionmaking.
6.
Preparing to notify breaches within 72 hours. The GDPR echoed a
requirement from a New York State Department of Financial
Services cybersecurity regulation whereby companies that
experienced a compromise of EU personal data must notify
relevant regulators within 72 hours of becoming aware of it.
For FIs headquartered in the United States but operating in
Europe, this meant expanding their U.S. breach-response
capability into Europe--including associated staff,
technologies, and supporting vendor relationships. A further
challenge was informational--defining what could actually be
known and reported within a relatively short window of time
during which forensics investigations would often still be in
progress.
7.
Engaging the ``first line of defense.'' One of the most
important, ongoing challenges for U.S. FIs is to re-organize
their data privacy organizations along the three ``lines of
defense'' in order to give scalable and sustainable effect to
GDPR controls. Many implemented a model based on placing
privacy representatives in the business operations of the first
line; data privacy governance leaders in the second line; and
an oversight role in the third line. Traditionally, privacy
expertise in the FI sector had been concentrated in the second
line of defense. Identifying and equipping privacy
representatives in the first line, whose primary jobs and
training had not historically been data privacy, remains a
general challenge for all commercial sectors.
Seven GDPR implementation insights for U.S. FIs
1.
DSRs are not created equal. The GDPR provides for eight data-
subject rights: to privacy notices, to data access, to data
rectification, to objection to processing, to withdrawal of
consent for processing, to objection to automated processing,
to data erasure, and to data portability. For most U.S. FIs,
these were new requirements they were not previously subject to
under U.S. data privacy regulations such as the GLBA Privacy
Rule. The DSRs in the latter Rule were limited to a right to
opt out of marketing and a right to opt out of data sharing
with affiliates. The implementation and exercise of these new
GDPR rights varied:
The GDPR rights generally posing the most
implementation challenges for U.S. FIs were the rights to
access and erasure. Fulfilling an access request could involve
pulling information on an individual from dozens and even
hundreds of structured databases and unstructured data stores--
but doing so in a timely manner would probably require
configuring all of these systems to a single consumer-identity-
management system. Fulfilling an erasure request could in turn
require different erasure and redaction protocols for each of
these systems.
When consumers exercised their GDPR rights after May
2018, those most exercised generally were the rights to access,
erasure, and objection to use for marketing.
2.
Erased doesn't mean forgotten. The GDPR's right to erasure is
parenthetically referred to in the regulation as the ``right to
be forgotten,'' although in practice in the U.S. financial
industry, those two concepts may not be equivalent. The
substantial number and scope of regulations and other
obligations in the U.S. financial industry requiring the
collection and retention of personal data such as for fraud
prevention, cybersecurity, anti-money laundering, terrorist
watchlisting, and for other discovery or litigation-related
purposes means that U.S. FIs will limit or deny many requests
for erasure. Moreover, for compliance purposes, U.S. FIs tend
to keep a log of completed erasure requests that retains basic
contact information of the requestor.
3.
DSRs benefit from strong authentication. For individuals, the
GDPR right of access could produce files containing many
personal details. If these files were delivered to the wrong
individual, their privacy would be exposed. To counter this
risk of misdirected files, companies can and do ask for
multiple pieces of personal information from DSR requesters to
first authenticate their identities before providing their
requested files. A strong authentication process could also
counter the risk of fraudulent DSR requests, which some U.S.
FIs experienced in the year since GDPR went into effect. A
challenge for this approach, however, is fulfilling DSRs for
individuals for whom companies do not keep enough information
to authenticate at a strong level. For example, a name and an
email address may not be enough information to strongly
authenticate.
4.
The distinction between primary and secondary data controllers is
important. The GDPR does not distinguish between ``primary''
data controllers that maintain direct relationships with data
subjects and ``secondary'' data controllers that do not. But
this distinction is useful in the insurance industry, for
example, where direct insurers are positioned to provide
privacy notices and data-breach notifications to data subjects
and obtain consent and field DSRs from data subjects, whereby
re-insurers are less well-positioned to do so.
5.
Board visibility makes a difference. The prospect of being
exposed to a fine of 4 percent of global revenues motivated
many companies to implement their GDPR programs by May 2018,
but the lack of any enforcement action approaching that
monetary level in the year since GDPR took effect has reduced
the pressure for ongoing enhancement of privacy controls in
some quarters. U.S. FIs who routinized the reporting of their
privacy program status to the Board or Audit Committee were
more often successful in maintaining strong organizational
support for GDPR during its first year of operation.
6.
Data governance is critical for privacy's success. The GDPR
emphasizes the need to have strong controls for personal data
throughout its lifecycle of collection, storage, use,
disclosure, and deletion. Because personal data often moves
horizontally across vertically structured financial
institutions, there is a heightened need in the financial
industry to formalize an approach to data governance. For this
reason, some FIs have endowed data governance leaders with some
data privacy responsibilities.
7.
GDPR did not fully harmonize privacy regulation in Europe. A
benefit of the GDPR was to standardize many varying provisions
in EU member states' data-protection laws, but substantial
variations continue to exist. Accommodating regulatory
variations generally increases the cost of compliance for FIs
operating across multiple jurisdictions. To reduce their GDPR
compliance and enforcement exposure, U.S. FIs are finding it
necessary to continue to track variations at the EU member-
state level where DPAs take the lead on enforcement and where
class-action lawsuits are adjudicated. Member states, for
example, are taking different approaches to the derogations
left to them in the GDPR, different interpretations of ``high
risk'' processing for DPIA purposes, and different enforcement
priorities. The need to monitor these changes has tended to
have a larger relative operational impact on smaller U.S. FIs
operating in Europe because of their generally smaller data
privacy teams.
Five unanswered questions for U.S. FIs post GDPR
As U.S. FIs continue to absorb the GDPR into their daily operations
and plan for the future, they tend to share five common questions they
are in the process of answering:
1.
Will the GDPR become the global data privacy standard? As U.S.
FIs operating internationally further automate their data
privacy programs and capabilities, the cost of these
enhancements is rising. Variances across jurisdictions
regarding how these capabilities should be delivered to
consumers--such as the specific nature and scope of DSRs--add
to that cost. If GDPR DSRs will become the de facto global
standard, it probably will make the most commercial sense for
these multinationals to design their DSRs to be offered
globally. If some GDPR DSRs won't become the global standard,
however--such as the GDPR's right to opt out of automated
decisionmaking--it would not make commercial sense to globalize
those DSRs. Moreover, if GDPR's program accountability
requirements become the global standard, it reduces the need
and likelihood that the GLBA's right for customers to opt out
of their nonpublic personal data being shared with affiliates
of the FI will become a standard outside the United States.
U.S. FIs engaging in long-term, strategic planning for their
data usage are needing to answer this question.
2.
Will people increasingly exercise their privacy rights? Many U.S.
companies received under 100 GDPR DSRs in the year after GDPR
went into effect, while some outliers fielded thousands of
them. In some cases, U.S. residents attempted to exercise GDPR
rights. Companies receiving them had to decide whether to
reject them on legal grounds or fulfill them in order to
provide a positive consumer experience. Most U.S. healthcare
providers and insurers similarly receive fewer than 100 HIPAA
DSRs each year. As the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)
brings to many U.S. companies for the first time the rights to
access and erasure and to opt out of selling data to third
parties, questions many U.S. privacy leaders are asking is
whether their expected volume of DSRs will outstrip their
generally manual processes for fulfilling DSRs, and whether
residents outside California will attempt to exercise these
rights in large numbers.
3.
How can informed consent be facilitated in a blink? The sharp
rise in the use of pop-up windows on mobile and stationary
websites to capture user
consent for cookies has slowed down the typical online customer
experience to demonstrate compliance without offering an
obvious material improvement in privacy protection. Corporate
privacy leaders are looking for new models--such as mobile apps
that ask you if you want to enable that app tracking your
device's geolocation or accessing your contacts--that break
down the privacy-consent process into quicker, more meaningful
steps.
4.
What pseudonymization protocol will stand the test of time?
Effective pseudonymization can increase the ability to use and
monetize data and create commercial innovation while also
protecting individual privacy. Advances in data processing and
artificial intelligence, however, are changing the threshold of
what is identifiable data and how much has to be removed from a
data set in order for it to be pseudonymized, anonymized, or
de-identified. U.S. privacy leaders are looking toward the
``statistical'' method of de-identification described in the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) as
a potential answer to this question.
5.
What is a high risk to privacy? Effectively functioning companies
will allocate the most risk-management resources to address
risks they determine are ``high'' in their enterprise risk-
management (ERM) programs. The concept of high risk embedded in
the GDPR and interpreted in varying ways across EU member
states diverges in many ways from the concept of high risk
provided for in different U.S. data privacy laws. For example,
the GDPR considers a person's status with regard to membership
in a trade union as ``sensitive'' data whose processing creates
inherent high risk, while no U.S. privacy law or regulation
results in a similar determination. Conversely, U.S. data-
breach notification laws make the storage of Social Security
numbers an inherent high risk, but GDPR does not similarly
classify the processing of EU social-insurance numbers.
Similarly, EU DPAs have listed ``large-scale data processing''
as a high-risk criterion that does not have an equivalent in
U.S. privacy regulations. Unless these concepts converge over
time across jurisdictions, privacy risk management may need to
be regionalized in several respects.
Looking ahead
The GDPR has caused U.S. FIs to implement new ways for European
residents to control their personal data. The GDPR's extraterritorial
reach has in turn prompted other jurisdictions around the world to
adopt its model that is centered on offering a set of data-subject
rights and instituting programmatic controls. To plan for a future
where consumers around the world may generally expect the core rights
of access, deletion, and objection to marketing, many U.S. FIs are
redesigning their privacy organizational models and capabilities.
Because of the relative newness of technologies designed to automate
the fulfillment of privacy rights and the technical complexity of many
FIs, a significant effort lies ahead of them in realizing these
designs. A key factor in whether automation is needed or manual
processes will continue to suffice is the degree to which consumers
will increasingly demand these rights. As these factors converge, the
highest level of privacy protection in the digital age will result when
both companies and consumers exercise their roles to the fullest.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF MACIEJ CEGLOWSKI
Founder, Pinboard
May 7, 2019
Thank you for the opportunity to address you today.
I am the founder and sole employee of Pinboard, a small for-profit
archiving service founded in 2009 that competes in part on the basis of
personal privacy. I have also been a frequent critic of Silicon
Valley's reliance on business models requiring mass surveillance,
speaking on the topic at conferences both in the United States and
abroad.
As someone who earns his living through data collection, I am
acutely aware of the power the tools we are building give us over our
fellow citizens' private lives, and the danger they pose to our
liberty. I am grateful to Chairman Crapo, ranking Member Brown, and the
Committee for the opportunity to testify on this vital matter.
The internet economy in 2019 is dominated by five American tech
companies: Apple, Microsoft, Google, Facebook, and Amazon. These are
also the five most valuable corporations in the world, with a combined
market capitalization exceeding four trillion dollars.\1\ Between them,
these companies control the market for online
advertising, mobile and desktop operating systems, office software,
document storage, search, cloud computing, and many other areas of the
digital economy. They also own and operate a significant portion of the
physical infrastructure of the internet, and act as its de facto
regulating authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ At the time of writing, Amazon was valued at $966B, Microsoft
$988B, Apple $974B, Facebook $558B, and Google (Alphabet) $824B.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The concentration of power in the hands of these giant firms is the
epilogue to a spectacular story of American innovation and dynamism.
The technologies underpinning the internet were all developed here in
the United States, and the many fortunes that they produced owe their
thanks to fruitful cooperation between Government, industry, and the
research community. Working together, the public and private sectors
created the conditions for a startup culture unlike any other in the
world.
Today, however, that culture of dynamism is at risk. The
surveillance business model has eroded user trust to such a point that
it is impeding our ability to innovate.
In many ways, the five internet giants operate like sovereign
states. Their operations are global, and decisions they take
unilaterally can affect entire societies. Denmark has gone so far as to
send an ambassador to Silicon Valley. When Jeff Bezos, the CEO of
Amazon, met recently with the Canadian prime minister, the occasion was
covered in the press like a state visit.
The emergence of this tech oligopoly reflects a profound shift in
our society, the migration of every area of commercial, social, and
personal life into an online realm where human interactions are
mediated by software.
To an extent that has no precedent, the daily activities of most
Americans are now tracked and permanently recorded by automated
systems. It is likely that every person in this hearing room carries
with them a mobile phone that keeps a history of their location, is
privy to their most private conversations, and contains a rich history
of their private life. Some of you may even have an always-on
microphone in your car or home that responds to your voice commands.
Emerging technologies promise to afford these systems even more
intimate glimpses into our private lives--phones that monitor our
facial expressions as we read, and connected homes that watch over us
while we sleep. Scenarios that were once the province of dystopian dime
fiction have become an unremarkable consumer reality.
The sudden ubiquity of this architecture of mass surveillance, and
its enshrinement as the default business model of the online economy,
mean that we can no longer put off hard conversations about the threats
it poses to liberty.
Adding to this urgency is the empirical fact that, while our online
economy depends on the collection and permanent storage of highly
personal data, we do not have the capacity to keep such large
collections of user data safe over time.
The litany of known data breaches is too long to recite here, but
includes every one of the top five tech companies, as well as health
and financial firms and Government agencies. Every year brings new and
more spectacular examples of our inability to protect our users. At
Yahoo, an internet giant at the time with a world-class security team,
over 3 billion user accounts were compromised in a 2013 breach. In
2015, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management allowed unauthorized
access to the records of over four million people, including many with
highly sensitive security clearances. And in 2017, Equifax exposed
data, including Social Security numbers, on 147 million Americans,
nearly half the U.S. population.
While many individual data breaches are due to negligence or poor
practices, their overall number reflects an uncomfortable truth well
known to computer professionals--that our ability to attack computer
systems far exceeds our ability to defend them, and will for the
foreseeable future.
The current situation, therefore, is not tenable. The internet
economy today resembles the earliest days of the nuclear industry. We
have a technology of unprecedented potential, we have made glowing
promises about how it will transform the daily lives of our fellow
Americans, but we don't know how to keep its dangerous byproducts safe.
Two Views of Privacy
Discussing privacy in the context of regulation can be vexing,
because the companies doing the most to erode our privacy are equally
sincere in their conviction that they are its champions.
The confusion stems from two different ways in which we use the
word privacy, leading us to sometimes talk past each other.
In the regulatory context, discussion of privacy invariably means
data privacy--the idea of protecting designated sensitive material from
unauthorized access.
Laws like the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) delimit certain
categories of sensitive information that require extra protection, and
mandate ways in which health and financial institutions have to
safeguard this data, or report when those safeguards have failed. The
Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 extends similar
protection to all data associated with children.
We continue to use this framework of data privacy today, including
in the recently enacted General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
It is true that, when it comes to protecting specific collections
of data, the companies that profit most from the surveillance economy
are the ones working hardest to defend them against unauthorized
access.
But there is a second, more fundamental sense of the word privacy,
one which until recently was so common and unremarkable that it would
have made no sense to try to describe it.
That is the idea that there exists a sphere of life that should
remain outside public scrutiny, in which we can be sure that our words,
actions, thoughts and feelings are not being indelibly recorded. This
includes not only intimate spaces like the home, but also the many
semi-private places where people gather and engage with one another in
the common activities of daily life--the workplace, church, club or
union hall. As these interactions move online, our privacy in this
deeper sense withers away.
Until recently, even people living in a police state could count on
the fact that the authorities didn't have enough equipment or manpower
to observe everyone, everywhere,\2\ and so enjoyed more freedom from
monitoring than we do living in a free society today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The record for intensive surveillance in the pre-internet age
likely belongs to East Germany, where by some estimates one in seven
people was an informant; https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/
books/first/k/koehler-stasi.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A characteristic of this new world of ambient surveillance is that
we cannot opt out of it, any more than we might opt out of automobile
culture by refusing to drive. However sincere our commitment to
walking, the world around us would still be a world built for cars. We
would still have to contend with roads, traffic jams, air pollution,
and run the risk of being hit by a bus.
Similarly, while it is possible in principle to throw one's laptop
into the sea and renounce all technology, it is no longer be possible
to opt out of a surveillance society.
When we talk about privacy in this second, more basic sense, the
giant tech companies are not the guardians of privacy, but its
gravediggers.
The tension between these interpretations of what privacy entails,
and who is trying to defend it, complicates attempts to discuss
regulation.
Tech companies will correctly point out that their customers have
willingly traded their private data for an almost miraculous collection
of useful services, services that have unquestionably made their lives
better, and that the business model that allows them to offer these
services for free creates far more value than harm for their customers.
Consumers will just as rightly point out that they never consented
to be the subjects in an uncontrolled social experiment, that the
companies engaged in reshaping our world have consistently refused to
honestly discuss their business models or data collection practices,
and that in a democratic society, profound social change requires
consensus and accountability.
Behavioral Data
Further complicating the debate on privacy is the novel nature of
the data being collected. While the laws around protecting data have
always focused on intentional communications--documents that can be
intercepted, conversations that can be eavesdropped upon--much of what
computer systems capture about us is behavioral data: incidental
observations of human behavior that don't seem to convey any
information at all.
Behavioral data encompasses anything people do while interacting
with a computer system. It can include the queries we type into a
search engine, our physical location, the hyperlinks we click on,
whether we are sitting or standing, how quickly we scroll down a
document, how jauntily we walk down a corridor, whether our eyes linger
on a photo, whether we start to write a comment and then delete it--
even the changes in our facial expression as we are shown an online ad.
This incidental data has proven to be such a valuable raw material
that an entire industry now specializes in finding ways to mine it. The
devices used to spy on us include our computers, cell phones,
televisions, cars, security cameras, our children's toys, home
appliances, wifi access points, even at one point trash cans in the
street.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Campbell-Dollaghan, Kelsey. ``Brave New Garbage: London's Trash
Cans Track You Using Your Smartphone.'' Gizmodo. (Aug. 9, 2013),
https://gizmodo.com/brave-new-garbage-londons-trash-cans-track-you-
using-1071610114.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Privacy and Consent
The extent to which anyone consents--or can consent--to this kind
of tracking is the thorny question in attempting to regulate the
relationship between people and software.
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), enacted in May 2018,
is the most ambitious attempt thus far to regulate online privacy. It
takes a very traditional view of the relationship between people and
data.
In the eyes of the GDPR, people own their data. They make an
affirmative choice to share their data with online services, and can
revoke that choice. The consent they give must be explicit and limited
to a specified purpose--the recipient does not have carte blanche to
use the data as they please, or to share it with third parties, with
some complicating caveats.
People have the right to request a full download of their data from
the services they have entrusted it to, and they have the right to
demand that it be permanently erased.
The GDPR imposes a notification requirement for data breaches, and
requires affirmative consent for the sale of user data. It also
restricts the movement of data to outside jurisdictions (though in the
case of the United States, this restriction is superseded by the U.S.-
EU Privacy Shield framework).
Finally, the GDPR mandates that privacy safeguards like data
tokenization and encryption be built in to new systems, and that
companies appoint a dedicated privacy officer.
The GDPR is not a simple regulation, and many of its most
potentially significant provisions (such as the scope of a data
controller's ``legitimate interests,'' or what the right to erasure
means in the context of a machine learning model) await interpretation
by regulators.
What limits, if any, the GDPR will place on the application of
machine learning is a particularly important open question. The law on
its face prohibits automated decisionmaking that has a ``legal or
similarly significant effect'' on data subjects, but the definition of
``significant effect'' is not clear, nor is it clear whether having a
human being simply countersign an algorithmic decision would be enough
to satisfy regulators that the decision process is not fully automated.
Impacts
As it is so new, the GDPR's ultimate impact on online privacy in
the European Union is unclear. Some of the dramatic early impacts (like
major U.S. newspapers going offline) have proven to be transient, while
many of the biggest impacts hinge on future decisions by EU regulators.
Enough has happened, however, to draw some preliminary conclusions.
The GDPR so far has made life hard on internet users. It is not
clear that this is the GDPR's fault.
The plain language of the GDPR is so plainly at odds with the
business model of surveillance advertising that contorting the real-
time ad brokerages into something resembling compliance has required
acrobatics that have left essentially everybody unhappy.
The leading ad networks in the European Union have chosen to
respond to the GDPR by stitching together a sort of Frankenstein's
monster of consent, a mechanism whereby a user wishing to visit, say, a
weather forecast page \4\ is first prompted to agree to share data with
a consortium of 119 entities, including the aptly named ``A Million
Ads'' network. The user can scroll through this list of intermediaries
one by one, or give or withhold consent en bloc, but either way she
must wait a further 2 minutes for the consent collection process to
terminate before she is allowed to find out whether or not it is going
to rain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ This is an actual example.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This majestically baroque consent mechanism also hinders Europeans
from using the privacy preserving features built into their web
browsers, or from turning off invasive tracking technologies like
third-party cookies, since the mechanism depends on their being
present.
For the average EU citizen, therefore, the immediate effect of the
GDPR has been to add friction to their internet browsing experience
along the lines of the infamous 2011 EU Privacy Directive (``EU cookie
law'') that added consent dialogs to nearly every site on the internet.
The GDPR rollout has also demonstrated to what extent the European
ad market depends on Google, who has assumed the role of de facto
technical regulatory authority due to its overwhelming market share.\5\
Google waited until the night before the regulation went into effect to
announce its intentions, leaving ad networks scrambling.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Google has at least a 70 percent advertising market share in
Europe, though this figure is averaged over the 10 year period 2006-
2016 and likely far higher today. Laurent, Lionel. ``Europe Is Changing
Google for the Better.'' Washington Post. (March 20, 2019), https://
www.washingtonpost.com/business/europe-is-changing-google-for-the-
better/2019/03/20/691a
aff4-4b2e-11e9-8cfc-2c5d0999c21e_story.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is significant that Google and Facebook also took advantage of
the U.S.-EU privacy shield to move 1.5 billion non-EU user records out
of EU jurisdiction to servers in the United States. Overall, the GDPR
has significantly strengthened Facebook and Google at the expense of
smaller players in the surveillance economy.
The data protection provisions of the GDPR, particularly the right
to erase, imposed significant compliance costs on internet companies.
In some cases, these compliance costs just show the legislation working
as intended. Companies who were not keeping adequate track of personal
data were forced to retrofit costly controls, and that data is now
safer for it.
But in other cases, companies with a strong commitment to privacy
also found themselves expending significant resources on retooling.
Personally identifying information has a way of seeping in to odd
corners of computer systems (for example, users will sometimes
accidentally paste their password into a search box), and tracking down
all of these special cases can be challenging in a complex system. The
requirements around erasure, particularly as they interact with
backups, also impose a special burden, as most computer systems are
designed with a bias to never losing data, rather than making it easy
to expunge.
A final, and extremely interesting outcome of the GDPR, was an
inadvertent experiment conducted by the New York Times. Privacy
advocates have long argued that intrusive third-party advertising does
not provide more value to publishers than the traditional pre-internet
style of advertising based off of content, but there has never been a
major publisher willing to publicly run the experiment.
The New York Times tested this theory by cutting off all ad
networks in Europe, and running only direct sold ads to its European
visitors. The paper found that ad revenue increased significantly, and
stayed elevated into 2019, bolstering the argument that surveillance-
based advertising offers no advantage to publishers, and may in fact
harm them.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Davies, Jessica. ``After GDPR, the New York Times cutoff ad
exchanges in Europe--and kept growing ad revenue.'' Digiday. Jan. 6,
2019, https://digiday.com/media/gumgumtest-new-york-times-gdpr-cut-off-
ad-exchanges-europe-ad-revenue/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Limits of Consent
While it is too soon to draw definitive conclusions about the GDPR,
there is a tension between its concept of user consent and the reality
of a surveillance economy that is worth examining in more detail.
A key assumption of the consent model is any user can choose to
withhold consent from online services. But not all services are created
equal--there are some that you really can't say no to.
Take the example of Facebook. Both landlords and employers in the
United States have begun demanding to see Facebook accounts as a
condition of housing or
employment.\7\ The United States Border Patrol has made a formal
request to begin collecting social media to help vet people arriving in
the country.\8\ In both those contexts, not having a Facebook account
might stand out too much to be a viable option. Many schools now
communicate with parents via Facebook; Facebook groups are also the
locus for political organizing and online activism across the political
spectrum.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Dewey, Caitlin. ``Creepy startup will help landlords, employers
and online dates strip-mine intimate data from your Facebook page.''
Washington Post. June 9, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-
intersect/wp/2016/06/09/creepy-startup-will-help-landlords-employers-
and-online-dates-strip-mine-intimate-data-from-your-facebook-page/.
\8\ 81 FR 40892. https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/06/
23/2016-14848/agency-information-collection-activities-arrival-and-
departure-record-forms-i-94-and-i-94w-and#h-11.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Analogous arguments can be made for social products offered by the
other major tech companies. But if you can't afford to opt out, what
does it mean to consent?
Opting out can also be impossible because of how deeply the
internet giants have embedded themselves in the fabric of the internet.
For example, major media properties in the European Union use a
technology called ReCaptcha on their GDPR consent forms.\9\ These forms
must be completed before a user can access the website they are
gathering consent for, but since the ReCaptcha service is run by
Google, and the form cannot be submitted without completing the Google-
generated challenge (which incidentally performs free image
classification labor for the company), a user who refuses to give
Google access to her browser will find herself denied access to a large
portion of the internet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ The purpose of ReCaptcha is to prevent automated submissions,
and ensure that a human being is filling out the form.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While this specific example may change when it comes to the
attention of an EU regulator, the broader issue remains. The sheer
reach of the tech oligopoly makes it impossible to avoid using their
services. When a company like Google controls the market-leading
browser, mobile operating system, email service and analytics suite,
exercises a monopoly over search in the European Union, runs the
largest ad network in Europe, and happens to own many of the undersea
cables that connect Europe to the rest of the world,\10\ how do you
possibly say ``no''?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Zimmer, Jameson. ``Google Owns 63,605 Miles and 8.5 percent of
Submarine Cables Worldwide.'' Broadband Now. (September 12, 2018),
https://broadbandnow.com/report/google-content-providers-submarine-
cable-ownership/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Informed Consent
Beyond one's basic ability to consent, there is the question of
what it means to give informed consent. Presumably we are not opting in
or out of the services we use for capricious reasons, but because we
can make a rational choice about what is in our interest.
In practice, however, obtaining this information is not possible,
even assuming superhuman reserves of patience.
For example, anyone visiting the popular Tumblr blogging platform
from a European IP address must first decide whether to share data with
Tumblr's 201 advertising partners, and read five separate privacy
policies from Tumblr's several web analytics providers.
Despite being a domain expert in the field, and spending an hour
clicking into these policies, I am unable to communicate what it is
that Tumblr is tracking, or what data of mine will be used for what
purposes by their data partners (each of whom has its own voluminous
terms of service). This opacity exists in part because the
intermediaries have fought hard to keep their business practices and
data sharing processes a secret, even in the teeth of strong European
regulation.
Organizations like the Interactive Advertising Bureau Europe (IABE)
defeat the spirit of the GDPR by bundling consent and requiring it
across many ad-supported properties in Europe. If regulators block the
bundling in its current incarnation, it will no doubt rise from the
dead in a modified form, reflecting the undying spirit of surveillance
advertising. But at no point will internet users have the information
they would need to make a truly informed choice (leaving aside the
ridiculousness of requiring a legal education and 2 hours of sustained
close reading in order to watch a cat video).
Consent in a world of inference
Finally, there is a sense in which machine learning and the power
of predictive inference may be making the whole idea of consent
irrelevant. At this point, companies have collected so much data about
entire populations that they can simply make guesses about us, often
with astonishing accuracy.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ The line of argument in this section is adapted from the work
of Dr. Zeynep Tufekci, UNC Chapel Hill. For example, ``Think You're
Discreet Online? Think Again,'' (April 21, 2019),
https://
www.nytimes.com/2019/04/21/opinion/computational-inference.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A useful analogy here is a jigsaw puzzle. If you give me a puzzle
with one piece missing, I can still assemble it, reconstruct the
contours of the missing piece by looking at the shape of the pieces
around it and, if the piece is small compared to the whole, easily
interpolate the missing part of the image.
This is exactly what computer systems do to us when we deny them
our personal information. Experts have long known that it takes a very
small amount of data to make reliable inferences about a person. Most
people in the United States, for example, can be uniquely identified by
just the combination of their date of birth, gender, and ZIP Code.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Sweeney, Latanya. ``Simple Demographics Often Identify People
Uniquely,'' Carnegie Mellon University, Data Privacy Working Paper.
(2000), https://dataprivacylab.org/projects/identifiability/paper1.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But machine learning is honing this ability to fill in the blanks
to surprising levels of accuracy, raising troubling questions about
what it means to have any categories of protected data at all.
For example, imagine that an algorithm could inspect your online
purchasing history and, with high confidence, infer that you suffer
from an anxiety disorder. Ordinarily, this kind of sensitive medical
information would be protected by HIPAA, but is the inference similarly
protected? What if the algorithm is only reasonably certain? What if
the algorithm knows that you're healthy now, but will suffer from such
a disorder in the future?
The question is not hypothetical--a 2017 study\13\ showed that a
machine learning algorithm examining photos posted to the image-sharing
site Instagram was able to detect signs of depression before it was
diagnosed in the subjects, and outperformed medical doctors on the
task.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Reece, Andrew and Danforth, Cristopher. ``Instagram photos
reveal predictive markers of depression.'' EPJ Data Science, (2017),
https://epjdatascience.springeropen.com/articles/10.11
40/epjds/s13688-017-0110-z.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The paradigm of automatic ownership of personal data does not mesh
well with a world where such private data cannot only interpolated and
reconstructed, but independently discovered by an algorithm!
And if I can infer such important facts about your life by applying
machine learning to public data, then I have deprived you of privacy
just as effectively as I would have by direct eavesdropping.
In order to talk meaningfully about consent in online systems, the
locus of regulation will need to expand beyond data collection, to
cover how those data collections, and the algorithms trained on them,
are used. But to do this, we will first need far greater visibility
into the workings of surveillance-dependent tech companies than they
have so far been willing to grant us.
As it stands, the consent framework exemplified in the GDPR is
simply not adequate to safeguard privacy. As much as we would like to
be the masters of our data, we are not. And the real masters aren't
talking.
Goals for Privacy Regulation
Absent a clear understanding of how our data is being used, and the
role it plays in surveillance-based business models, it is hard to lay
out a specific regulatory program.
Nevertheless, there are some general goals we can pursue based on
the experience of regulation attempts in Europe, and what we know about
the surveillance economy.
Clarity
Privacy regulation should be understandable, both for users of the
technology, and for the companies the regulations govern. Users
especially should not be required to make complex and irrevocable
decisions about privacy. To the extent possible, intuitions about
privacy from the human world (``a casual conversation between friends
is not recorded forever'') should carry over into the digital world.
Privacy
At the risk of sounding tautological, privacy regulation should not
punish people for seeking privacy. It should not be necessary to turn
on invasive tracking technologies in one's browser in order to express
the desire to not to be tracked.
Retention Limits on Behavioral Data
Knowing that we lack the capacity to keep data collections safe
over time, we can reduce the potential impact of any breach by setting
strict lifetimes for behavioral data.
Google has demonstrated the feasibility of this approach with their
recent announcement that users will be able to set their account to
automatically delete location data after 3 or 18 months.\14\ This
demonstrates that permanent retention of behavioral data is not
critical to surveillance-based business models. Such limits should be
enforced industrywide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Monsees, David and McGriff, Marlo. ``Introducing auto-delete
controls for your Location History and activity data.'' (May 1, 2019),
https://www.blog.google/technology/safety-security/automatically
delete-data/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moving to a norm where behavioral data is kept briefly instead of
forever will mark a major step forward in data security, both reducing
the time data is potentially exposed to attackers, and reducing the
total volume of data that must be kept safe.
Time limits on behavioral data will also reduce consumers'
perception that they are making irrevocable privacy commitments every
time they try a new product or service.
Right To Download
The right to download is one of the most laudable features in the
GDPR, and serves the important secondary purpose of educating the
public about the extent of data collection.
This right should, however, be expanded to include the right to
download, and correct, all information that third-party data brokers
have provided about a user, in a spirit similar to the Fair Credit
Reporting Act.
Fairness
Tech startups in the highly regulated areas of health, finance and
banking should be required to compete on the same regulatory footing as
established businesses in those areas. In particular, they should not
be allowed to do an end run around existing data privacy laws by using
machine learning and algorithmic inference.
For example, the use of a machine learning algorithm should not
allow a loan company to evade consumer protections against
discrimination in fair lending laws.
(For a fuller discussion of this point, see the addendum on machine
learning at the end of this document).
Positive Regulation
While the above suggestions seek to impose limits and restrictions,
there is an important way that privacy regulation can create new ground
for innovation.
What is missing from the regulatory landscape is a legal mechanism
for making credible and binding promises to users about privacy
practices.
Today, internet startups in the United States who want to compete
on privacy have no mechanism to signal their commitment to users other
than making promises through their terms of service (which usually
include a standard legal clause that they may change at any time).
Except in the case of the most egregious violations, which
sometimes attract the attention of the Federal Trade Commission, these
terms of service carry little weight.
As the owner of a company that markets itself to privacy-conscious
people, I would derive enormous benefit from a legal framework that
allowed me to make binding privacy promises (for example, a pledge that
there is no third-party tracking on my website), and imposed stiff
fines on my company if I violated these guarantees (including criminal
liability in the case of outright fraud).
Such a legal mechanism would not only enable competition around
privacy-enhancing features, but it would also give future regulators a
clearer idea of how much value consumers place on data privacy. It is
possible that the tech giants are right, and people want services for
free, no matter the privacy cost. It is also possible that people value
privacy, and will pay extra for it, just like many people now pay a
premium for organic fruit. The experiment is easy to run--but it
requires a modest foundation in law.
Academic research in computer science is full of fascinating ideas
that could serve as the seed for business built around user privacy.
Results in fields like homeomorphic encryption, differential privacy,
privacy-preserving machine learning, and zero-knowledge proofs all
await a clever entrepreneur who can incorporate them into a useful
product or service. It is very hard to compete against companies like
Amazon or Facebook on price, but it is not hard to beat them on
privacy. With a minimum of regulatory scaffolding, we might see a
welcome new burst of innovation.
Preserving Liberty
The final, and paramount goal, of privacy regulation should be to
preserve our liberty.
There is no clearer warning of the danger of building up an
infrastructure of surveillance than what is happening today in China's
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous
Region. Claiming to be concerned about the possible radicalization of a
Muslim minority, Chinese authorities have imposed a regime of total
surveillance over a population of 25 million people.
As recent reporting by Human Rights Watch has shown, a computer
system called the Integrated Joint Operations Platform (IJOP) monitors
the location and movement of all people in the province (based on phone
data), as well as their gas and electricity consumption, which apps
they use, where they worship, who they communicate with, and how they
spend their money. This surveillance information is fed into machine
learning models that can bin people into one of 36 suspect categories,
bringing them to the closer attention of the police.\15\ Never before
has a government had the technical means to implement this level of
surveillance across an entire population. And they are doing it with
the same off-the-shelf commercial technologies we use in America to get
people to click on ads.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Human Rights Watch, ``China's Algorithms of Repression,'' (May
1, 2019), https://www.hrw.org/report/2019/05/01/chinas-algorithms-
repression/reverse-engineering-xinjiang-police-mass-surveillance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The latent potential of the surveillance economy as a toolkit for
despotism cannot be exaggerated. The monitoring tools we see in
repressive regimes are not ``dual use'' technologies--they are single
use technologies, working as designed, except for a different master.
For 60 years, we have called the threat of totalitarian
surveillance ``Orwellian,'' but the word no longer fits the threat. The
better word now may be ``Californian.'' A truly sophisticated system of
social control, of the kind being pioneered in China, will not compel
obedience, but nudge people toward it. Rather than censoring or
punishing those who dissent, it will simply make sure their voices are
not heard. It will reward complacent behavior, and sideline
troublemakers. It's even possible that, judiciously wielded, such a
system of social control might enjoy wide public support in our own
country.
But I hope you will agree with me that such a future would be
profoundly un-American.
There is no deep reason that weds the commercial internet to a
business model of blanket surveillance. The spirit of innovation is not
dead in Silicon Valley, and there are other ways we can grow our
digital economy that will maintain our lead in information technology,
while also safeguarding our liberty. Just like the creation of the
internet itself, the effort to put it on a safer foundation will
require a combination of research, entrepreneurial drive and timely,
enlightened regulation. But we did it before, and there's no reason to
think we can't do it again.
Addendum: Machine Learning and Privacy
Machine learning is a mathematical technique for training computer
systems to make accurate predictions from a large corpus of training
data, with a degree of accuracy that in some domains can mimic human
cognition.
For example, machine learning algorithms trained on a sufficiently
large data set can learn to identify objects in photographs with a high
degree of accuracy, transcribe spoken language to text, translate texts
between languages, or flag anomalous behavior on a surveillance
videotape.
The mathematical techniques underpinning machine learning, like
convolutional neural networks (CNN), have been well-known since before
the revolution in machine learning that took place beginning in 2012.
What enabled the key breakthrough in machine learning was the arrival
of truly large collections of data, along with concomitant computing
power, allowing these techniques to finally demonstrate their full
potential.
It takes data sets of millions or billions of items, along with
considerable computing power, to get adequate results from a machine
learning algorithms. Before the advent of the surveillance economy, we
simply did not realize the power of these techniques when applied at
scale.
Because machine learning has a voracious appetite for data and
computing power, it contributes both to the centralizing tendency that
has consolidated the tech industry, and to the pressure companies face
to maximize the collection of user data.
Machine learning models poses some unique problems in privacy
regulation because of the way they can obscure the links between the
data used to train them and their ultimate behavior.
A key feature of machine learning is that it occurs in separable
phases. An initial training phase consists of running a learning
algorithm on a large collection of labeled data (a time and
computation-intensive process). This model can then be deployed in an
exploitation phase, which requires far fewer resources.
Once the training phase is complete, the data used to train the
model is no longer required and can conceivably be thrown away.
The two phases of training and exploitation can occur far away from
each other both in space and time. The legal status of models trained
on personal data under privacy laws like the GDPR, or whether data
transfer laws apply to moving a trained model across jurisdictions, is
not clear.
Inspecting a trained model reveals nothing about the data that went
into it. To a human inspecting it, the model consists of millions and
millions of numeric weights that have no obvious meaning, or
relationship to human categories of thought. One cannot examine an
image recognition model, for example, and point to the numbers that
encode ``apple.''
The training process behaves as a kind of one-way function. It is
not possible to run a trained model backwards to reconstruct the input
data; nor is it possible to ``untrain'' a model so that it will forget
a specific part of its input.
Machine learning algorithms are best understood as inference
engines. They find structure and excel at making inferences from data
that can sometimes be surprising even to people familiar with the
technology. This ability to see patterns that humans don't notice has
led to interest in using machine learning algorithms in medical
diagnosis, evaluating insurance risk, assigning credit scores, stock
trading, and other fields that currently rely on expert human analysis.
The opacity of machine learning models, combined with this capacity
for inference, also make them an ideal technology for circumventing
legal protections on data use. In this spirit, I have previously
referred to machine learning as ``money laundering for bias.'' Whatever
latent biases are in the training data, whether or not they are
apparent to humans, and whether or not attempts are made to remove them
from the data set, will be reflected in the behavior of the model.
A final feature of machine learning is that it is curiously
vulnerable to adversarial inputs. For example, an image classifier that
correctly identifies a picture of a horse might reclassify the same
image as an apple, sailboat or any other object of an attacker's
choosing if they can manipulate even one pixel in the image.\16\
Changes in input data not noticeable to a human observer will be
sufficient to persuade the model. Recent research suggests that this
property is an inherent and ineradicable feature of any machine
learning system that uses current approaches.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Su, Jiawei, Vargas, Danilo, and Kouichi, Sakurai. ``One Pixel
Attack for Fooling Deep Neural Networks.'' (Oct 24, 2017), https://
arxiv.org/pdf/1710.08864.pdf.
\17\ Wang, Xianmin, Li, Jing, Kuang, Xioahui, Tan, Yu-an. ``The
security of machine learning in an adversarial setting: A survey.''
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, (August 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In brief, machine learning is effective, has an enormous appetite
for data, requires large computational resources, makes decisions that
resist analysis, excels at finding latent structure in data, obscures
the link between source data and outcomes, defies many human
intuitions, and is readily fooled by a knowledgeable adversary.
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM PETER
H. CHASE
------
Q.1. We are approaching the 1-year anniversary of the GDPR.
What are some of the negative unintended consequences that the
United States can learn from as Congress explores its own
privacy legislation?
A.1. There have been a number of stories about some of the
negative unintended consequences of GDPR in its first year in
force. One study (https://voxeu.org/article/short-run-effects-
gdpr-technology-venture-investment) found that venture capital
for tech firms in Europe declined significantly compared with
counterparts in the United States, noting specifically:
EU technology firms, on average, experienced double-
digit percentage declines in venture funding relative
to their U.S. counterparts after GDPR went into effect.
At our aggregate unit of observation, EU venture
funding decreased by $3.38 million at the mean of
$23.18 million raised per week per state per crude
technology category. This reduction takes place in both
the intensive margin (the average dollar amount raised
per round of funding, which decreased 39 percent) and
the extensive margin (the number of deals, which
incurred a 17 percent average drop).
GDPR's effect is particularly pronounced for young (0-3
year-old) EU ventures, where an average reduction of 19
percent in the number of deals is observed . . . If
GDPR leads to fewer new ventures and less capital per
venture, there could be fewer jobs as a result. Our
back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the
investment reduction for young ventures could translate
into a yearly loss between 3,604 to 29,819 jobs in the
European Union, corresponding to 4.09 percent to 11.20
percent of jobs created by 0-3 year-old ventures in our
sample.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Jian Jia et al., The Short-Run Effects of GDPR on Technology
Venture Investment, Vox.eu, (January 7, 2019).
The authors of the study note that this effect may not be
due to the GDPR per se, but rather to the actions major
platforms took to ensure that apps available through them were
GDPR-compliant. They also stress that this is a short-run
observation, which could correct over time.
Somewhat related, I have been told by representatives of
major financial firms involved in mergers and acquisitions that
the need for ``due diligence'' related to GDPR compliance has
become a significant factor in slowing some deals.
Another consequence, which probably is unintended in its
magnitude and direction, appears to have been on hospitals that
have increasingly moved toward digitalization of their
healthcare-related services, as these have had to invest
considerably more in compliance than less technologically
advanced hospitals, including with respect to staff
training.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Yuan Bocong and Li Jiannan, The Policy Effect of the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) on the Digital Public Health Sector
in the European Union: An Empirical Investigation, International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, March 25, 2019.
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6466053/)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unintended negative consequences such as these must be
expected with any large and detailed law, and especially one
that affects the practices of virtually all businesses, as all
firms--not just the IT sector--have become digital. As noted in
my written statement, certainly an expected consequence was the
cost of compliance, although European authorities may have
under-estimated those costs. One possible reason for this is
that even in its own publications, the European Union and many
others have stressed the somewhat absolutist aspect of the
``fundamental right'' to data protection, although in fact GDPR
does take more of a risk-based approach. This has been
beneficial for the many large and small firms that have leapt
into the GDPR compliance business.
But these unintended costs are also offset by some
unexpected benefits, such as those that appear to have come
from extended ``data hygiene'' processes many firms have
undergone, including with respect to their cyber-security
practices.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Tim Woods, GDPR's Impact on Incident Response, Security Today,
April 24, 2019. https://securitytoday.com/Articles/2019/04/24/GDPRs-
Impact-on-Incident-Response.aspx?Page=1.
Q.2. A central element of GDPR is that companies must clearly
explain how data is collected and used. Already we've seen
companies such as Google face heavy fines for failing to comply
with GDPR's consent requirements. How would you grade the EU's
enforcement of GDPR standards writ large, but also specifically
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the data collection and use standards?
A.2. GDPR has notably raised awareness of the importance of
data protection in the European Union, among citizens as well
as firms that hold consumer data. This is important, as the
first step in GDPR enforcement comes from citizens exercising
their rights to more information about what data is being
collected about them and how it is being used. GDPR gives them
a right to lodge complaints with a data protection authority,
and to seek effective judicial remedies both against that
authority (e.g., for not acting on a complaint) and a data
controller or processor. GDPR also allows not-for-profit civil
society organizations versed in data protection issues to lodge
such complaints, as Privacy International recently did against
a number of data brokers and credit rating agencies.
Actual enforcement rests in the first instance on the Data
Protection Supervisory Authorities in each of the EU member
states, which may take differing approaches to this task. Some
are more focused on helping firms--especially smaller ones--
comply with their obligations under GDPR; others may be more
disciplinary. That being said, the European Data Protection
Board (EDPB) provides guidance and rulings to ensure the member
state DPSAs interpret the GDPR in a consistent manner.
On May 22, 2019, the EDPB published a blog ``taking stock''
of the GDPR, noting that member state supervisory authorities
received 144,376 queries and complaints in 2018, as well as
89,271 data breach notifications, both up significantly over
2017. (Note, however, that GDPR was only in force as of May 25,
2018, so the numbers are not strictly comparable.) While 63
percent of these cases had been closed, some 37 percent were
still being processed as of May 2019, while 0.1 percent were
being appealed--including those (such as the Google case noted
in the question) that had led to the supervisory authorities
levying some $60 million in fines in the 7 months following
GDPR's entry into force.
I have not yet seen an analysis of precisely how many of
these queries and complaints specifically related to data
collection and use standards, although suspect these issues
were raised in most of them.
In general, however, I would ``grade'' the European Union's
enforcement efforts fairly favorably. All EU member states had
data protection laws and data protection authorities under the
previous 1995 Data Protection Directive, so GDPR was not
completely new. That said, the political context surrounding
and the emphasis on data protection has increased immensely
during the past few years, not least because of the 2013
Snowden revelations and the Cambridge Analytica stories.
This, plus the more detailed and stringent GDPR
requirements, places significant demands on the Supervisory
Authorities, many of which had to be legally reconstituted to
meet GDPR requirements for independence and enforcement
authorities. GDPR requires member state governments to provide
the requisite resources to the Supervisory Authorities, but
this takes time, as does finding sufficient qualified staff (in
competition with the private sector compliance business). Even
with the 2 years between enactment in April 2016 and entry into
force in May 2018, many supervisory authorities, especially in
smaller member states, are still struggling to staff up.
They are not helped by the fact that the EDPB is still
developing detailed guidance on some of the trickiest parts of
GDPR (e.g., on big data analytics, beyond profiling and
automated decisionmaking), and that very little has yet been
subjected to detailed judicial review.
These ``growing pains'' should have been expected, and as
noted the majority of Supervisory Authorities are managing them
in part by focusing on helping the firms they supervise comply
with the GDPR. This necessarily means emphasizing some of the
risk and harm-based approaches that are reflected in the GDPR,
as implicit in the Data Protection Impact Assessments. Applying
such ``prosecutorial discretion'' makes sense at this point in
the GDPR's life, although those who emphasize the ``fundamental
right'' of data protection may be somewhat disappointed.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
PETER H. CHASE
Data Minimization vs. Big Data
Q.1. Data minimization seeks for businesses to collect,
process, and store the minimum amount of data that is necessary
to carry out the purposes for which is was collected. There are
obvious advantages to this as it minimizes the risk of data
breaches and other privacy harms. At the same time, big data
analytics are going to be crucial for the future and play an
important role in smart cities, artificial intelligence, and
other important technologies that fuel economic growth.
Can you describe how you view a balance between
minimization and big data? Please describe how this balance
applies specifically to the financial sector?
A.1. Data minimization and big data analytics are two different
concepts.
The European Union's General Data Protection Directive
(GDPR) requires a data controller (including financial firms)
to collect and process personal data in accordance with a
number of principles, including the data minimization
principle. This requirement in Article 5(1)(c) does not in
itself restrict the amount of personal data a controller may
collect; it merely stipulates that the data must be ``adequate,
relevant and necessary in relation to the purposes for which
they (the personal data) are processed.''
``Big data analytics''--that is, the application of
powerful computing capabilities to large amounts of data to try
to determine and learn from certain correlations--could be one
of the purposes for which a data controller (including a
financial firm) collects/processes personal data; that is, GDPR
and the data minimization principle do not preclude big data
analytics.
That said, under GDPR a controller must also ensure that
any processing of personal data complies with other key
principles and requirements, including importantly the
``lawfulness, fairness and transparency'' principle in Article
5(1)(a) and the ``purpose limitation'' principle in Article
5(1)(b). The first of these requires inter alia that any
processing of personal data must be done in accordance with one
of the six lawful purposes spelled out in Article 6, while the
second mandates that data must be ``collected for specified,
explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a
manner that is incompatible with those purposes.''
Many see this ``purpose limitation'' principle as
potentially more problematic for big data analytics than the
``data minimization'' principle, as a data controller
(including a financial firm) might wish to apply such analytics
to personal data in a way that was not clearly and specifically
envisioned and spelled out to a data subject when the data was
collected. Interestingly, neither the European Data Protection
Board (EDPB) or its predecessor, the ``Working Party 29'' (WP-
29), have provided clear guidance on this issue.
They have, however, provided detailed guidance (https://
ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/item-detail.cfm?item_id=612053)
on two of the main purposes for which big data analytics might
be applied to personal data, automated decisionmaking and
profiling, both of which are specifically addressed as well in
Article 22 of GDPR (https://gdpr-info.eu/art-22-gdpr/). The
EDPB Guidance notes that both analytical tools may have useful
applications, including in financial service industries, and
indeed cites financial service applications in a number of the
examples. Profiling is defined as:
a procedure which may involve a series of statistical
deductions . . . used to make predictions (or
evaluations) about people, using data from various
sources to infer something about an individual, based
on the qualities of others who appear statistically
similar.
Automated decisionmaking can be based on data provided directly
by a consumer, observed about that person, or derived or
inferred about them; it may or may not involve profiling.
Both of these ``big data'' procedures are allowable under
GDPR, but they must comply the relevant provisions thereof.
This may be difficult. Consent may not apply unless the
individual was specifically alerted to the specific additional
processing to which his or her data might be subjected, and
even then the controller needs to meet the requirement that the
``consent'' also meet the ``fairness'' principle (including the
individual's reasonable expectations about the use of his/her
data). European officials also point to the possibility of
using the ``legitimate interests'' of the controller as a basis
for big data analytics, although if so doing a controller would
need to demonstrate--probably through a Data Protection Impact
Assessment--that the rights of the individuals' whose data is
being processed do not over-rule those interests. The Guidance
suggests this will be increasingly difficult to demonstrate the
more detailed, comprehensive and impactful the profiling might
be for an individual.
Note that under GDPR, an individual has an absolute right
to object to the use of profiling for direct marketing
purposes.
Security Standards
Q.2. Are the existing data security standards under GLBA
sufficient for protecting consumer's information? If not, what
do you recommend to make the standards adequate?
A.2. I do not know enough about the security standards under
GLBA to assess whether or not they are sufficient for
protecting consumers' information. The GDPR also has provisions
in Articles 32-34 about data security and breach notification,
but I am not in a position to compare those with GLBA. Data
breaches of course continue to happen in the European Union;
the European Union is trying to address these more through the
upgrading of its cyber-security law and regulation than through
GDPR.
Discrimination in AI
Q.3. Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence can often
lead to discriminatory and biased outcomes. It is important
that Congress address and prevent discrimination in any future
privacy legislation.
Q.3.a. Can impact assessments in the financial sector be
useful?
A.3.a. Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence are types
of big data analytics, so many of the comments made in response
to the first question are also applicable here.
As a general matter, the GDPR's lawfulness and fairness
principle would preclude decisionmaking based on personal
information that either was not in compliance with existing
laws against such discrimination or otherwise unfairly
discriminated against an individual.
Data Protection Impact Assessments, as described in detail
in GDPR Article 35 (https://gdpr-info.eu/art-35-gdpr/) as well
as relevant EDPB Guidance (https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/
article29/item-detail.cfm?item_id=611236), would of course be a
useful tool financial service firms could use to determine
whether their use of big data analytics, including machine
learning and artificial intelligence, is consistent with data
protection laws and requirements.
Q.3.b. How do we balance the need for transparency in automated
decisionmaking with proprietary business information?
A.3.b. The principle of transparency in automated
decisionmaking need not conflict with protecting proprietary
business information, an issue discussed in GDPR Recital 63.
The EDPB has issued detailed guidance (https://ec.europa.eu/
newsroom/article29/item-detail.cfm?item_id=622227) on this
issue, which essentially says that (a) data subjects have a
right to access (and rectify) the personal data about them used
in automated decisionmaking, and that (b) data controllers need
to be able to explain in some detail about how their automated
decisionmaking processes work, but do not need to reveal
proprietary business data as part of that.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See especially the Guidance on Automated Decision Making, page
25 (https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/item-
detail.cfm?item_id=612053).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note that the EDPB argues that GDPR prohibits solely
automated decisionmaking that has a legal or ``similarly
significant'' effects on an individual, unless in the
performance of a contract (where the use of the procedure is
clearly spelled out), pursuant to law or with the explicit
consent of the individual. Every individual at the least has a
right to human intervention in the decisionmaking and an
explanation of the grounds for the decision.
Q.3.c. Where do you think we must be careful to avoid
discrimination based on machine learning, AI and other
algorithms?
A.3.c. The United States has laws against discrimination,
including specific types of discrimination that might be
practiced by financial firms, whether or not that
discrimination is a result of the use of machine-learning, AI
or other algorithms. The existence or not of a general data
protection law in the United States along the lines of GDPR
does not in any way excuse these firms from their need to obey
these laws. The many levels of Government responsible for the
enforcement of these laws, however, need to have the
appropriate capacity, technical competence and resources to be
able to do so in the context of the use of computer-based
decisionmaking mechanisms.
Q.3.d. Are you aware of pricing differences for consumer
financial products such as loans or credit cards based on
algorithms?
A.3.d. Personally, no, but differential pricing is both common
and permissible in many industries, and specifically financial
industries. The use of computer-based analysis/modeling
(algorithms) in making these pricing determinations is not
novel, and, as noted above, is subject to existing laws.
Q.3.e. Are there firms that you think are utilizing algorithms
to expand access for affordable credit or useful financial
products that we can learn from?
A.3.e. I am not personally aware of any such firms in the
United States or Europe, although have read about ways in which
``fintech'' is arguably expanding the pool of individuals able
to access financial resources.
Harms
Q.4. It is well documented that some businesses have collected
and used personal information to engage in digital redlining
against marginalized communities in areas from credit to
housing to
employment and education. Others have sold customer location
data intended to help 911 services save lives to bounty
hunters, threatening the physical safety of citizens and
discredit the use of emergency mechanisms. Data harms, in sum,
can be varied and very real, going well beyond narrow financial
harms that many would only like to focus on.
What do you believe are the harms Congress should address
in privacy legislation aimed at the Nation's financial sector?
A.4. I am not qualified to respond to the question,
specifically with respect to the financial sector, but would
not again that all existing laws apply.
I would add that Privacy International has filed complaints
under GDPR to the UK's Information Commissioner's Office about
a number of specific data practices used by data brokers and
credit rating agencies that might go to some novel personal
data protection issues not now covered by U.S. law.
Impact of GLBA
Q.5. Recent polling found that 94 percent of Californians think
that companies should get your permission before sharing your
data with third parties. This polling is likely reflective of
consumer sentiment across the Nation.
Q.5.a. How many consumers typically take advantage of their
right to opt-out of the sale of their data to third parties?
A.5.a. I have not yet seen any data about the number of
Europeans who have opted-out of (objected to) the sale of their
data to third parties since the GDPR went into force in May
2018. The GDPR (which is more of an ``opt-in'' approach) does
however require that consumers be told in advance how their
data will be collected and the specific purposes for which it
will be used, and that they have the right to object to the
sharing of their data with third parties. This is true even
when the data is not provided directly by them (as addressed in
Article 13, https://gdpr-info.eu/art-13-gdpr/), but also when
it has been collected indirectly (Article 14, https://gdpr-
info.eu/art-14-gdpr/).
Q.5.b. Do you see differences in opt-out options based on firm
size? Are consumers more likely to accept tracking from large
monopolies like Google, Amazon or Facebook and deny it from
smaller sites like local newspapers?
A.5.b. I am not aware of any specific research on this subject,
whether related to the United States or in Europe.
National Rules and Standards
Q.6. A lot of data processing is done by third-party processing
companies which exist simply to process the data on behalf of
any business. They don't necessarily have a say in how the data
is used, they simply perform the processing functions for
someone else. This is important for a couple reasons. First, it
presents a challenge in trying to craft rules because these
entities have no consumer facing side. But it also raises the
question of how these entities should manage compliance with
different data privacy and security laws as they process for
businesses that work in different sectors.
What should Congress keep in mind as a few committees of
jurisdiction are looking at the data privacy issues with
regards to
ensuring processors are able to comply with the strong
standards we need to set?
A.6. The GDPR, which provides generally applicable rules with
respect to the protection of personal data (that is, regardless
of sector), distinguishes between data ``controllers'' and data
``processors'' for the reason described in the question. The
roles and responsibilities of the two are discussed in GDPR
Chapter 4, and specifically Articles 24 (Responsibility of the
Controller), 26 (Joint Controllers), 28 (Processors) and 29
(Processing under the Authority of the Controller or
Processor). In principle, the controllers have the primary
responsibility for ensuring that the companies they engage as
processors also comply fully with the terms of GDPR. Precisely
because the relationship between the controller and the
processor can be complex, the EDPB and its predecessor, the WP-
29, have provided a number of guidance documents on this,
including with respect to the contractual rules that should
govern the relationship between them as well as for identifying
the ``lead supervisory authority'' that oversees the
relationship.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM JAY
CLINE
Q.1. As companies change the way they do business to comply
with GDPR in Europe, here in the United States those same
companies are voluntarily rolling out the same protections. For
example, in April 2018, Facebook announced that it would
provide GDPR privacy controls to all its users. My concern is
that smaller companies and startups will not be able to
voluntarily offer GDPR protections to Americans. What can be
done to assist those companies that would like to comply but
lack the resources?
A.1. My experience is primarily with large corporations, and I
do not have an informed perspective about smaller companies.
Q.2. Is it realistic for the United States to ``free-ride'' on
GDPR? Can we expect companies to voluntarily adopt all or part
of GDPR? How can we avoid a balkanized world of privacy
regulations?
A.2. I have published an analysis of the world's privacy
regulations, highlighting the areas where there are common
agreement and the areas where there are divergence. I advise
companies to build global privacy capabilities in areas where
there is common agreement--such as employee training and
incident response--and local capabilities where there are
divergence, such as on individual rights.
Q.3. As consumers begin to demand additional privacy
protections, we will undoubtedly hear pushback from U.S. firms
that too much regulation will undermine our competitive edge.
According to analyses by Goldman Sachs, Facebook's revenue
could ``potentially see a negative impact of up to 7 percent
from GDPR.'' In your experience, are these concerns founded?
And how can we strike a balance that protects consumers while
allowing firms to grow?
A.3. There are indeed administrative requirements of GDPR which
impose commercial burdens without providing obvious, concrete
improvements in consumer privacy from an American perspective.
For example, requirements to document cross border data-
transfer agreements and document the legal basis of data
processing are vestiges of Europe's unique approach to data
privacy. The widespread adoption by websites of cookie pop-up
boxes in GDPR's wake are another example of administrative
steps that do not practically improve consumer privacy.
Some of the major requirements of the GDPR, however, have
North American origins, such as the data-breach notification
rules that emanate from the United States, and Privacy by
Design that originates from Canada. Other parts of the GDPR--
such as data inventorying and risk assessments--reflect a code
of good business practice that I have long advised clients to
undertake in order to achieve their business objectives and
protect their brands.
The American-led rise of social media and mobile phones has
both given the United States a global economic competitive
advantage and shown American consumers are willing to trust
these technologies while also demanding higher privacy
protections. The sharp rise this year in venture-capital-
funded, innovative U.S. privacy technologies that sell their
products to large enterprises reflects a market expectation
that American consumers will continue to demand an increasing
level of privacy protection in the years ahead.
I advise clients to strike this balance between protection
and innovation by designing a data architecture that puts
consumers in control of their personal data, protecting that
data throughout its lifecycle, and resolving privacy and
ethical impact assessments for all new business and technology
change. I have found that companies that take this approach
achieve a more complete view of their data for innovation
purposes, and also earn more trust of their stakeholders.
Q.4. We are approaching the 1-year anniversary of the GDPR.
What are some of the negative unintended consequences that the
United States can learn from as Congress explores its own
privacy legislation?
A.4. One study\1\ of new deals activity in the European Union
showed a decrease after GDPR's go-live date of May 2018. This
study matched anecdotal evidence that investors perceived
higher risk and uncertainties in the European Union,
particularly with regard to the potential of a corporation to
be fined 4 percent of its annual revenues for egregious
violations of the GDPR. The July 2019 GDPR enforcement actions
by the U.K. Information Commissioner that established record
privacy fines in the European Union reinforced the perception
that this fining capacity represents material risk for
investors in the EU market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.datainnovation.org/2019/06/what-the-evidence-shows-
about-the-impact-of-the-gdpr-after-one-year/.
Q.5. A central element of GDPR is that companies must clearly
explain how data is collected and used. Already we've seen
companies such as Google face heavy fines for failing to comply
with GDPR's consent requirements. How would you grade the
European Union's enforcement of GDPR standards writ large, but
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
also specifically the data collection and use standards?
A.5. Many industry observers expected EU member states' first
wave of privacy investigations to conclude sooner than they
have. Since the hearing in May 2019, the United Kingdom has
indicated its intention to impose the two largest privacy fines
in EU history. It remains to be seen what the European Union's
steady state of GDPR enforcement will be.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM JAY
CLINE
Data Minimization vs. Big Data
Q.1. Data minimization seeks for businesses to collect,
process, and store the minimum amount of data that is necessary
to carry out the purposes for which is was collected. There are
obvious advantages to this as it minimizes the risk of data
breaches and other privacy harms. At the same time, big data
analytics are going to be crucial for the future and play an
important role in smart cities, artificial intelligence, and
other important technologies that fuel economic growth.
Can you describe how you view a balance between
minimization and big data? Please describe how this balance
applies specifically to the financial sector?
A.1. The tremendous potential of big data can be achieved only
with the ongoing trust of the people whose data are used for
these purposes. Two components of gaining that trust ordinarily
are transparency and individual control. People generally want
to know how their data will be used in large-scale data sets,
and they want the ability to not participate if they disagree
with the uses. In order to deliver these two components of
transparency and individual control, organizations would need
to implement a new ``data architecture.'' Today, most companies
organize their technology around a ``systems architecture''
that connects servers to each other in a network. To enable a
single individual to remove their data from the entire network
without causing individual applications and databases to stop
working, however, and to make sure data was minimized to the
agreed-upon purposes, companies would need to engineer their
systems at a more granular, data-element level. Achieving a
balance between data minimization and big data can be done, but
it requires a re-thinking about how information technology is
organized.
Security Standards
Q.2. Are the existing data security standards under GLBA
sufficient for protecting consumer's information? If not, what
do you recommend to make the standards adequate?
A.2. The most important and effective standard of the GLBA
Safeguards Rule and how it has been enforced by the Federal
Trade Commission is the requirement to regularly assess
vulnerabilities and to remediate material vulnerabilities with
commercially reasonable and available means. This all-
encompassing approach--if implemented consistently and
comprehensively across an organization--should result in
substantial and ongoing protection of consumer information from
unauthorized access or disclosure. NIST has similarly developed
useful and effective information security standards that when
implemented have elevated the protection of consumer
information.
Discrimination in AI
Q.3. Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence can often
lead to discriminatory and biased outcomes. It is important
that Congress address and prevent discrimination in any future
privacy legislation.
Q.3.a. Can impact assessments in the financial sector be
useful?
A.3.a. Privacy impact assessments with supplemental data-ethics
criteria can be useful and practically essential in meeting the
objective of eliminating bias in machine learning and
artificial intelligence. In the same way that software
applications are tested
before they are put into production, algorithms that an impact
assessment determines could cause substantially negative and
disparate outcomes on vulnerable populations can be evaluated
and improved before deployment.
Q.3.b. How do we balance the need for transparency in automated
decisionmaking with proprietary business information?
A.3.b. Most automated decisionmaking programs are designed
around three components: data input, data processing, and data
output. The data input and the data output components are the
most important to make transparent to people whose data are
being processed in order for them to make informed decisions
about whether they want their data included. Protecting the
confidentiality of the middle, data-processing stage is the
most important in order to preserve proprietary secrets. For
example, highlighting to a user that they may like to buy a
certain product because they bought a past product that others
like them purchased demonstrates the relationship between the
input and the output without revealing the business secret of
why the one product
recommendation topped all of the other options. From a
regulatory standpoint, GDPR article 15 contains a right of
access to ``meaningful information about the logic involved''
in automated decisionmaking. This threshold falls short of
requiring companies to provide their confidential source code
as part of an access request.
Q.3.c. Where do you think we must be careful to avoid
discrimination based on machine learning, AI and other
algorithms?
A.3.c. I am recommending to my clients that they prioritize for
privacy and ethical impact assessments any data-analytics
processes that could reduce access to the basic necessities of
life--food, clothing, housing, credit, insurance, and
employment.
Q.3.d. Are you aware of pricing differences for consumer
financial products such as loans or credit cards based on
algorithms?
A.3.d. I am not aware of these specific scenarios.
Q.3.e. Are there firms that you think are utilizing algorithms
to expand access for affordable credit or useful financial
products that we can learn from?
A.3.e. I see positive steps taking place in the area of risk
scoring within some parts of the financial services sector
whereby advanced data analytics reduce uncertainty and allow
for the reduction of rates and premiums, creating more access
to credit and insurance.
Harms
Q.4. It is well documented that some businesses have collected
and used personal information to engage in digital redlining
against marginalized communities in areas from credit to
housing to employment and education. Others have sold customer
location data intended to help 911 services save lives to
bounty hunters, threatening the physical safety of citizens and
discredit the use of emergency mechanisms. Data harms, in sum,
can be varied and very real, going well beyond narrow financial
harms that many would only like to focus on.
What do you believe are the harms Congress should address
in privacy legislation aimed at the Nation's financial sector?
A.4. The GDPR includes a principle to use personal data only
for the purpose it was originally collected, which has become a
generally accepted industry standard in the privacy profession.
Companies following this principle will generally avoid causing
the aforementioned harms.
Impact of GLBA
Q.5. Recent polling found that 94 percent of Californians think
that companies should get your permission before sharing your
data with third parties. This polling is likely reflective of
consumer sentiment across the Nation.
Q.5.a. How many consumers typically take advantage of their
right to opt-out of the sale of their data to third parties?
A.5.a. Consumers' exercise of any type of opt-out right is
highly dependent upon the context. Low, single-digit rates are
normally observed if a consumer must log in to a preference
center or click a link in an email footer to express a choice.
Higher rates are seen when the opt-out choices are presented
prominently during an account sign-up, registration, or
reservation. The highest rates are seen when consumers must
express one choice or another in order to successfully download
a mobile app.
Q.5.b. Do you see differences in opt-out options based on firm
size? Are consumers more likely to accept tracking from large
monopolies like Google, Amazon or Facebook and deny it from
smaller sites like local newspapers?
A.5.b. My experience is primarily with large corporations, and
I don't have an informed perspective on this question.
National Rules and Standards
Q.6. A lot of data processing is done by third-party processing
companies which exist simply to process the data on behalf of
any business. They don't necessarily have a say in how the data
is used, they simply perform the processing functions for
someone else. This is important for a couple reasons. First, it
presents a challenge in trying to craft rules because these
entities have no consumer facing side. But it also raises the
question of how these entities should manage compliance with
different data privacy and security laws as they process for
businesses that work in different sectors.
What should Congress keep in mind as a few committees of
jurisdiction are looking at the data privacy issues with
regards to ensuring processors are able to comply with the
strong standards we need to set?
A.6. Data processors face a fundamental challenge that they
often do not have direct relationships with the people whose
data they process. They act as agents of their clients who they
depend on to manage privacy-rights processes with consumers.
Their clients in turn are challenged to deploy sufficient
monitoring mechanisms to ensure their data processors are only
using personal data to fulfill their contractual terms. GDPR
addresses this situation by requiring data controllers to hold
their data processors accountable to relevant GDPR
requirements, while HIPAA holds business associates directly
accountable to the relevant provisions of the law. Neither
creates specific rules for data processors. Together, these two
approaches form the bookends of the current privacy regulatory
spectrum regarding data processors.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM MACIEJ
CEGLOWSKI
Q.1. What happens to a consumer's data after a consumer
terminates their relationship with an institution collecting
their data? Does the company delete the consumer's data? Does
it encrypt the data?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.2. Is there any uniform requirement or industry practice that
dictates how institutions treat consumer data once a consumer
decides to no longer conduct business with an institution?
A.2. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.3. If company is breached after a consumer has terminated
their relationship, is the consumer's data still vulnerable?
A.3. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.4. To ensure consumer data is protected, should consumers be
allowed to request their personally identifiable information be
made nonpersonally identifiable, after the consumer ends their
business relationship?
A.4. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.5. Using the Equifax data breach as an example, how much harm
can bad actors, free from consumer scrutiny and armed with
sensitive information, cause in 6 weeks?
A.5. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.6. Would consumers be better protected if companies were
required to notify them of data breaches in a timely manner?
A.6. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.7. As companies change the way they do business to comply
with General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in Europe, here
in the United States those same companies are voluntarily
rolling out the same protections. For example, in April 2018,
Facebook announced that it would provide GDPR privacy controls
to all its users. My concern is that smaller companies and
startups will not be able to voluntarily offer GDPR protections
to Americans. What are the implications for smaller businesses
that want to comply but don't have the resources to do so?
A.7. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.8. As consumers begin to demand additional privacy
protections, we will undoubtedly hear pushback from U.S. firms
that too much regulation will undermine our competitive edge.
According to analyses by Goldman Sachs, Facebook's revenue
could ``potentially see a negative impact of up to 7 percent
from GDPR.'' In your experience, are these concerns founded?
And how can we strike a balance that protects consumers while
allowing firms to grow?
A.8. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
MACIEJ CEGLOWSKI
Data Minimization vs. Big Data
Q.1. Data minimization seeks for businesses to collect,
process, and store the minimum amount of data that is necessary
to carry out the purposes for which is was collected. There are
obvious advantages to this as it minimizes the risk of data
breaches and other privacy harms. At the same time, big data
analytics are going to be crucial for the future and play an
important role in smart cities, artificial intelligence, and
other important technologies that fuel economic growth.
Can you describe how you view a balance between
minimization and big data? Please describe how this balance
applies specifically to the financial sector?
A.1. Response not received in time for publication.
Security Standards
Q.2. Are the existing data security standards under GLBA
sufficient for protecting consumer's information? If not, what
do you recommend to make the standards adequate?
A.2. Response not received in time for publication.
Discrimination in AI
Q.3. Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence can often
lead to discriminatory and biased outcomes. It is important
that Congress address and prevent discrimination in any future
privacy legislation.
Q.3.a. Can impact assessments in the financial sector be
useful?
A.3.a. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.3.b. How do we balance the need for transparency in automated
decisionmaking with proprietary business information?
A.3.b. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.3.c. Where do you think we must be careful to avoid
discrimination based on machine learning, AI and other
algorithms?
A.3.c. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.3.d. Are you aware of pricing differences for consumer
financial products such as loans or credit cards based on
algorithms?
A.3.d. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.3.e. Are there firms that you think are utilizing algorithms
to expand access for affordable credit or useful financial
products that we can learn from?
A.3.e. Response not received in time for publication.
Harms
Q.4. It is well documented that some businesses have collected
and used personal information to engage in digital redlining
against marginalized communities in areas from credit to
housing to employment and education. Others have sold customer
location data intended to help 911 services save lives to
bounty hunters, threatening the physical safety of citizens and
discredit the use of emergency mechanisms. Data harms, in sum,
can be varied and very real, going well beyond narrow financial
harms that many would only like to focus on.
What do you believe are the harms Congress should address
in privacy legislation aimed at the Nation's financial sector?
A.4. Response not received in time for publication.
Impact of GLBA
Q.5. Recent polling found that 94 percent of Californians think
that companies should get your permission before sharing your
data with third parties. This polling is likely reflective of
consumer sentiment across the Nation.
Q.5.a. How many consumers typically take advantage of their
right to opt-out of the sale of their data to third parties?
A.5.a. Response not received in time for publication.
Q.5.b. Do you see differences in opt-out options based on firm
size? Are consumers more likely to accept tracking from large
monopolies like Google, Amazon or Facebook and deny it from
smaller sites like local newspapers?
A.5.b. Response not received in time for publication.
National Rules and Standards
Q.6. A lot of data processing is done by third-party processing
companies which exist simply to process the data on behalf of
any business. They don't necessarily have a say in how the data
is used, they simply perform the processing functions for
someone else. This is important for a couple reasons. First, it
presents a challenge in trying to craft rules because these
entities have no consumer facing side. But it also raises the
question of how these entities should manage compliance with
different data privacy and security laws as they process for
businesses that work in different sectors.
What should Congress keep in mind as a few committees of
jurisdiction are looking at the data privacy issues with
regards to
ensuring processors are able to comply with the strong
standards we need to set?
A.6. Response not received in time for publication.
Data Protection Officers
Q.7. In your testimony, you note the lack of qualified data
protection officers.
LWhat are the qualifications for a data protection
officer (DPO)?
LWhat are the costs for a firm to hire and train a
DPO?
LWhat training exists for DPOs? How are they
certified? What is the cost for a DPO to attain
certification? Do the salaries paid to DPOs allow them
to repay their student loans and also support
themselves and their families?
A.7. Response not received in time for publication.
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]