- LOCAL EFFORTS TO COUNTER THE TERROR THREAT IN NEW YORK CITY: A RETROSPECTIVE AND A ROADMAP
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
LOCAL EFFORTS TO COUNTER THE TERROR THREAT IN NEW YORK CITY: A
RETROSPECTIVE AND A ROADMAP
=======================================================================
FIELD HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INTELLIGENCE AND
COUNTERTERRORISM
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
MAY 6, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-16
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
37-473 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Peter T. King, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Michael T. McCaul, Texas
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Katko, New York
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Ratcliffe, Texas
J. Luis Correa, California
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Xochitl Torres Small, New Mexico
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Max Rose, New York
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Mark Green, Tennessee
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Van Taylor, Texas
Emanuel Cleaver, Missouri
John Joyce, Pennsylvania
Al Green, Texas
Dan Crenshaw, Texas
Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Michael Guest, Mississippi
Dina Titus, Nevada
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Hope Goins, Staff Director
Chris Vieson, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERTERRORISM
Max Rose, New York, Chairman
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mark Walker, North Carolina,
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Ranking Member
Elissa Slotkin, Michigan
Peter T. King, New York
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi (ex
Mark Green, Tennessee
officio)
Mike Rogers, Alabama (ex officio)
Nicole Tisdale, Subcommittee Staff Director
Mandy Bowers, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable Max Rose, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Intelligence
and Counterterrorism:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable Mark Walker, a Representative in Congress From the
State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Intelligence and Counterterrorism:
Oral Statement.................................................
3
Prepared Statement.............................................
4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................
5
Witnesses
Mr. John J. Miller, Deputy Commissioner, Intelligence and
Counterterrorism, New York Police Department:
Oral Statement.................................................
6
Prepared Statement.............................................
9
Mr. Thomas Currao, Chief of Counterterrorism, Fire Department of
the City of New York:
Oral Statement.................................................
13
Prepared Statement.............................................
17
Mr. Louis P. Klock, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey:
Oral Statement.................................................
20
Prepared Statement.............................................
23
Appendix
Questions From Chairman Max Rose for John J. Miller..............
41
Questions From Chairman Max Rose for Thomas Currao...............
41
Questions From Chairman Max Rose for Louis P. Klock..............
42
LOCAL EFFORTS TO COUNTER THE TERROR THREAT IN NEW YORK CITY: A
RETROSPECTIVE AND A ROADMAP
----------
Monday, May 6, 2019
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Counterterrorism,
Staten Island, NY.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:07 p.m., in
Staten Island Borough Hall, 10 Richmond Terrace, Staten Island,
NY, Hon. Max Rose [Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Rose [presiding], Walker, and
King.
Also present: Representatives Pascrell and Clarke.
Mr. Rose. The Subcommittee on Intelligence and
Counterterrorism will come to order.
Good afternoon, everybody. It is good to be home here on
Staten Island, New York City. I am really proud to be convening
my first subcommittee field hearing, and no better place to be
doing it than here; and, of course, no more important issue, in
my book, than that of New York City's security.
As many of you know, this is the first time in the history
of this subcommittee or this committee that a representative
from New York City has served as the Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Counterterrorism. I am honored
to be joined by the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Mark Walker of North Carolina, as well as 3 Members from the
New York and New Jersey delegation: Ms. Yvette Clarke from
Brooklyn, who is en route; Mr. King from Long Island; and Mr.
Pascrell from Paterson, New Jersey.
Today's hearing, ``Local Efforts to Counter the Terror
Threat in New York City: A Retrospective and a Roadmap,'' could
not be more important, especially as we approach the 20th
anniversary of 9/11.
The NYPD and our law enforcement agencies continue to make
huge strides in keeping New York City safe. We are now the
safest big city in the country, and for that I do want to
acknowledge the gentlemen in front of us for everything you
have done to help make that the case. I know that does not just
happen by osmosis.
I am looking forward to hearing about your progress over
the last 2 decades, and hearing about your concerns so we can
make sure that Congress continues to support your work.
New York City continues to face terrorist threats. Since 9/
11, New York has been targeted over and over by terrorists
seeking to do us harm. The men and women of law enforcement in
this city continue to thwart these attempted attacks.
In recent years, the threat from domestic terrorism has
risen dramatically. Across the country, we have seen a rise in
terrorist attacks on our holiest and most sacred places, houses
of worship. Just 2 weeks ago, Jewish worshipers in the Chabad
of Poway Synagogue in California were brutally attacked by a
domestic terrorist. One woman, Lori Kaye, was murdered. That
attack happened 6 months to the day after another murderous
rampage in the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh.
Here in New York City, in March 2017, we saw another
domestic terrorist murder an African-American man, Timothy
Caughman, with a sword, as the first in a planned rampage
targeting black men. Of course, we continue to face threats
from jihadist-inspired terrorists. In October 2017, we saw an
extremist ram a pickup truck into pedestrians and cyclists in
Lower Manhattan, killing 8 people and wounding 11 others within
eyeshot of Ground Zero.
It goes without saying that the job of keeping New York
City safe is an incredibly complex and rapidly-evolving
challenge. Thankfully, we have the best men and women on the
job in the country.
As for us, Congress should be there to provide assistance
where it is needed, and provide oversight where things are not
working quite as well as they should, especially when it comes
to information sharing with the Federal Government to counter
terrorist attacks. We need to make sure that you are not just
sending us information but that the Federal agencies are
shooting it right back to you. That is why we are holding this
hearing today.
After the Ranking Member delivers his opening statement, I
will introduce these three distinguished gentlemen,
representing the men and women working to keep this city safe.
Just on a closing note, there is a tremendous amount of
media focus on a myriad of different public safety issues, from
the global to the domestic. But it seems as if the issue of
counterterrorism is no longer in the limelight. Well, today we
are doing a hearing centered around that, centered around New
York City, which has a bulls-eye on it, and might always will,
to ensure that this remains an issue that we focus on.
[The statement of Chairman Rose follows:]
Statement of Chairman Max Rose
May 6, 2019
As many of you know, this is the first time in the history of this
committee that a representative from New York City has served as
Chairman of the Subcommittee on Intelligence and Counterterrorism. I'm
honored to be joined by the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Mark Walker of North Carolina, as well as 3 Members from the New York
and New Jersey delegation--Ms. Yvette Clarke from Brooklyn, Mr. King
from Long Island, and Mr. Pascrell from Paterson, New Jersey.
Today's hearing, ``Local Efforts to Counter the Terror Threat in
New York City: A Retrospective and a Roadmap,'' could not be more
important, especially as we approach the 20th anniversary of 9/11.
The NYPD and our law enforcement agencies continue to make huge
strides in keeping New York City safe. We're now the safest big city in
the country.
I'm looking forward to hearing about your progress over the last 2
decades, and hearing about your concerns, so I can ensure Congress
continues to support your work.
New York City continues to face terrorist threats. Since 9/11, New
York has been targeted over and over by terrorists seeking to do us
harm. And the men and women of law enforcement in this city continue to
thwart these attempted attacks.
In recent years, the threat from domestic terrorism has risen
dramatically. Across the country, we've seen a rise in terrorist
attacks on our holiest and most sacred places--houses of worship. Just
2 weeks ago, Jewish worshipers in the Chabad of Poway synagogue in
California were brutally attacked by a domestic terrorist. One woman,
Lori Kaye, was murdered. That attack happened 6 months--to the day--
after a white supremacist's murderous rampage in the Tree of Life
Synagogue in Pittsburgh. Here in New York City, in March 2017, a
domestic terrorist murdered an African-American man, Timothy Caughman,
with a sword--as the first in a planned rampage targeting Black men.
And of course we continue to face threats from jihadist-inspired
terrorists. In October 2017, an Islamist extremist rammed a pickup
truck into pedestrians and cyclists in Lower Manhattan, killing 8
people and wounding 11 others.
It goes without saying that the job of keeping New York City safe
is an incredibly complex and rapidly-evolving challenge. Thankfully, we
have the best women and men on the job.
As for us, Congress should be there to provide assistance where
it's needed, and provide oversight where things aren't working quite as
well as they should--especially when it comes to information sharing
with the Federal Government to counter terrorist attacks. We need to
make sure that you're not just sending information to Federal agencies
without them sharing information with you. That's why we're holding
this hearing today.
Mr. Rose. Again, with that, I thank all of our witnesses
for joining us this morning, and I now recognize the Ranking
Member of the subcommittee, Mr. Walker, for an opening
statement.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you for holding this hearing, as well as the staff for their
hard work in setting it up and certainly inviting me to this
district here on Staten Island.
Before we get started, I want to just take a moment to
remember Officer Jordan Harris Sheldon's family, a young police
department gentleman from North Carolina who was killed in the
line of duty this past Saturday evening.
I would also just like to take a point of privilege to
thank Mr. Peter King for his years of work in representing New
York and being really one of the lead people, past Chairman of
this committee, and all the great work that he has done over
the years.
There is no question that New York City is a major terror
target. The city's law enforcement and first responder
community have worked tirelessly to identify, prevent, deter,
and mitigate threats in the region.
Since the September 11, 2001 terror attacks, the threat
landscape has shifted. We once principally faced threats
planned and directed by al-Qaeda senior leaders. However, the
last few years have seen a rise in lone-wolf actors radicalized
by ISIS on-line propaganda.
ISIS has exploited social media to inspire these
individuals to use knives and vehicles to carry out attacks on
soft targets anywhere and at any time they can. The territorial
defeat of ISIS does not leave us immune to their continued
attempts to coordinate and inspire attacks on our soil. The
attacks on Easter targeting Christians in Sri Lanka and the
recent release of a new video of ISIS leader al-Baghdadi
demonstrate that the group still remains a threat.
Additionally, we cannot forget that al-Qaeda and other
Islamist terror groups remain intent on targeting the West, as
the Chairman clearly identified. It is clear that domestic
extremists are following in the footsteps of foreign terrorists
by using social media platforms to spread propaganda and create
echo chambers of hate. Religious institutions from all faith
groups are being targeted by both domestic and internationally-
inspired groups.
Targeting innocent people in their place of worship is one
of the vilest acts of terrorism, and we must do a better job of
identifying plots and stopping these attacks. Close
coordination between Federal, State, and local entities is
vital to counterterrorism defense both on the international and
domestic fronts.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses on whether
they are receiving the necessary information and sharing
support, training, and coordination from Federal partners. It
is an honor to be here today to receive testimony from this
distinguished panel, who all 3 I had been able to get a chance
to meet earlier. I want to thank them for their service and for
advising this subcommittee on terrorism threats facing the
homeland, lessons learned, and emerging threats.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Walker follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Mark Walker
May 6, 2019
I want to thank Chairman Rose for holding this hearing and inviting
me to his District. There is no question that New York City is a major
terror target. The city's law enforcement and first responder community
have worked tirelessly to identify, prevent, deter, and mitigate
threats in the region.
Since the September 11, 2001 terror attacks, the threat landscape
has shifted. We once principally faced threats planned and directed by
al-Qaeda senior leaders.
The last few years have seen a rise in lone-wolf actors radicalized
by ISIS on-line propaganda.
ISIS has exploited social media to inspire these individuals to use
knives and vehicles to carry out attacks on soft targets.
The territorial defeat of ISIS does not leave us immune to their
continued attempts to coordinate and inspire attacks on our soil.
The horrible attacks on Easter targeting Christians in Sri Lanka
and the recent release of a new video of ISIS-leader al Baghdadi
demonstrate that the group remains a threat.
Additionally, we cannot forget that al-Qaeda and other Islamist
terror groups remain intent on targeting the West.
It is clear that domestic extremists are following in the footsteps
of foreign terrorists by using social media platforms to spread
propaganda and create echo chambers of hate.
Religious institutions from all faith groups are being targeted by
both domestic and internationally-inspired groups.
Targeting innocent people in their place of worship is one of the
vilest acts of terrorism and we must do a better job of identifying
plots and stopping these attacks.
Close coordination between Federal, State, and local entities is
vital to counterterrorism defenses--both international and domestic.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses on whether or not they
are receiving the necessary information sharing support, training, and
coordination from Federal partners.
It is an honor to be here today to receive testimony from this
distinguished panel. I want to thank them for their service and for
advising this subcommittee on terrorism threats facing the homeland,
lessons learned, and emerging threats.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Ranking Member.
I also want to sincerely thank you for acknowledging the
importance of New York City security for the entire country, as
well as the lessons learned for the entire country as to what
our wonderful agencies are doing here on the ground.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that under the
committee rules, opening statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statement of Chairman Thompson follows:]
Statement of Chairman Bennie G. Thompson
May 6, 2019
Since his first day in Congress, the Chairman has been a fierce
advocate for the men and women of the city of New York Police
Department, the Fire Department of the city of New York, and the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey. [Chairman Rose's] decision to
hold today's field hearing underscores his commitment to law
enforcement and first responders serving in and around Staten Island.
Nearly 18 years after the September 11 attacks, we must continue to
do all we can at the Federal, State, and local levels to prevent future
attacks. The Federal Government needs to support State and local
partners in their efforts. For example, the Federal Government provides
vital funding through grant programs for State and locals to secure
their communities.
Unfortunately, the Trump administration again proposed significant
cuts to these programs. This is unacceptable. When it comes to securing
communities from current and emerging threats, we should not be asking
our State and local partners to do more with less.
Instead, we need to give them the resources they need to work
alongside their Federal partners on behalf of their communities and the
American people.
The Federal Government also spearheads critical information-sharing
practices. We must ensure those channels remain open and that
jurisdictional barriers do not inhibit the Federal Government and its
partners from safeguarding those we serve. I hope that we hear about
the influence the greater New York City community's resilience plays in
their counterterrorism policies.
Time and time again, this city has refused to back down in the face
of terror. The agencies represented here today are on the front line of
defending our Nation from both domestic and international threats. That
is why it is so important to hear their testimony and take it back to
Washington to use in the committee's work.
Mr. Rose. Additionally, I ask unanimous consent that the
Members not serving on the subcommittee shall be permitted to
sit and question the witnesses, as appropriate.
Without objection, so ordered.
I welcome our panel of witnesses. Our first witness is Mr.
John J. Miller, deputy commissioner for intelligence and
counterterrorism at the New York Police Department. Prior to
this position, Mr. Miller served as the deputy director of the
Intelligence Analysis Division at the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence.
Next we are joined by Mr. Thomas J. Currao, who currently
serves as the chief of counterterrorism at the Fire Department
of the city of New York. Prior to joining the FDNY, Mr. Currao
was employed by the Rockland County Board of Cooperative
Education Services as a health and safety technician.
Finally, we have Mr. Louis P. Klock, who serves as the
deputy superintendent of police at the Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey.
For both Mr. Thomas Currao and Mr. Klock, we recognize you
for this being the first time that you are testifying before
Congress.
Mr. Miller, this may be your 100th. We also recognize you
for that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rose. Without objection, the witnesses' full statements
will be inserted in the record.
I now ask each witness to summarize his or her statement
for 5 minutes, beginning with Mr. Miller.
STATEMENT OF JOHN J. MILLER, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER, INTELLIGENCE
AND COUNTERTERRORISM, NEW YORK POLICE DEPARTMENT
Mr. Miller. Good afternoon, Chairman Rose, Ranking Member
Walker, and Members of the subcommittee. I am John Miller,
deputy commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism for
the New York City Police Department. On behalf of Police
Commissioner James P. O'Neill and Mayor Bill de Blasio, I am
pleased to testify before your subcommittee today to discuss
the NYPD's efforts to fight modern terrorism and the evolution
of threats to New York City.
Since September 11, 2001, we have seen New York City become
the safest big city in America. That is in terms of crime
reduction. We have achieved numbers that we have not seen since
the early 1950's. But that said, the threat of terrorism since
September 11, 2001 has not abated. That tragic day forever
changed how the NYPD views its mission and forced us to
recognize that we must be proactive as a police department in
our efforts to prevent both home-grown and international
terrorism in our city. Soon after 9/11, the NYPD became the
first major city police department to develop its own
significant in-house counterterrorism infrastructure, operating
throughout the city, throughout the United States, and even the
world to share intelligence and develop techniques to combat
this continually evolving threat.
The one thing that undergirds all of those counterterrorism
efforts, all that intelligence gathering, is what drives our
neighborhood policing philosophy overall, and that is
collaboration and collective problem solving. That is
collaboration with our Federal, State, local, and private
partners. It is too vital, the threat of terrorism, which
recognizes no borders and often does not distinguish between
Government and civilian targets. In fact, this collaboration,
which includes my fellow panel members, both the Port
Authority, the Fire Department, the MTA, as well as many
others, serves as the backbone of the NYPD's counterterrorism
philosophy.
While my submitted testimony provides significantly greater
detail and numbers about our counterterrorism efforts, I would
be remiss if I did not briefly outline our Government and
private-sector partnerships, our counterterrorism initiatives,
and our portfolio of protective equipment, which are extensive
and always leveraged in a way that ensures maximum protection
for both the public safety as well as civil liberties.
The NYPD is a significant participant in the Joint
Terrorism Task Force. We have over 120 detectives assigned to
the New York JTTF. It is the Nation's oldest. It started in
1980. We have operations like Operation Sentry, which coalesces
275 different law enforcement partners from around the country;
Operation Nexus, where the NYPD assists businesses Nation-wide,
with a focus on New York City, in identifying suspicious
transactions that might be linked to terrorist plots; and, of
course, NYPD Shield, which established a vital communications
network between the NYPD and approximately 20,000 Shield
members in the private sector. Those are from businesses large
and small, and organizations throughout the country now. The
Shield program is being replicated Nationally by other police
departments, where we have sent teams to help them learn the
way to set it up, to operate, and manage it.
As part of the Securing the Cities initiative, we have
created a security infrastructure which includes the placement
of radiation detection equipment in neighboring jurisdictions
at key points of entry to the five boroughs so that the city is
virtually ringed with a radiological alarm system.
The Department also participates in multi-agency super
searches that are joint operations to focus manpower at
sensitive transit locations such as bridges, ferries, and
tunnels, and that is conducted in partnership with the Port
Authority Police, the Amtrak Police, the MTA Police, New Jersey
Transit Police, as well as the FBI, TSA, and in large part with
the National Guard Shield Group, which is part of the
protection package for all of those locations.
We deploy a critical response command. That is over 525
specially-trained, specially-armed police officers as one of
our first lines of defense against any threat, with a
particular focus on the active shooter.
We deploy our trained vapor wake dogs that are able to
sense mobile threats and explosive particles. That means if you
think of a Boston Marathon type of scenario, not just using an
explosive detection canine to examine a package that is left in
a doorway, but a scenario where someone is carrying explosives
through a crowd at a major event, these dogs can put you on the
trail of that individual, and there is a tactical plan that
goes with that.
We employ expert civilian analysts who study terrorist
groups, trends, and methods of attack.
Through our International Liaison Program, detectives are
embedded with fellow law enforcement agencies in 13 foreign
countries, including France, Spain, Jordan, the UAE, Qatar,
Singapore, and Israel.
Across the city, we have distributed approximately 3,000
radiation pagers and nearly 4,000 radiological dosimeters, in
addition to the installation of highly sensitive detection
equipment on the boats, helicopters, and a fixed-wing aircraft
we use to patrol New York Harbor. We use vehicles that patrol
our streets with other detectors. Our Federally-funded Domain
Awareness System, or DAS, receives data from real-time sensors,
including radiological and chemical sensors, shot spotter
information to detect gunfire in the streets, information from
9-1-1 calls, hundreds of license plate readers, and live feeds
from thousands of CCTV cameras around the city.
The DAS system makes it possible to scan footage for
specific objects, such as an unattended bag, a car driving
against the flow of traffic or in a restricted area, suspicious
behavior such as a person walking through a restricted area.
The DAS' advanced graphical interface and mapping capability
allows us to monitor arising threats and to guide our response
if an attack should occur.
We also design and implement large-scale counterterrorism
projects, including counterterrorism training for the entire
patrol force and other law enforcement agencies; identifying
critical infrastructure sites and developing protective
strategies for those sites; researching, testing, and
developing plans for the use of emerging technologies used to
detect and combat chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear,
and explosive weapons; developing systems and programs to
increase harbor security, which includes proactive deployment
and mapping of background radiation in the Port of New York and
New Jersey; and interfacing with the New York Office of
Emergency Management.
The NYPD's Counterterrorism and Intelligence Bureaus
utilize equipment and deploy programs and initiatives which,
without continued and increased Federal funding, would not
exist in their current forms, or even at all. Federal funding
is critical to our efforts, and it is a serious cause for
concern when we see such Nation-wide funding decrease by $26.2
million from 2008 levels, and hear about proposals to cut
funding even further. The NYPD relies on this funding to
protect New York against terrorist attacks and to strengthen
homeland preparedness, including the security of critical
transportation and port infrastructure.
Notwithstanding our extensive efforts, violent extremists
of all stripes, both foreign and home-grown, count New York
City as their No. 1 target. What makes our unenviable position
on this list even more concerning is the evolution of the
terror framework in the modern day. What we once saw as threats
to our homeland coming in large part from well-funded state and
non-state actors who established training camps, attracted
recruits to these camps, trained these recruits and planned
attacks from these centralized locations, and dispatched
individuals to carry out these attacks, we now see the primary
threat as one that is decentralized and carried out by so-
called ``lone wolves.'' Traditional brick-and-mortar terror
camps and infrastructures have been replaced with websites,
chat rooms, and on-line manuals. This is the difference between
a directed terrorist and an inspired terrorist. Largely gone
are the days when groups such as ISIS and al-Qaeda provide us
with the opportunity to locate, surveil, and infiltrate a
training camp, or gather intelligence and identify bad actors,
learn of the group's methods and techniques and future plans
and targets. Instead, tech-savvy extremists have teamed with
terror masterminds with the goal of virtual recruitment,
training, and the provision of an on-line tutorial on how to
plan an effective attack to susceptible individuals who do not
even need to leave their home. These modern-day terrorists are
increasingly more difficult to identify, as are their targets.
We have prevented 30 plots targeting New York City, but we
have also had 3 plots, including the truck attack that you
referenced, Mr. Chairman, in your opening statement, which
injured 12 people, killing 8; the attempted suicide bombing on
the Times Square subway station; as well as the Chelsea
bombing. Each one of these was inspired by a designated foreign
terrorist organization largely through the use of internet
propaganda.
So to close and to sum up, as Police Commissioner O'Neill
has said, in some areas the NYPD is very good. In other areas,
we are the best. But in all areas, we can do better. Our
ability to get better in the realm of counterterrorism is
directly tied to continuing and increased levels of Federal
funding and Federal partnerships, and the foresight of Federal
legislators to ensure laws that are aimed at protecting our
liberties cannot be used as a pathway to design a more
effective attack by our enemies.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify today. I
will be happy to answer questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of John J. Miller
May 6, 2019
Good afternoon Chairman Rose, Ranking Member Walker, and Members of
the subcommittee. I am John Miller, deputy commissioner of intelligence
and counterterrorism for the New York City Police Department (NYPD). On
behalf of Police Commissioner James P. O'Neill and Mayor Bill de
Blasio, I am pleased to testify before your subcommittee today to
discuss the NYPD's efforts to fight modern terrorism and the evolution
of threats to New York City.
Since September 11, 2001, we've seen New York City become the
safest big city in the Nation. That tragic day forever changed how the
NYPD views its mission and forced us to recognize that we must be
proactive in our efforts to prevent both home-grown and international
terror threats to our city. Soon after, the NYPD became the first
police department in the country to develop its own significant
counterterrorism infrastructure, operating throughout the city,
country, and the world to gather intelligence and develop techniques to
combat this continually evolving threat. The one thing that undergirds
all of our counterterrorism and intelligence-gathering efforts, and
what drives our neighborhood policing philosophy overall, is
collaboration and collective problem-solving. Collaboration with our
Federal, State, local, and private partners is vital to combat the
threat of terrorism which recognizes no borders and often does not
distinguish between public and civilian targets. In fact, this
collaboration, which includes my fellow panel members, the Port
Authority, Fire Department, and the Metropolitan Transit Authority, as
well as many others, serves as the backbone of the NYPD's
counterterrorism philosophy.
The NYPD's Counterterrorism and Intelligence Bureau utilizes
equipment and employs programs and initiatives which, without continued
Federal funding, would not exist in their current forms, or even at
all. Federal funding is critical to our efforts and it is a serious
cause for concern when we see such Nation-wide funding decreased by
$26.2 million from 2008 levels and hear about proposals to cut this
funding even further. Over the last 5 years, the NYPD has received an
average of $162 million a year in Federal funding, of which on average
$116.4 million of that comes from Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
grants. The NYPD relies on this funding to protect New Yorkers against
terrorist attacks and to strengthen homeland preparedness, including
the security of critical transportation and port infrastructure.
We frequently work with other Government agencies to help protect
our city. Most notably, the NYPD is a member of the Joint Terrorism
Task Force, led by the FBI, which combines the resources of multiple
law enforcement agencies to investigate and prevent terrorist attacks.
Additional initiatives include Operation SENTRY, which consists of
regular contact with law enforcement agencies from around the country
in order to share information and training techniques, and to pursue
joint investigative avenues. At last count, there are 275 participating
law enforcement partners. Law enforcement in this country can no longer
be content with merely focusing on activity in their own jurisdictions.
Information silos can be deadly and Operation SENTRY is designed to
break down walls between jurisdictions.
The NYPD's Critical Response Command (CRC) is one of our first
lines of defense against any threat. An elite squad, with officers
trained in special weapons, long guns, explosive trace detection, and
radiological and nuclear awareness, who respond quickly to any
potential attack on the city, including active-shooter incidents. This
team, which is central to the Counterterrorism Bureau's proactive
counterterrorism mission, conducts daily deployments, saturating high-
probability targets with a uniformed presence aimed at disrupting
terrorist planning operations and deterring and preventing attacks. But
the Counterterrorism and Intelligence Bureau has a mandate broader than
the CRC's operations. The Bureau has wide-ranging responsibilities that
include designing and implementing large-scale counterterrorism
projects; conducting counterterrorism training for the entire patrol
force and other law enforcement agencies; identifying critical
infrastructure sites and developing protective strategies for such
sites; researching, testing, and developing plans for the use of
emerging technologies used to detect and combat chemical, biological,
radiological, nuclear, and explosive weapons; developing systems and
programs to increase harbor security, which includes the pro-active
deployment and mapping of background radiation in the Port of New York
and New Jersey; and interfacing with the NYC Office of Emergency
Management, which coordinates the city's response to mass-scale events.
Over the years, the caliber of people we have been able to attract
has played a major role in our ability to protect New York City. We
have hired civilian analysts who are experts in intelligence and
foreign affairs. They study terrorist groups, trends, and methods of
attacks. One of our most important institutional strengths is the
remarkable diversity in our ranks. The NYPD is fortunate to have a deep
pool of foreign-speaking officers. This has allowed us to build a
foreign linguist program with more than 1,200 registered speakers of 85
different languages--Arabic, Dari, Farsi, Mandarin, Pashto, Russian,
Spanish, and Urdu, to name just a few.
Our personnel also includes our trained vapor wake dogs. Our vapor
wake dogs are often deployed at large-scale events in the city. They
are able to sense mobile threats and explosive particles, and they are
trained to avoid the distractions of large crowds and loud noises. They
are an invaluable component to our counterterror strategy which has
been made possible by Federal appropriations.
The NYPD also provides comprehensive training to our officers to
respond to explosive, chemical, biological, and radiological incidents.
There are many possible forms a terror attack could take, and the
Department has to be ready for any scenario. Federal funds are vital to
training officers to respond to active-shooter scenarios, allowing them
to engage and end a coordinated terrorist attack like the attack in
Mumbai. It also provides critical instruction to officers in life-
saving techniques that can be implemented before it is safe enough for
medical personnel to enter an active crime scene.
In addition to supporting the staffing levels of our
counterterrorism and intelligence bureaus and training our officers,
this funding has helped the NYPD create the security infrastructure
that has prevented potential attacks. For instance, in an initiative
supported by DHS, we have installed radiation detection equipment in
neighboring jurisdictions and at key points of entry into the five
boroughs so that the city is virtually ringed with a radiological alarm
system. This program, called Securing the Cities, includes 150 law
enforcement agencies in dozens of nearby cities and towns.
Across the city, we have distributed approximately 3,000 radiation
pagers to units throughout the Department and nearly 4,000 radiological
dosimeters to each Patrol Borough's counterterrorism post. We continue
to invest heavily to acquire and maintain state-of-the-art equipment to
identify, prevent, or disrupt threats. We have installed highly-
sensitive detection equipment on the boats and helicopters we use to
patrol New York Harbor, as well as vehicles we use to patrol our
streets.
Mass transit and the many entry points into New York are always
among our highest priorities. The NYPD and our partners in the MTA
place particular emphasis on the subway system, in light of its
attractiveness as a target and because it is a vital artery that keeps
this city running. In excess of 5 million New Yorkers use the subways
every day and the strength of the system, open 24 hours a day every day
of the year, makes it an appealing target for attackers. We perform
random screening of bags and packages of subway passengers and we
maintain a presence at each of the 14 underwater subway tunnels. We
have expanded uniformed patrols underground and regularly conduct
security sweeps in subway cars. The department also participates in
Multi-Agency Super Surges which are joint operations to focus manpower
at sensitive transit locations such as bridges, ferries, and tunnels,
conducted in partnership with the Port Authority Police, Amtrak Police,
MTA Police, New Jersey Transit Police, the FBI, TSA, and the National
Guard SHIELD Group.
Federal funding also helps ensure that each officer responding to a
terror incident has the proper equipment so that they can effectively
respond to events such as active shooters or radiological attacks. The
support we receive from the Federal Government, whether it be in the
form of funding and our collaborative relationships with our Federal
law enforcement partners has been and continues to be invaluable.
However, we continue to seek greater funding levels that are
commensurate with the severity of the ever-present threat to our city,
which unfortunately consistently finds itself atop the terror target
list. With additional funding above and beyond the current levels, the
NYPD could, among other things, further increase deployments in
critical areas of the city, continue to expand our Domain Awareness
System (DAS) in order to retrieve and analyze critical information and
elevate situational awareness, as well as expand our public, private,
and international partnerships.
As part of our information-sharing efforts, I would like to note
that the Department of Homeland Security Office of Intelligence and
Analysis (I&A) certified a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility
(SCIF) at NYPD Headquarters which supports Classified information
sharing integral to the NYPD mission. We also have three I&A personnel
assigned to New York City to support NYPD in addition to a DHS Special
Security Officer (SSO) assigned full-time to manage SCIF operations.
The DHS Intelligence Analyst assigned to the NYPD is co-located with
our Intelligence Division and proactively shares DHS and intelligence
community information with us. This partnership alone has resulted in
leads for existing investigations, new investigations being opened, and
two recent joint finished intelligence products.
In addition to the NYPD's public sector and international
Government partnerships, we have increasingly teamed up with the
private sector. These partnerships are instrumental and are always
leveraged in a way that ensures maximum protection for both the
public's safety and civil liberties. Our public-private initiatives,
interconnected yet distinct, begin with our Federally-funded Domain
Awareness System, which receives data from real-time sensors, including
radiological and chemical sensors, ShotSpotter, information from 9-1-1
calls, hundreds of license-plate readers, and live feeds from thousands
of CCTV cameras around the city. Not all of these cameras are city-
owned or -operated. In fact, most of them are not. They belong to
private entities that have chosen to partner with us in the Lower
Manhattan Security Initiative and the Midtown Manhattan Security
Initiative, providing encrypted access to their cameras as well as
other information, in our collective effort to keep the city's millions
of inhabitants safe. This information, including camera feeds, can also
be accessed by NYPD officers on their Department-issued mobile devices
in real time. DAS makes it possible to scan footage for specific
objects, such as an unattended bag, a car driving against the flow of
traffic, or suspicious behavior, such as a person walking through a
restricted area. DAS's advanced graphical interface and mapping
capability allows us to monitor arising threats and to guide our
response if an attack should occur.
Our collaborative efforts also include initiatives known as
Operation Nexus, where the NYPD works with businesses throughout the
Nation to provide them with information to help them identify
suspicious transactions that may be linked to terrorist plots, and NYPD
SHIELD, which established a 2-way line of communication and information
sharing between the NYPD and approximately 20,000 private-sector
members from businesses and organizations throughout the country,
representing almost every sector of industry and Government. The
information we share enables us to better secure our city and allows
businesses, both individually and collectively as industries, to
enhance their own security.
However, in spite of our extensive efforts, violent extremists of
all stripes, both foreign and home-grown, count New York City as their
No. 1 target. What makes our unenviable position on this list even more
concerning is the evolution of the terror framework in the modern day.
Where we once saw the threats to our homeland coming in large part from
well-funded state and non-state actors who established training camps,
attracted recruits to these camps, trained these recruits, planned
attacks from these centralized locations, and dispatched individuals to
carry out these attacks, we now see the primary threat as one that is
decentralized, carried out by so-called ``lone wolves''. Traditional
brick-and-mortar terror infrastructures have been replaced with
websites, chat rooms, and on-line manuals. This is the difference
between a directed terrorist and an inspired terrorist. Gone are the
days where groups such as ISIS and al-Qaeda provide us with the
opportunity to locate, surveil, and infiltrate a training camp, gather
intelligence and identify bad actors, learn of the group's methods,
techniques, future plans, and targets. Instead, tech-savvy extremists
have teamed with terror masterminds with the goal of virtual
recruitment, training, and the provision of an on-line tutorial on how
to plan an effective attack to susceptible individuals that don't even
need to leave their home. These modern-day terrorists are increasingly
more difficult to identify, as are their targets.
Although the primary threats now come from ``lone wolves'', and the
danger from centralized terror groups has recently moved to the
margins, it has not disappeared. With the fall of the Islamic State
caliphate in Syria and Iraq a major blow was struck to the
international terrorist infrastructure but we do not expect the threat
to abate any time soon. As we saw this Easter in Sri Lanka, the threat
from these well-funded and organized terrorist groups remains very
real. The State Department currently lists North Korea, Iran, Sudan,
and Syria as state sponsors of terrorism, and politically influential
groups such as Hamas in the Gaza Strip and Hezbollah in Lebanon have
been designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations. Importantly, the State
Department recently for the first time designated a government military
organization as a Foreign Terrorist Organization, Iran's Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps. What began as an ideologically-driven
militia after the Iranian Revolution, has become a largely autonomous
authoritarian military security force numbering over 100,000 which has
inserted itself into virtually every aspect of Iranian society and the
Middle East generally, suppressing dissent domestically, and arming,
training, and funding fighters in Yemen, Syria, Iraq, and elsewhere.
Whether the ever-looming specter of an attack against our city
stems from an individual or group that is inspired or directed, we will
continue to work in collaboration with our Federal, State, local, and
private-sector partners to continuously improve our investigative and
emergency response infrastructure, while protecting and upholding the
freedoms and liberties afforded to those who live, work, and visit New
York City. In the almost 18 years after the worst attack our country
has ever experienced, the NYPD and our partners have uncovered
approximately 30 terrorist plots against our city. In most cases, they
have been thwarted by the efforts of the NYPD and the FBI-NYPD Joint
Terrorism Task Force.
Tragically, we could not stop all of them. In September 2016, a man
inspired by al-Qaeda set off home-made pressure cooker bombs in the
Chelsea neighborhood of Manhattan and in Seaside Park, New Jersey,
injuring 30 people, and 7 additional unexploded devices were
subsequently discovered. This case highlights that although our
proactive efforts could not prevent this attack, our reactive
preparedness resulted in the immediate activation of partnerships and
plans that not only quickly located the perpetrator, but also other
devices before more damage could be done. Collaboration between the
FBI, ATF, our New Jersey partners, and the NYPD, among others, led to
this individual's speedy capture and he is currently serving multiple
life sentences.
In November 2017, an ISIS-inspired extremist used a rented truck to
mow down innocent cyclists and pedestrians on the West Side Highway
running path near Ground Zero in Manhattan, killing 8. Collaboration
between the NYPD and the FBI led to Federal charges of lending support
to a terrorist organization, in addition to murder charges, on which he
will be tried later this year.
More recently, in December 2017, an ISIS-inspired extremist
attempted a suicide bombing when he set off a homemade explosive device
at the Port Authority Bus Terminal subway station in Manhattan,
injuring 3 people and himself. Once again, collaboration between the
NYPD and our State and Federal partners resulted in a successful
investigation and a guilty verdict on terrorism charges. These attacks,
while tragic, serve to strengthen our resolve to protect New Yorkers
from terrorist violence in all forms and from all quarters.
The future of a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy must
necessarily seek to adapt to emerging tactics we see nationally and
internationally, which if successful can inevitably be used against
this city. We must be vigilant and constantly strive to anticipate and
protect against threats before they materialize into deadly acts.
To this end, since September 11 the NYPD's reach has extended
overseas. Through our International Liaison Program, detectives are
embedded with law enforcement agencies in 13 foreign countries,
including France, Spain, Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar,
Singapore, and Israel. This program has been vital in establishing and
maintaining contacts and information sharing with local law enforcement
and intelligence agencies, as well as INTERPOL, and has proven to be
effective not only in counterterrorism efforts, but in solving crimes
where a perpetrator has fled New York to escape justice. The NYPD has
been given unprecedented access to the scenes of terror attacks and
intelligence by our foreign partners, enabling us to immediately make
threat assessments and adapt our security posture in the city.
Right now, one of the most prominent and thankfully unrealized
threats comes in the form of unmanned aircraft systems, or drones.
Though bad actors have yet to deploy drones for terroristic purposes in
the United States, terror groups such as ISIS and al-Qaeda have
incorporated drones in battle overseas to devastating effect. And, as
we saw last December in London where illegal drone flights brought an
entire airport to a standstill for 17 hours, when we are unable to
disable or disrupt a drone posing a threat, we are at its mercy. This
is where we need your help.
Currently, Federal law prohibits anyone except the Department of
Homeland Security and the Department of Justice from using technology
that could be used to jam a drone's signal, and there exists no pathway
for State or local governments to apply to the FCC for an exception
from this prohibition. The NYPD recommends amending the Federal Code to
allow State and local governments to use jamming technology against
unmanned aircraft systems in select circumstances. We would ensure
those members of the service would be properly-trained and would
establish meaningful oversight protocols. Despite the best efforts of
our DHS and DOJ partners, which we do not question, they simply do not
have the resources to ensure the level of geographic coverage New York
City requires against this threat. The difficulty that DHS and DOJ will
have responding to threats in New York City is magnified in places
where they do not have permanent field offices. The NYPD is ready,
willing and able to deploy this option if given the authority. Select
trained members of the NYPD could be ready to respond swiftly anywhere
in the five boroughs. Even a short delay could mean the difference
between successfully stopping such an attack and catastrophe.
Last, given the low cost and minimal expertise needed to carry out
vehicle or truck attacks like we've seen in Nice, France and
Manhattan's West Side Highway, we expect this tactic to remain popular
among people looking to do us harm. However, with the advent and
inevitable proliferation of driverless vehicles we must not find
ourselves playing catch-up as we are currently doing with drones.
Lawmakers must preemptively, before these vehicles become as wide-
spread as drones are now, require that these vehicles incorporate a
mechanism to allow law enforcement to interdict or otherwise disrupt a
driverless vehicle suspected of being used as a weapon.
Almost 18 years after 9/11, New York City enjoys the distinction of
being the safest big city in America. However, complacency serves as a
welcome mat for tragedy. The state-of-the-art technology I have
outlined requires on-going modernization to be effective, as is the
nature with all technology. The partnerships I have lauded cannot
remain static, we must expand our public, private, and international
networks so that we can tap into and learn from ever-evolving and
diverse intelligence, methods, approaches, and strategies. The
equipment we employ must be upgraded in order for it to have maximum
value in protecting the public and our officers. The training we
administer must be updated to ensure our tactics keep up with the
evolving threat against our city. Finally, relevant laws must
continuously be reviewed and amended to guarantee the legal framework
designed to protect our freedoms is not used to compromise our safety.
As Commissioner O'Neill has said, in some areas the NYPD is very
good, in other areas, we are the best, but in all areas we can do
better. Our ability to get better in the realm of counterterrorism is
directly tied to a continuing and increased level of Federal funding,
Federal partnerships and the foresight of Federal legislators to ensure
laws aimed at protecting our liberties cannot be used as a pathway to
design a more effective attack by our enemies.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify today. I am happy
to answer any questions you may have.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Currao to summarize his statement for 5
minutes.
Thank you again for being here.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS CURRAO, CHIEF OF COUNTERTERRORISM, FIRE
DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK
Mr. Currao. Good afternoon, Chairman Rose, Ranking Member
Walker, and Members of the Subcommittee on Intelligence and
Counterterrorism. My name is Tom Currao, and I am the chief of
Counterterrorism and Emergency Preparedness for the New York
City Fire Department. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss
the importance of the FDNY's continuing preparedness efforts in
a dynamic threat environment.
The primary mission of the New York City Fire Department is
to protect life and property. We execute this mission through
firefighting, search and rescue, pre-hospital patient care, and
hazardous materials mitigation. However, as a professional fire
service agency, our protection of life and property,
particularly after September 11, is increasingly in the
homeland security realm via threat and risk analysis,
developing and sharing intelligence at all levels of
classification, as well as working within the first responder
community to mitigate and recover from the effects of natural
disasters.
In a post-9/11 environment, we operate in a constant state
of evolution, seeking the latest innovations to keep up with
emerging threats. We maximize our cooperation and coordination
with Federal, State, and local agencies, working together to
prepare for, respond to, and mitigate the effects of security
and disaster threats. All of this is made possible by the
Federal Homeland Security funding that we receive.
Following the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission
Report, the Fire Department has used Federal funding to invest
in several core areas. We expanded the Department's incident
management capabilities by building a state-of-the-art
Emergency Operations Center at FDNY headquarters to manage
complex emergencies. We developed a 300-member Incident
Management Team to manage and coordinate emergencies. This team
has activated for a variety of emergencies, including at
explosion incidents, during extreme weather such as Super Storm
Sandy, and at major fires. The IMT operates as a regional and
National resource, serving the people of the New York and New
Jersey metropolitan area as well as our fellow citizens around
the country and the world when deployed in the wake of
hurricanes and severe storms.
The Department created the FDNY Center for Terrorism and
Disaster Preparedness to develop emergency response plans and
create drills and exercises. We built advanced training
facilities at the Fire Academy, including a Subway Simulator, a
Shipboard Firefighting Simulator, and a marine-based Damage
Control Simulator. We have also developed specialized units and
preparedness capabilities within our Special Operations Command
such as HazMat, HazTac Ambulances, and Technical
Decontamination Engines. The Department built advanced
technical rescue capabilities across Rescue Operations and the
FDNY's Special Operations Command. Members are trained to
respond in various tech rescue environments for search and
rescue and patient extrication, including building collapses,
incidents in the New York City subway system, and high-angle
rescues. We also created tactical water rescue teams to rescue
people impacted by floods and hurricanes.
Following the Paris attacks of 2015, the Commissioner
tasked Department leadership with designing a response
mechanism that would be ready for quick deployment to such
incidents. Using Federal funding, the Department created the
Counterterrorism Rescue Task Force, in which specially-trained
EMS personnel operate in conjunction with NYPD force protection
in warm zones during active-shooter events to triage and
provide life-saving care, such as bleeding control, in those
moments where every second counts.
We have also enhanced our urban search-and-rescue teams and
Special Operations Command Task Force, and we have built a
formidable marine fleet to patrol and protect New York Harbor.
Marine assets include a tiered system of response boats,
ranging from 140-foot boats for large-scale disasters, mid-
sized boats with more maneuverability, to smaller medical
response boats. These are also a regional asset, responding
primarily within the Port of New York and New Jersey but with
the ability to respond to emergencies throughout the Northeast.
The FDNY cannot operate at our highest capacity without
working hand-in-glove with our partners at the NYPD, New York
City Emergency Management, the Port Authority of New York New
Jersey, the Metropolitan Transit Authority, the United States
Coast Guard, the New York State Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Services, the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the Joint Terrorism Task Force, and many departments and first-
responder agencies here in New York and across the country.
Only a short while after its formation, the Rescue Task
Force was deployed in response to the 2016 Chelsea bombing. In
June 2017, when a disgruntled doctor killed 1 person and
wounded 6 others at Bronx Lebanon Hospital, the Rescue Task
Force entered the hospital to treat seriously wounded patients
even as the gunman was still being sought. It was also deployed
in response to a pipe bomb that was detonated during a morning
rush hour at the Port Authority. Each deployment involves FDNY
and NYPD members working in concert, operating as a single
unit.
The cooperation exhibited by the agencies during live
emergencies does not just happen on its own. Rather, it is the
product of intense training and preparation so when a call
comes in, the teams work together seamlessly. The Center for
Terrorism and Disaster Preparedness, FDNY's in-house planning
and preparedness group, works with local and regional partners
to develop emergency response plans and carry out joint
exercises and drills. On average, the Center for Terrorism and
Disaster Preparedness runs 40 preparedness exercises a year.
Recent examples include active-shooter drills with the NYPD,
Ebola pathogen drills with New York City and Long Island area
hospitals, and a cybersecurity drill with West Point Cadets. We
also conduct joint trainings with the Metropolitan Transit
Authority, including a recent full-scale shooter exercise in
the Park Avenue Tunnel.
The Counterterrorism Task Force works extensively with NYPD
counterparts, including an annual 3-day training involving
communications and movement of Rescue Task Force members,
medical care and patient movement in the warm zone, self and
buddy aide for injured members, improvised explosive device
awareness, and drills around a variety of scenarios such as a
classroom shooter with a secondary device. In 2018, we had 120
days of joint training. In 2019, approximately 100 Fire and EMS
members and 60 NYPD members will receive the training each
week. Last year, the FDNY/NYPD Rescue Task Force deployed for
pre-staged events 69 times, including a 2-hour joint training
session at each deployment. FDNY also conducts large-scale
joint agency trainings, such as a 3-day New York State homeland
security training in Oriskany, New York. The FDNY also has a
liaison to the Joint Terrorism Task Force.
Cooperation and communication between the Fire Department
and the Police Department is as strong as it has ever been.
This extends beyond response to planning and developing
interagency standard operating procedures. In fact, there is a
draft procedure that was recently developed by both of our
agencies to address fire and smoke as a weapon in the high-rise
environment. In addition, we regularly share intelligence
analysis with the NYPD Intelligence and Counterterrorism
Divisions.
In 2004, the Department created the FDNY Center for
Terrorism and Disaster Preparedness. Serving as the focal point
of the Department's strategic preparedness, the Center creates
dynamic and practical approaches to counterterrorism, disaster
response, and consequence management. Core competencies of the
Center include: Intelligence sharing; weapons of mass
destruction and security preparedness; designing drills and
exercises; and emergency response planning, education, and
technology.
We want to briefly share with the committee some of the
emerging threats that we have been focusing on at the Center.
One trend that we are tracking that appears to be on the rise
is violence perpetrated by domestic extremists. This includes
violence carried out by domestic individuals motivated by
political, social, environmental, and religious movements. In
the United States, and indeed on a global basis, this includes
the white supremacist movement and its various subgroupings,
anti-Government extremist movements, and single-issue movements
including anti-abortion, anti-immigrant, and anti-Muslim
extremists, among others. These attacks often involve firearms
and improvised explosive devices. These weapons may be easy to
obtain and construct using common materials and supported by
digital instructional resources. Recent examples of attacks of
this nature include the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting and an
individual who sent pipe bombs to prominent political and media
figures.
Another threat that we have been studying closely for years
is the concept of complex coordinated attacks. These are
attacks that are characterized by multiple teams of attackers,
multiple attack locations, and perhaps multiple types of
weapons. Examples include attacks in Mumbai, Paris, Brussels,
and the Easter Sunday attacks in Sri Lanka. Their complex and
dynamic nature present operating challenges for first
responders. An attack involving multiple forms of violence at
disperse locations elevates the importance of communication and
coordination among responders. Responses may require
simultaneous action and sustained operations over a long period
of time involving personnel from a wider response area than in
a single isolated response, as well as a deliberate method of
communicating with and providing warnings to the public. The
Fire Department's Incident Management Team and operators train
frequently with other first-responder agencies and
jurisdictions to be prepared for just such an event. One
specific example will take place on June 4 when the Fire
Department will be taking part in an exercise with the U.S.
Coast Guard responding to a hypothetical situation of active
shooters on multiple ferries in different areas of the city's
waterways.
We also devote resources to planning and preparation around
the threat of vertical terrorism, which is a terrorist incident
in a high-rise building using automatic weapons, explosives,
and potentially fire as a weapon. The most striking example of
this is the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks. This is a particularly
complex problem and involves coordinated planning and
development of interagency standard operating procedures to
support further research, training, and exercises. Attacks of
this nature present challenges both in reaching the perpetrator
as well as reaching, caring for, and transporting patients. In
many ways, the success of the law enforcement and fire service
missions are intertwined and codependent.
The Fire Department relies on Federal funding to make smart
investments in terrorism and disaster preparedness. The grant
funds that we obtain has allowed us to create and maintain the
capabilities that I have described to you here today and has
enabled the Department to continue looking forward, proactively
planning for the next wave of threats. In addition to the large
equipment, we use Federal resources for critical equipment such
as personal protective equipment. This gear is critical to the
safety of our members when responding to and mitigating
potential chemical, biological, and radiological weapons, such
as when the Ebola patient that was discovered in Hamilton
Heights was exhibiting signs of Ebola. FDNY Haz-Tac paramedics
donned their TyChem-F suits and their Powered Air Purifying
Respirators and relied on their training to successfully
respond to, transport, and hand off the patient to an isolation
section within Bellevue Hospital.
Proposed cuts under the current administration would
significantly erode the progress that we have made in the years
since 9/11. Cuts to our funding would result in the Center for
Terrorism and Disaster Preparedness or the Fire Department
Operations Center not having the resources available to
adequately run. These cuts would severely impact the operation
of our Incident Management Team, our Rescue Task Force, and
other specialized teams.
It has been an honor today for the Fire Department to
appear before you. We appreciate your support and we look
forward to a continued partnership with Members of this
committee and the Congress so that we are able to sustain
existing capabilities and continue to adapt to new threats in
order to protect the people of the New York City urban area.
I would be happy to take your questions at this time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Currao follows:]
Prepared Statement of Thomas Currao
May 6, 2019
Good afternoon Chairman Rose, Ranking Member Walker, and Members of
the Subcommittee on Intelligence and Counterterrorism. My name is Tom
Currao and I am the chief of counterterrorism and emergency
preparedness for the New York City Fire Department (FDNY). Thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the importance of the FDNY's continuing
preparedness efforts in a dynamic threat environment.
The primary mission of the New York City Fire Department is to
protect life and property. We execute this mission through
firefighting, search and rescue, pre-hospital patient care, and
hazardous material mitigation. However, as a professional fire service
agency, our protection of life and property, particularly after
September 11, is increasingly in the homeland security realm via threat
and risk analysis, developing and sharing intelligence at all levels of
classification, as well as working within the first responder community
to mitigate and recover from the effects of natural disasters.
In a post-9/11 environment, we operate in a constant state of
evolution, seeking the latest innovations to keep up with emerging
threats. We maximize our cooperation and coordination with Federal,
State, and local agencies, working together to prepare for, respond to,
and mitigate the effects of security and disaster threats. All of this
is made possible by the Federal Homeland Security funding that we
receive.
post-9/11 innovations
Following the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Report, the
Fire Department has used Federal funding to invest in several core
areas. We expanded the Department's incident management capabilities by
building a state-of-the-art Emergency Operations Center at FDNY
headquarters to manage complex emergencies. We developed a 300-member
Incident Management Team (IMT) to manage and coordinate emergencies.
This team has activated for a variety of emergencies, including at
explosion incidents, during extreme weather such as Superstorm Sandy,
and at major fires. The IMT operates as a regional and National
resource, serving the people of the New York-New Jersey metropolitan
area as well as our fellow citizens around the country and the world
when deployed in the wake of hurricanes and severe storms.
The department created the FDNY Center for Terrorism and Disaster
Preparedness (CTDP) to develop emergency response plans and create
drills and exercises. We built advanced training facilities at the Fire
Academy, including a Subway Simulator, a Shipboard Firefighting
Simulator, and a marine-based Damage Control Simulator. We've also
developed specialized units and preparedness capabilities within our
Special Operations Command such as HazMat, HazTac Ambulances, and
Technical Decontamination Engines. The department built advanced
Technical Rescue capabilities across Rescue Operations and the FDNY's
Special Operations Command. Members are trained to respond in various
tech Rescue environments (for Search and Rescue and Patient
Extrication), including: Building collapses, incidents in the NYC
Subway, and high-angle rescues. We also created tactical water rescue
teams to rescue people impacted by floods and hurricanes.
Following the Paris attacks of 2015, the Commissioner tasked
department leadership with designing a response mechanism that would be
ready for quick deployment to such incidents. Using Federal funding,
the department created the Counterterrorism Rescue Task Force, in which
specially-trained EMS personnel operate in conjunction with NYPD force
protection in ``warm zones'' during active-shooter events to triage and
provide life-saving care, such as bleeding control; in those moments,
every second counts.
We have also enhanced our Urban Search and Rescue teams and Special
Operations Command Task Force, and we've built a formidable marine
fleet to patrol and protect New York Harbor. Marine assets include a
tiered system of response boats, ranging from 140-foot boats for large-
scale disasters, mid-sized boats with more maneuverability, to smaller
medical response boats. These are also a regional asset, responding
primarily within the Port of New York and New Jersey but with the
ability to respond to emergencies throughout the Northeast.
cooperation and coordination
The FDNY cannot operate at our highest capacity without working
hand-in-glove with our partners at the NYPD, New York City Emergency
Management (NYCEM), the Port Authority of New York New Jersey (PANYNJ),
the Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA), the United States Coast Guard
(USCG), the New York State Division of Homeland Security and Emergency
Services, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Joint Terrorism
Task Force (JTTF), and many departments and first responder agencies
here in New York and across the country.
Only a short while after its formation, the Rescue Task Force was
deployed in response to the 2016 Chelsea Bombing. In June 2017, when a
disgruntled doctor killed 1 person and wounded 6 others at Bronx
Lebanon Hospital, the Rescue Task Force entered the hospital to treat
seriously wounded patients even as the gunman was still being sought.
It was also deployed in response to a pipe bomb that was detonated
during a morning rush hour at the Port Authority. Each deployment
involves FDNY and NYPD members working in concert, operating as a
single unit.
The cooperation exhibited by the agencies during live emergencies
does not just happen on its own; rather, it is the product of intense
training and preparation so that the when a call comes in, the teams
work together seamlessly. The Center for Terrorism and Disaster
Preparedness (CTDP)--FDNY's in-house planning and preparedness group--
works with local and regional partners to develop emergency response
plans and carry out joint exercises and drills. On average, CTDP runs
40 preparedness exercises a year. Recent examples include active-
shooter drills with the NYPD, Ebola pathogen drills with New York City
and Long Island area hospitals, and a cybersecurity drill with West
Point Cadets. We also conduct joint trainings with the Metropolitan
Transit Authority, including a recent full-scale shooter exercise in
the Park Avenue Tunnel.
The Counterterrorism Task Force works extensively with NYPD
counterparts, including an annual 3-day training involving
communications and movement of Rescue Task Force members, medical care
and patient movement in the warm zone, self and buddy aide for injured
members, improvised explosive device awareness, and drills around a
variety of scenarios such as a classroom shooter with a secondary
device. In 2018, we had 120 days of joint training. In 2019,
approximately 100 Fire/EMS members and 60 NYPD members will receive the
training each week. Last year, FDNY/NYPD Rescue Task Force deployed for
pre-staged events 69 times, including a 2-hour joint training session
at each deployment. FDNY also conducts large-scale joint agency
trainings, such as a 3-day New York State homeland security training in
Oriskany, NY. The FDNY also has a liaison to the Joint Terrorism Task
Force.
Cooperation and communication between the fire department and the
police department is as strong as it has ever been. This extends beyond
response to planning and developing interagency standard operating
procedures. In fact, there is a draft procedure that was recently
developed by both of our agencies to address fire and smoke as a weapon
in the high-rise environment. In addition, we regularly share
intelligence analysis with the NYPD Intelligence and Counterterrorism
Divisions.
emerging threats
In 2004, the department created the FDNY Center for Terrorism and
Disaster Preparedness. Serving as the focal point of the department's
strategic preparedness, the CTDP creates dynamic and practical
approaches to counterterrorism, disaster response, and consequence
management. Core competencies of the Center include: Intelligence
sharing; Weapons of Mass Destruction and security preparedness;
Designing drills and exercises; and Emergency Response Planning,
Education, and Technology.
We want to briefly share with the committee some of the emerging
threats that we've been focusing on at the Center. One trend that we're
tracking that appears to be on the rise is violence perpetrated by
domestic extremists. This includes violence carried out by domestic
individuals motived by political, social, environmental, and religious
movements. In the United States, and indeed on a global basis, this
includes the white supremacist movement and its various subgroupings,
anti-government extremist movements, and single-issue movements
including anti-abortion, anti-immigrant, and anti-Muslim extremists,
among others. These attacks often involve firearms and improvised
explosive devices. These weapons may be easy to obtain and construct
using common materials and supported by digital instructional
resources. Recent examples of attacks of this nature include the
Pittsburgh synagogue shooting and an individual who sent pipe bombs to
prominent political and media figures.
Another threat that we have been studying closely for years is the
concept of complex-coordinated attacks. These are attacks that are
characterized by multiple teams of attackers, multiple attack
locations, and perhaps multiple types of weapons. Examples include
attacks in Mumbai, Paris, Brussels, and the Easter Sunday attacks in
Sri Lanka. Their complex and dynamic nature present operating
challenges for first responders. An attack involving multiple forms of
violence at disperse locations elevates the importance of communication
and coordination among responders. Responses may require simultaneous
action and sustained operations over a long period of time involving
personnel from a wider response area than in a single isolated
response, as well as a deliberate method of communicating with and
providing warnings to the public. The Fire Department's Incident
Management Team and operators train frequently with other first
responder agencies and jurisdictions to be prepared for such an event.
One specific example will take place on June 4 when the Fire Department
will be taking part in an exercise with the U.S. Coast Guard responding
to a hypothetical scenario of active shooters on multiple ferries in
different areas of the city's waterways.
We also devote resources to planning and preparation around the
threat of vertical terrorism, which is a terrorist incident in a high-
rise building using automatic weapons, explosives, and potentially fire
as a weapon. The most striking example of this is the 2008 Mumbai
terror attacks. This is a particularly complex problem and involves
coordinated planning and development of interagency standard operating
procedures, to support further research, training, and exercises.
Attacks of this nature present challenges both in reaching the
perpetrator as well as reaching, caring for, and transporting patients.
In many ways, the success of the law enforcement and fire service
missions are intertwined and codependent. To prepare for this type of
attack, the FDNY has conducted drills tailored to this scenario,
including hosting a Vertical Terrorism Preparedness Workshop at 1 World
Trade Center with our partners at NYPD, NYCEM, PANYNJ, the FBI, DHS,
FEMA, and others.
importance of federal funding
The Fire Department relies on Federal funding to make smart
investments in terrorism and disaster preparedness. The grants funds
that we obtain has allowed us to create and maintain the capabilities
that I've described here today and has enabled the Department to
continue looking forward, proactively planning for the next wave of
threats. In addition to the large equipment, we use Federal resources
for critical equipment such as Personal Protective Equipment for our
first responders. This gear is critical to the safety of our members
when responding to and mitigate potential chemical, biological, and
radiological weapons. When we received a call in 2014 that a patient in
Hamilton Heights was exhibiting signs that he very likely had Ebola,
FDNY Haz-Tac paramedics donned their TyChem-F suits and their Powered
Air Purifying Respirators and relied on their training to successfully
respond to, transport, and hand off the patient to an isolated section
at Bellevue Hospital Center.
Proposed cuts under the current administration would significantly
erode the progress that we have made in the years since 9/11. Cuts to
our funding would result in the Center for Terrorism and Disaster
Preparedness or the Fire Department Operations Center not having the
resources available to adequately run. These cuts would severely impact
the operation of our Incident Management Team, our Rescue Task Force,
and other specialized teams.
first responder use of t-band spectrum
Finally, I would like to address T-Band spectrum, which is a
portion of spectrum that is used for public safety communications in 11
heavily-populated metropolitan areas. Currently, the Federal
Communications Commissioner is required to reallocate and auction the
T-Band spectrum by 2021. Since September 11, the FDNY has
systematically improved radio communications for our firefighters and
EMS personnel responding to fires and medical emergencies because those
transmissions can so often mean the difference between life and death.
Losing the T-Band spectrum would require billions of dollars to replace
existing radios and infrastructure, devastate FDNY's operations at
thousands of emergencies each day, and unnecessarily endanger the
safety of New Yorkers. We appreciate the bi-partisan Congressional
effort to preserve the T-Band spectrum before it is reallocated for
good.
It is an honor for the Fire Department to appear before you today.
We appreciate your support and we look forward to a continued
partnership with Members of this committee and the Congress so that we
are able to sustain existing capabilities and continue to adapt to new
threats in order to protect the people of the New York City Urban Area.
I would be happy to take your questions at this time.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize Mr. Klock to summarize his statement for 5
minutes.
STATEMENT OF LOUIS P. KLOCK, DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE,
PORT AUTHORITY OF NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY
Mr. Klock. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. On behalf
of Chief Security Officer John Bilich and the Superintendent of
Police Ed Cetnar, I want to thank you for allowing the Port
Authority to represent here.
I am humbled to be sitting next to two fine gentlemen here
who have personified the mission that we go through day in and
day out.
I would like to just ping off a couple of quick words
before I go through my statement, such words as teamwork,
training, preparedness. Those words truly define the
relationship that we have here, not just in training but
exercise preparedness but when the bell rings, like what
happened on December 11, 2017 when, just at the doorsteps of
our bus terminal, both gentlemen explained how someone came in
and detonated themselves. At that moment there, it personified
teamwork in a way that, frankly, I have not seen in years.
Regardless of what uniform you wore, what rank you were,
everyone just jumped in and did what they had to do. Briefings
occurred, intelligence was shared, and at the end of the day it
was a proud day for New York City, the way everybody responded.
I just would like to let you know that what we have here is
truly a winning team and something that we are all, frankly,
very proud of what we have here, but we cannot do it alone. We
thank you for what you are doing here because, frankly, from
where I sit, it energizes me and I cannot wait to go back to
the Port Authority to let everyone know about the support that
we have from all of you. So thank you very much.
I will jump into my remarks. You can tell I am a first-
timer because I typed it in size 12 font, and I look over at
Mr. Miller and he had like a 20 font, so you can tell he has
done this 100 times.
Mr. Rose. They have had the opportunity to testify as many
times as Mr. Miller has.
Mr. Klock. I will live and learn. Thank you.
I will take a few minutes just to talk about our mission
and how we operate within our various facilities.
Since our inception in 1928, the Port Authority Police
Department has emerged as the Nation's largest transportation
police department, with over 2,200 members. The Port
Authority's unique operational landscape of airports, seaports,
trains, bridges, tunnels, and real estate include some of the
busiest and most iconic structures in the world. The Port
Authority Police Department is divided into four divisions: Air
Transportation, Ground Transportation, Counterterrorism and
Investigations. I would just like to take a moment to break
down each one of those different branches.
The Air Transportation Branch includes Newark Liberty
International Airport, LaGuardia Airport, Teterboro Airport,
and John F. Kennedy International Airport. In 2018, over 138
million passengers traveled through Port Authority airports,
which was a 4.5 percent increase over 2017 travel. The Port
Authority Police Department has significantly increased its
presence in recent years, adding additional posts and
implementing cutting-edge counterterrorism technology. The
department continually invests in security enhancements, adding
drone equipment that helps detect drones that venture into our
air space, automated license plate readers, and the newest
radiological detection through a partnership with Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency, known as DARPA.
Additionally, the Port Authority Police provide aircraft rescue
firefighting services at all 4 airports.
Our next branch is the Ground Transportation Branch,
encompassing the George Washington Bridge, Lincoln Tunnel,
Holland Tunnel, Goethals Bridge, Outer Bridge, Bayonne Bridge,
PATH system, Port Authority Bus Terminal, World Trade Center,
and the New Jersey Marine Terminals. Port Authority bridges and
tunnels serve as the interstate gateway between New York and
New Jersey. Over 100 million vehicles travel across the George
Washington Bridge each year, making it the busiest bridge in
the world. Port Authority Police continue to keep the region
moving by conducting high-visibility patrols, accident
mitigation, and traffic enforcement.
The PATH system, which is our train system, provides rail
service on 44.8 miles of track between New York and New Jersey,
with an average ridership of approximately 280,860 passengers
per day who pass through our 13 stations. The PATH system was
the first commuter rail line to fully implement positive train
control in the United States. Port Authority Police at PATH
have a robust daily deployment consisting of heavy weapon
patrols, counterterrorism initiatives, plainclothes operations,
and radiological detection.
The Port Authority Bus Terminal is the largest bus
transportation facility in the United States and the busiest by
volume in the entire world. The bus terminal serves as the
major hub for buses in midtown Manhattan and services commuter
lines as well as interstate bus operations. In 2017, the Port
Authority Police, along with our partners here at the table,
valiantly apprehended Akayed Ullah, who detonated an improvised
explosive device in an underground corridor leading to the bus
terminal.
Last, the New Jersey Marine Terminals, consisting of our
Port Elizabeth, Port Newark, and Port Jersey branches, comprise
the busiest container terminal on the East Coast and the third-
largest in the country. In 2018, the port moved over 38 million
metric tons of cargo, which has consistently grown over the
last 10 years. The Port Authority CVI, which is our commercial
vehicle inspection unit, specializes in commercial vehicle
safety inspections and helps ensure the safe transportation of
cargo and hazardous materials through the port and through
other facilities. Police patrols are highly trained in anti-
terror, radiological detection, and heavy weapons.
The Port Authority Police have the distinct responsibility
to protect the approximately 15 acres of the World Trade Center
campus, where over 3,000 people lost their lives in the
terrorist attacks of 9/11. The Port Authority Police suffered
the largest 1-day loss of law enforcement when 37 police
officers were killed on 9/11 during the attempted rescue of
thousands of people from the World Trade Center site. Today,
the campus is home to a variety of Government and corporate
entities and is one of the most visited locations in Manhattan.
The World Trade Center campus contains the National 9/11
Memorial. The Port Authority Police aggressively patrol the
campus, utilizing state-of-the-art counterterrorism patrol
tactics and equipment.
The department has made significant investments in
counterterrorism investigations as we look to emerge with
greater Emergency Services Unit, our K-9 Unit, CVI Unit, and
the Counterterrorism Unit. These units work closely with our
partners sitting here today, as well as other local, State, and
Federal mutual aid partners to enhance advanced response and
mitigation capabilities. Furthermore, members of the Port
Authority Criminal Investigations Bureau are embedded in
Federal and State task forces, including the Joint Terrorism
Task Force in both New York and New Jersey, as well as the DEA
Task Force in both New York and New Jersey. This collaboration
provides critical intelligence and helps drive our mission. Our
Department has one of the largest K-9 deployments in the
country, with 24-hour coverage at all of our facilities.
Additionally, our K-9 assets are attached to Federal task
forces and are often requested by our mutual aid partners for
patrol-related assistance.
In closing, the evolution of the Port Authority Police
Department over the last year has led to the Department being
on the forefront of counterterrorism policing. Investments in
staffing, training, equipment, and technology are just part of
the Department's aspiration to become the greatest
counterterrorism police department in the country. For over 91
years, the Port Authority Police Department has proudly served
the region with pride, service, and distinction, and will
continue that tradition.
I thank you for allowing me to represent the fine ladies
and gentlemen of the Port Authority Police Department. I will
now take any questions of you if you have any at this time.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Klock follows:]
Prepared Statement of Louis P. Klock
May 6, 2019
Since its inception in 1928, the Port Authority Police Department
has emerged as the Nation's largest transportation police department,
with over 2,200 members. The Port Authority's unique operational
landscape of airports, seaports, trains, bridges, tunnels, and real
estate include some of the busiest and most iconic structures in the
world. The Port Authority Police Department is divided into the
following divisions: Air Transportation, Ground Transportation,
Counterterrorism/Investigations.
The Air Transportation Branch includes Newark Liberty International
Airport, LaGuardia Airport, Teterboro Airport, and John F. Kennedy
International Airport. In 2018, over 138 million passengers traveled
through Port Authority Airports, which was a 4.5 percent increase over
2017 travel. The Port Authority Police Department has significantly
increased its presence in recent years, adding additional posts and
implementing cutting-edge counterterrorism technology. The department
continually invests in security enhancements, adding drone detection
equipment, automated license plate readers, and the newest in
radiological detection through a partnership with Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Additionally, the Port Authority
Police provide Aircraft Rescue Fire Fighting services at all 4
airports.
The Ground Transportation Branch encompasses the George Washington
Bridge, Lincoln Tunnel, Holland Tunnel, Goethals Bridge, Outer Bridge,
Bayonne Bridge, PATH, Port Authority Bus Terminal, World Trade Center,
and the New Jersey Marine Terminals. Port Authority bridges and tunnels
serve as the interstate gateway between New York and New Jersey. Over
100 million vehicles travel across the George Washington Bridge each
year making it the busiest bridge in the world. Port Authority Police
continue to keep the region moving by conducting high-visibility
patrols, accident mitigation, and traffic enforcement.
The PATH system provides rail service on 44.8 miles of track
between New York and New Jersey, with an average of 280,860 passengers
each day passing through 13 stations. The PATH system was the first
commuter rail line to fully implement positive train control in the
United States. Port Authority Police at PATH have a robust daily
deployment consisting of heavy weapon patrols, counterterrorism
initiatives, plainclothes operations, and radiological detection.
The Port Authority Bus Terminal is the largest bus transportation
facility in the United States and busiest by volume in the world. The
PABT serves as the major hub for buses in mid-town Manhattan and
services commuter lines as wells interstate bus operations. In 2017,
the Port Authority Police valiantly apprehended Akayed Ullah, who
detonated an improvised explosive device in an underground corridor
leading into the PABT.
The New Jersey Marine Terminals (Port Elizabeth, Port Newark, Port
Jersey) comprise the busiest container terminal on the East Coast and
third-largest in the country. In 2018 the port moved over 35 million
metric tons of cargo, which has consistently grown over the last 10
years. The Port Authority Police CVI Unit specializes in commercial
vehicle safety inspections and helps ensure the safe transportation of
cargo and hazardous materials throughout the port and through other
facilities. Police patrols are trained in anti-terror, radiological
detection, and heavy weapons.
The Port Authority Police have the distinct responsibility to
protect the approximately 15 acres of the World Trade Center campus,
where over 3,000 people lost their lives in the terrorist attacks of 9/
11. The Port Authority Police suffered the largest 1-day loss of law
enforcement personnel when 37 Port Authority Police officers were
killed on 9/11 during the attempted rescue of thousands of people from
the World Trade Center site. Today, the campus is home to a variety of
both Government and corporate entities and is one of the most visited
locations in Manhattan. The World Trade Center campus contains the
National 9/11 Memorial. The Port Authority Police aggressively patrol
the campus utilizing state-of-the-art counterterrorism patrol tactics
and equipment.
The department has made significant investments in its
Counterterrorism/Investigations Branch, which includes the Emergency
Services Unit, K9 Unit, CVI Unit, and the Counterterrorism Unit. These
units work closely with local, State, and Federal mutual aid partners
to enhance advanced response and mitigation capabilities. Furthermore,
members of the Port Authority Police Criminal Investigations Bureau are
embedded in Federal and State task forces, including the Joint
Terrorism Task Force (N.Y. and N.J.) and DEA Task Force (NJ and NY).
This collaboration provides critical intelligence and helps drive our
mission. Our Department has one of the largest K9 deployments in the
country, with 24-hour coverage at all facilities. Additionally, our K-
9's assets are attached to Federal task forces and are often requested
by our mutual aid partners for patrol-related assistance.
The evolution of the Port Authority Police over the past year has
led to the Department being on the forefront of counterterrorism
policing. Investments in staffing, training, equipment, and technology
are just part of the Department's aspiration to become the greatest
counterterrorism police department in the country. For over 91 years,
the Port Authority Police Department has proudly served the region with
pride, service, and distinction and will continue that tradition.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak on behalf of the Port
Authority Police Department. I will now take any questions.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Mr. Klock.
I thank all the witnesses for their testimony.
To reiterate something that you just said, this is indeed a
great team, and we are honored again to have you all here.
I remind each Member that he or she will have 5 minutes to
question the panel.
I will now recognize myself for the questions, for the
first series of questions.
Mr. Currao, you made an interesting point about outlining
some of the cuts you would have to make should Federal funding
decrease. I would ask you just to elaborate on that, if
necessary, and then I will present the same question to each of
you. If you could just paint us a picture, $25 million down in
the last 10 years, what are the consequences if Federal funding
continues to decline, Federal support, and how would that
support affect New York City's public safety and that of the
country?
Mr. Currao. So, I would answer that in really two main
ways. One is preparedness. As I mentioned, the Center for
Terrorism Disaster Preparedness puts together 40 exercises a
year, and those exercises touch on local level, State, and
regional level. We work across with many, many agencies, across
a full suite, a full spectrum of threats. So our ability to be
able to put together those exercises, not only the quantity but
the depth of those exercises, would be more challenged because
we would not have the funding to support that.
On the other end, from the response mode, the rescue task
forces, the training that we are on day 3 right now, our
continual training with our partners in the New York City
Police Department, would be severely hampered. As I said, we
train 100 members a week from the FDNY, we train 16 members a
week from the NYPD, and that is all predicated on the funding
that we get, and that has a direct impact. We have already used
these skills, particularly in the West Side ramming. The skills
we learned in this training helped save lives.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
Mr. Klock. With the understanding that Uncle Sam only gives
me 5 minutes.
Mr. Klock. Very good. I will make it 5 minutes' worth.
Thank you.
Very similar to what the Chief had mentioned earlier,
preparedness would definitely be something that we would feel a
pinch. We have full-scale exercises, not just on the front of a
disaster or something along those lines, like an aircraft
disaster or something like that, but we also conduct active-
shooter drills at every one of our facilities throughout the
year, and they are very realistic. We do them with our partners
that are seated here, so it is not in a silo. On the Jersey
side we bring Elizabeth, as well as Jersey City, as well as New
Jersey State Police and Transit. So it is a shared function.
We believe that you are only as good as you train. If you
train hard, you are going to do well on game day. So training
would definitely be something that we would experience a
setback. The training that we do is real. They spend a
tremendous amount of effort and labor on making it as realistic
as possible, and you would not want to lose that when it comes
to training because that is really how you are going to respond
when the bell rings.
The other portion is strictly putting cops out in the field
and in operations. Day-to-day, your funding puts a lot of our
heavy weapons and our tactical people out there in harm's way
and right on the front. When things begin to have an uptick,
not just around the city but around the world, we will respond
in kind when both agencies here ramp things up as a result of
what is going on around the world. Frankly, we cannot do that
without your assistance. We put people out not just at airports
but you heard about all the different facilities. Frankly, that
comes into hundreds and hundreds of people around the clock,
and it adds up.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Without repeating what my colleagues said in
the interest of time, I think when you look at the contribution
we make, 85 percent of the cost of running anything in
Government is personnel costs. We pay that, with the exception
of reimbursement for the salaries of a few intelligence
analysts. So it is not as if we do not bear our own brunt here
or contribute in kind.
But when you look at the programs I discussed in my
testimony, the domain awareness system has an operations and
maintenance cost of $52 million a year. That is primarily a
counterterrorism system that serves other functions, but it was
built to protect New York City from National security threats.
The radiation pagers, the dosimeters, things that were
supported by Securing the Cities money, which has been diverted
to other places, would be a concern.
So UASI money has maintained a relatively steady pace. But
when we see the port funding, the transit funding, the
infrastructure protection funding that comes from other places
decreased by $26.2 million since 2008, the threat is not
getting smaller, and none of what we do is getting cheaper, and
when we turn to the city to say we may have to pay for more of
this, I think you are aware that the city is facing its own
budget concerns.
So this is a real concern for us. There was discussion in
the last administration of cuts up to 40 percent, which was
foolish and irresponsible. There have been discussions about
reductions in this administration. We are just saying we are
trying to maintain safety here, and it has not gotten any
cheaper.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Walker, North Carolina, Ranking Member.
Mr. Walker. Thank you all. Thanks to the panel again for
the very detailed testimony.
I would like to jump right into it with a question for each
witness, and I would like you to keep your responses to about
20 seconds, if possible, to provide an overview of how you
coordinate and share information with other jurisdictions to
improve Nation-wide counterterrorism efforts, of course to the
extent that you can. Could you just give us a brief overview?
We will start with Mr. Miller, Mr. Currao, and Mr. Klock.
Mr. Miller. Sure. We have the Shield Program, which has
20,000 members. That is the private-sector outreach. We have
the Sentry Program, which is designed specifically for other
law enforcement agencies. That has 275 members. It used to be
the doughnut around New York City, but now it extends all the
way up and down both coasts and as far west as Texas and
California. We have our foreign liaisons, which, of course,
brings it out to the world.
We are in a constant cycle of exchange of information.
Mr. Walker. OK, good enough.
Mr. Currao.
Mr. Currao. I would have to give as our primary example our
watch line. It is a weekly intelligence product. It is 1 page.
It is developed for the fire service and emergency medical and
first responder community. It goes across the Nation. It has an
estimated readership of tens of thousands. It also goes to 9
countries. We have a lot of particular partners like the London
Fire Brigade, Australia. So that is one of our primary methods
of sharing intelligence, one of many.
Mr. Walker. Thank you very much.
Mr. Klock.
Mr. Klock. Thank you. I will be brief.
We have our Criminal Investigation Bureau personnel that
scour intelligence from around the world to look for certain
commonalities that have to do with aviation, rail, ports, and
what they will then do is look for certain trends, and this
really comes with the help of everyone here at the table. They
will take that information, disseminate it out to every single
rank in the department so that they are aware when they go out
on patrol.
Mr. Walker. Mr. Miller, if we go back and think about the
West Side bike attack in October 2017, would you spend about 20
or 30 seconds and talk about lessons learned about preventing
and also responding to these types of attacks?
Mr. Miller. One of the key lessons of the bicycle attack
was the pre-operational surveillance done by the offender
there. We had had an incident in Times Square involving a non-
terrorist incident where a number of people were run over on
the street. We did a renewed program of putting bollards,
Jersey barriers, and other things to block key sidewalks at
symbolic targets all over the city. The bicycle path was one of
those places that had not been considered for that. So if you
look at that today, it is locked down so that a car cannot
enter, as are many places since.
Mr. Walker. Some of my closest friends back in Greensboro
are Rabbi Fred Gitman and Rabbi Andy Corrin, wonderful people.
I remember in 2017 when there were hundreds of bomb threats
directed to the Jewish community. They were later, thank
goodness, determined to be hoaxes.
In the midst of this situation, however, obviously there is
a real need to share information and coordinate--I was a pastor
for 16 years--to coordinate with religious communities. A lot
of these churches and synagogues and temples and mosques, they
never really put together a security team. I was at two mega-
churches. They had a little bit of a service.
Mr. Klock, would you mind taking that? I may come back to
Mr. Miller as well. How do we communicate? How do we set up
something to make sure that, from your perspective, these
religious institutions are better protected?
Mr. Klock. Sir, I am going to have to defer to my partners
here because our operating environment has very little to do
with religious communities. What we do is take the information
that we learned from lessons from around the world and truly
apply them to our facilities. But with respect to reaching out
and touching the various religious facilities, we do not have
much interaction.
Mr. Walker. With 45 seconds, let's split it between the two
gentlemen here, if we could, please.
Mr. Currao. So one of the things that we do is we employ a
red team analysis, and we have been doing this at sensitive
locations throughout the city. My team, my intelligence
division from the Center for Terrorism, will go out and
actually look at an occupancy through the eyes of the
perpetrator. We will develop a scenario, and we will exercise
that scenario.
Mr. Walker. Are you getting that information to the
religious institution at some point?
Mr. Currao. Well, we have not done a religious institution
yet. We just recently did the Atlantic Terminal. But we do work
with our private-sector partners the whole way. They are
actually in the exercise, and the lessons learned are
immediately applicable to any changes.
Mr. Walker. With a few seconds left, Mr. Miller, would you
wrap it up?
Mr. Miller. Sure. We did three important things. One, we
looked at the threats and determined that myriad calls saying
that there was a bomb there, that it was going to go off in an
hour and there were threats and demands, was clearly not a real
threat. It was designed to scare, to cause disruption and
panic.
So we did conference calls with religious institutions and
said the threat here is not really of a bomb. The threat here
is to disrupt your daily activities. Here are the procedures to
go look, and we recommended that they stop doing full-on
evacuations and closures where there was not additional
information except threats that fit into this fake pattern.
The other thing we did was a very competent investigation
with the JTTF, which led to the identification of one of the
people making the threats, and ultimately a person in a foreign
country who was arrested and charged.
Mr. Walker. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair will now recognize other Members for questions
they may wish to ask the witnesses. In accordance with our
committee rules, I will recognize Members who were present at
the start of the hearing based on seniority on the committee,
alternating between Majority and Minority. Those Members coming
in later will be recognized in order of their arrival.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from New
Jersey, Mr. Pascrell.
Mr. Pascrell. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for
inviting me to today's field hearing.
We truly have three patriots--and I am not blowing smoke, I
mean it--in front of us today who are witnesses. We know the
background and we know what they have contributed.
I have had the honor to work in this field for a long time
with my good brother Peter King. We worked together on homeland
security. As an original and founding Member of the Homeland
Security Committee and co-chair of the Congressional Law
Enforcement, Congressional Fire Services caucus, I am glad the
committee remains focused on local efforts to counter this
enduring threat.
We will support our first responders because they are on
the front lines every day keeping us safe. That is clear. That
is a given. There is no equivocation whatsoever.
But, you know, I strongly oppose efforts in Washington--
let's get down to the nitty-gritty here--of this administration
to cut over $600 million in Federal funds for counterterrorism
programs, equipment, and training at the State and local level.
For the second year in a row, they have tried to cut nearly
$200 million from the State homeland security grant program,
over $200 million from the Urban Area Security Initiative, the
center part of what we do; over $100 million from
transportation and port security grants. These cuts are
outrageous.
We are pretty good in the Congress at talking out of both
sides of our mouths, I know. We train for it. But this is
absurd, unacceptable, and I think that the Chairman of this
subcommittee within Homeland Security is doing all of us a
great favor by letting some fresh air in and some light.
I had a question, Mr. Miller, for you. Domestic terrorism
in the United States, motivated by right-wing ideologies, has
grown precipitously in the last decade. According to a recent
analysis which I read, between 2010 and 2017 right-wing
terrorists committed a third of all acts of terrorism in the
United States--that is 92 out of 263--more even than Islamist
terrorists, 38 out of 263.
Given this information, has the New York City Police
Department included domestic terrorism, and has this shift been
both at the analytical as well as the operational end of what
we deal with day in and day out? Can I have your response to
that, sir?
Mr. Miller. We too have seen the increase in the pitch and
tone of the vitriol on-line, as well as the attacks across the
Nation. We are ideologically agnostic, meaning the team, a
significant team that includes Bill Sweeney, the assistant
director of the New York Office of the FBI; Brian Parman, the
Special Agent in Charge of the JTTF--that is over 500 people
that do this day and night. Add to that 2,000 people from the
NYPD. So we have no shortage of people to focus on this. But we
focus on the act, the actions, the plots, and the plans
regardless of what the cause is.
So as we have seen the increase around the country, we have
intensified our gaze in terms of the analysis, the people
looking at it and searching for any right-wing terrorism here.
As was discussed in testimony earlier today, we had an
individual come up from Baltimore and commit a homicide with a
racial motive purely because New York is the media capital of
the world. We get that. We have not seen the giant uptick in
activity here in New York, but we are watching for it. We
obviously had the spate of pipe bombs in October. We had an
individual who walked into St. Patrick's Cathedral 2 weeks ago
with 5 gallons of gasoline.
So we are keenly aware of this, and our resources shift
with the threat. With the pipe bomb case that went on in
Manhattan, which brought the city almost into a crisis as it
unfolded over the course of a week, there was no
counterterrorism resource that was spared or not focused on
that, again regardless of ideology. It was not about the
ideology, it was about the terrorism.
Mr. Pascrell. As you know, that part of Homeland Security
has basically been shut down by this administration in terms of
domestic terrorism. It does not make any sense to me. Perhaps I
am missing something.
Mr. Miller. We asked about that specifically, and what we
were told is that the same people are doing the same jobs but
they were shifted around in a reorganization. Regardless of
that, though, our effort remains laser focused on any plot or
any threat to the safety of New Yorkers based on any kind of
terrorism.
One thing I would put forward to this committee in terms of
that is there are designated foreign terrorist organizations.
We live in a country with a Constitution and a First Amendment,
and it would be very difficult to figure out what is a
designated domestic terrorist organization, what does that look
like here. However, I do believe it would be helpful to have a
domestic terrorism statute where no matter what the cause was
or what the organization was, or whether it was made up or
real, that the individual who went to carry out something that
would be designated or defined under that statute as a
terrorist act, regardless of cause, could be charged with
terrorist enhancements that went beyond the simple gun charge
or the simple conspiracy charge. Remember, if an individual has
a machine gun and plans to do something for ISIS as a
designated foreign terrorist organization, they are facing
telephone-book-level sentencing in Federal court. If the same
person for a domestic terrorist agenda does the same thing, it
may be a conspiracy to commit a crime that did not happen with
a legally registered weapon. We need help there.
Mr. Pascrell. One quick last question if I may, Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Rose. Yes, you are the boss.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Pascrell. Let me ask you this question. Did you get a
chance to read--it was made public in 2009--the domestic
terrorism report that was provided to the Congress of the
United States in the Obama administration? With a great amount
of pressure from certain organizations, they deep-sixed it
under Secretary Napolitano. Are you familiar with that
document?
Mr. Miller. As I sit here, I am not familiar with that
specific document. In 2009, I was somewhere between the FBI and
the DNI.
Mr. Pascrell. It was started under the Bush administration,
and they deep-sixed it in 2009.
Mr. Miller. I could not respond to that specifically.
Mr. Pascrell. I recommend that we all read that because it
has pertinence today.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, our
neighbor here on Staten Island, Peter King. Also, on behalf of
the committee, I thank you for your long-time service to this
committee and your support for New York.
Mr. King. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate that very much.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here. In my
district we lost over 150 friends, neighbors, constituents on
9/11, and along with Staten Island it is probably the largest
number of victims. So this is a very close personal issue to
me.
I would just say to my good friend Mr. Pascrell, one of the
reasons we have been successful is this has not been a partisan
issue. The fact is the biggest cuts of all were made by the
Obama administration, and we restored them. Last year the Trump
administration made indefensible cuts; they were restored. This
year if there are more indefensible cuts, they will also be
restored. So to me, there have been good guys and bad guys on
both sides. There was a 40 percent cut under the Obama
administration, which would have decimated. Last year's cuts by
the President would have been devastating, and this year's will
as well. So I think it is important that Congress work together
in a bipartisan way and stand together, not as Republicans and
Democrats but as Americans, to make sure that this works.
I would ask Mr. Miller--again, we are running low on time
here--can you tell us the significance if we did not have a T-
Band?
Mr. Miller. In the communications realm?
Mr. King. Yes, yes.
Mr. Miller. This is the bandwidth we are using to transmit
video and data. It would be extraordinarily, extraordinarily
damaging. Right now, the radio frequency band is full, but the
way the data transmits, particularly stuff that is essential
today--video, photographs, and things that take up a lot of
bandwidth--without T-Band, there is no way to move it
efficiently in the public safety realm. It is essential.
Mr. King. Chief, I know the Fire Department has a real
anxiety over this.
Mr. Currao. Absolutely. Our radio infrastructure, our
innovations, are really built on that, and to lose that band
would be detrimental. It would be very, very difficult and
would have a severe impact on our operations.
Mr. King. Superintendent Klock.
Mr. Klock. Sir, the same would hold true with the Port
Authority. Thank you.
Mr. King. John Miller, obviously there is tremendous
cooperation at this table. I think all of that has improved
since 9/11. Between the NYPD and the FBI, what is the status
now of that cooperation?
Mr. Miller. I was around when they formed the Joint
Terrorism Task Force in 1980, and I have seen the levels of
cooperation between the FBI and the NYPD ebb and flow over the
years. I can say with extraordinary confidence that the
relationship between the FBI and the NYPD, all the way from FBI
headquarters to the JTTF in New York, has never been closer or
literally more seamless. We talk multiple times every day on
the phone back and forth between the leadership, and given the
number of our people embedded there, 120, we are literally, the
NYPD, part of the fabric of the JTTF, not just a participant.
Mr. King. So you and Bill Sweeney get along very well?
Mr. Miller. Bill Sweeney and I, Brian Parman and I, the
ASACs, it has never been closer. That is not to say that there
is not some disagreement that comes up twice a month over some
strategy or some case. The difference is at the end of the
meeting or the end of the phone call, that is settled amicably.
We choose a way to go together and we go that way, and you do
not read about it in the newspaper.
Mr. King. Chief, I was going to ask you about fire as a
weapon, Mumbai being an example. Before that, just to let you
know, this Saturday they are naming a street after John Vigiano
in Deer Park. For those of you who may not know, he was a hero
firefighter. He lost two sons in 9/11, one a cop, one a
firefighter. Anyway, that will be, I think, 11 o'clock Saturday
morning. Saturday? Sunday morning--Saturday morning.
In any event, can you tell what kind of training is done
using Mumbai as a base and that type of thing, using fire as a
weapon? Your coordination with the police and the other forces.
Mr. Currao. Absolutely. Fire and smoke as a weapon, it is
one of our most challenging coordination pieces. We have a
draft document that we co-wrote with the NYPD. It is a draft
right now. It is a very complicated issue because in order to
deal with something like fire and smoke as a weapon as part of
a complex attack, our missions are intertwined, so we have to
answer a lot of questions about how do we do that effectively
and safely for our personnel. So we have to control the fire,
we have to get our emergency medical personnel up into those
areas, rapidly triage and treat. That is a direct take-off from
what we are doing right now with our rescue task forces and
what we call tactical emergency casualty care. We learned a lot
from the military, and it has helped both our agencies to be
able to save lives.
In terms of fire protection, we are looking at different
ways to be able to apply water from different locations in
order to be able to, if we can, use the fire protection systems
within the building. We have actually done extensive testing if
they attack our fire prevention systems with explosives, how to
seal those systems so they still work, and we are still looking
at research at how we can do it with an integrated, coordinated
team.
Mr. King. If they are firing weapons at you, you can work
with the NYPD on this?
Mr. Currao. That is what we are----
Mr. King. It is fire and guns, is what we are basically
talking about.
Mr. Miller. It is very complicated. We took one of the
tallest skyscrapers in New York City, and we did a 2-day drill
that kind of tested the theory of what is firefighting by
remote control, what is firefighting up close, what does force
protection look like where you have firefighters in a place
where there may be terrorists or active shooters or explosives
and you have police officers who are not used to working in a
fire environment. This is something we worked on for a long
time since that day, and I think we are fairly advanced at it.
It is not complete because of the layers, but we have taken
enormous strides.
Mr. King. Thank you all for your testimony.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
Brooklyn, my friend, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me thank
our Ranking Member Walker for convening today's field hearing.
In Congress, I am proud to represent New York's 9th
Congressional District, otherwise known as Brooklyn, and I
could not be more excited to be here on Staten Island with my
colleague, Congressman Max Rose.
I would like to thank you, our witnesses, for your
testimony here today and for your years of dedicated public
service to New York and New Jersey and, of course, to our
Nation.
New York City embodies the innovation, dynamism, and
diversity that make our country special, and that is why it is
the No. 1 terrorist target in the world. A strike on our city
is an attack on the values we hold dear as Americans.
I can remember both the 1993 terrorist attack as well as 9/
11 as though it was yesterday, my father being a Port Authority
retiree, not only the horror of watching the Towers fall but
the bravery of our first responders who risked it all in
service to others. We each owe a debt of gratitude to these
heroes, and I am honored to have witnesses from the NYPD, the
FDNY, and the Port Authority Police here with us today.
Sadly, terrorism has become a multi-headed demon and
remains an all-too-real threat for our communities. I believe
that Donald Trump's approach to foreign policy is deeply
concerning, particularly the recklessness with which we have
gone about seeking our policy positions, and I believe it has
also generated a new generation of ISIS fighters, while here at
home I believe his rhetoric has sparked a deadly wave of white
supremacist attacks.
Every day, New Yorkers go about their lives riding our
subways, visiting houses of worship, not knowing when or where
terror will strike next.
We cannot give in to fear; we must confront it. Today's
hearing is about giving our local first responders the tools
and Federal assistance they need to keep our city and our
region safe. We have made great strides since 9/11, but we
still have much work to do, from improving information sharing
to enhancing security of our transportation networks.
Meanwhile, we must also prepare for emerging threats such as
cyber terrorism, which require new approaches and increased
vigilance.
The Statue of Liberty is not just a symbol of our city. It
is an embodiment of the values that terrorists despise so
deeply. For those who seek to destroy and traffic in hate, our
city, filled with immigrants and entrepreneurs, represents a
perfect enemy.
I look forward to working with each of you to protect New
York, to defend our values, at minimum continuing a maintenance
of effort, at most trying to make sure you have all of the
resources you need to be an example for this Nation and to keep
us all safe.
So I want to start with you, Mr. Miller. You spoke in your
testimony about the traditional brick-and-mortar terror
infrastructures that have been replaced with websites, chat
rooms, and on-line manuals. So much of what is fueling
terrorist activity is web-based these days. Increasingly
nefarious activities are fueled by chatter on the web and
foreshadowed via social media.
In addition, we know that malicious actors are seeking to
tamper with our critical infrastructure, and ransomware has
begun to proliferate in the private sector. Likewise is the
threat of election tampering through our electronic voting
machines.
How equipped is the city of New York to defend us in the
cyber realm?
Mr. Miller. So, we have taken, Representative Clarke, giant
steps in the past--literally in the past 2 or 3 years that had
not existed before. One critical step was setting up the New
York City Cyber Command. That is different from DOIT, which is
the Department of Internet Technology. It is literally a
protection element within the city's government that looks
across all the city's networks. We traveled to Los Angeles,
where they had developed a similar although slightly different
structure, and we have confronted in a very new way, through a
task force approach, cyber threats where we have seen cyber
attacks, cyber infiltrations, cyber incidents, malware, where
the Cyber Command has been able to bring in the FBI, the NYPD
cyber people, DOIT and its experts.
Our cyber people, who are not on the law enforcement side,
they are on the 1's and 0's side, that has been a big step,
because we have seen it coming. We saw what happened in places
like Newark, where they suffered a ransomware attack that was
disabling. We saw what happened in Atlanta, where they lost
hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of equipment and
information, and we have changed our footing significantly.
That is in the cyber realm.
In the terrorism realm, we are constantly scanning across
the darkest corners of the internet, whether it is right-wing,
left-wing, Islamist. It has become a choose your own adventure
or, as one of my British colleagues at the Leadership and
Counterterrorism Conference called it last week, a terror salad
bar, where you can go from cause to cause and pick and choose,
but the weaponization of social media has been significant.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
We have time should any of the Members of the committee
like another round of questions.
I will just jump in very quickly.
Mr. Miller, I want to talk about a supremely local issue
but something that is incredibly important for the security of
New York City, and that is the relationship between the NYPD
and the National Park Service as it pertains to Floyd Bennett
Field. If you could just give us an update on how critical this
site is, what you are doing there, and what are the latest
aspects of your interactions with the National Park Service.
Mr. Miller. We have a long history at Floyd Bennett Field.
There was a time in the 1970's when the Federal Government
wanted to turn Floyd Bennett Field over to the city, and the
city was in dire economic straits at that point, trying to
avoid bankruptcy, and could not take the property on, which
looking back is a shame. It went to the National Park Service
as part of the Gateway National Area, and the NYPD maintains
its aviation bureau there. That is critical in a city of 8.6
million people over hundreds of square miles for the police
helicopter function.
It is more critical considering that the Coast Guard air
wing is now located up in Cape May in New Jersey and up in Cape
Cod, without much in between.
So the NYPD is the primary air/sea rescue element that is
going to get there first. Their facility is at Floyd Bennett
Field, the Special Operations Division of the NYPD. That is
emergency service, the strategic response command. It is the
people that we have that are medically trained. It is our
active-shooter people, they are at Floyd Bennett Field. The
driver training program is at Floyd Bennett Field operating on
what used to be runways. It is a piece of the NYPD's critical
infrastructure.
Our history with the U.S. Park Service there has been
friendly and cordial. We have always had open discussions. But
where we have asked to maintain facilities that are falling
down, legacy facilities that we moved into and occupy, where we
have asked to make improvements to create other structures,
like an active-shooter simulation training place, a shoot
house, if you will, where we have asked to repair things that
are falling down or rusting, we have gotten very cordial
discussions but ultimately, in every case, been mired in
bureaucracy that has not allowed us to go forward.
So we have an aging, borrowed, and failing infrastructure
there that we would like to make improvements on because it is
essential to the most important operations of the NYPD.
Mr. Rose. So, let me get this straight, though. The
principal threat that we face in New York City today most
likely is that of a self-radicalized gunman of some type. Would
you agree with that?
Mr. Miller. I would agree with that. I would caveat that
with the idea that the lone wolf is our primary threat. We have
said that in our own assessment, which I can share with this
committee on a law enforcement-sensitive basis. But we also see
al-Qaeda in the shadows trying to rebound. I think if you look
at the Sri Lanka attacks from last week, what we saw was a
watershed moment for ISIS, which had been declared out of
business as a caliphate, as an infantry, and as a terrorist
group beyond propaganda the week before, and they managed to
launch a multi-layer, complex attack that killed hundreds of
people in targets that involved large amounts of explosives,
weapons, even a training camp that was uncovered in the last
few days.
So we face a multi-level threat, and SOD, the people who
occupy Floyd Bennett Field, are the very pointy edge of our
spear on that threat.
Mr. Rose. So this is a threat that is greater now than
ever, and the National Park Service will not allow you to build
a complex to suitably respond to a myriad of different threats.
Mr. Miller. They never say no, and we never get to yes. I
worked in Washington for 7 years. It could use some help. It
needs some fixing.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I think I speak for the committee when
I say that that is horrifying, and we are going to work our
hardest--and please, anyone, disagree with me, if you like. We
are going to work our hardest to fix that and make sure that
New York City is prepared to defend itself.
Mr. Miller. On behalf of the Police Commissioner of the
city of New York, we appreciate it. We find it very
frustrating.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
We now recognize again Mr. Walker, the Ranking Member from
North Carolina, and we thank you so much again for supporting
New York.
Mr. Walker. Well, New York sets the example as far as
security, counterintelligence, and I am happy to be here again
today.
One of the areas that we have not talked about at all is
cyber terrorism. Without making a mistake again as far as which
one of you--I think maybe Mr. Miller is the one I would think
would want to address this.
Obviously, we get hit thousands of times per day by foreign
entities. We do not always know how much of that is state-
sponsored versus privately. What are you guys doing? What are
you worrying about a long-term attack from that perspective?
Would you mind giving us your thoughts in that area?
Mr. Miller. Our concerns--and these would be the concerns
of everybody across this table--are two things. One, that we
face the threat of terrorism and that we have systems and plans
and kind of a push-button effect of when the bell rings, we are
all ready to go and we know exactly what we are going to do.
The threat behind the threat is if a state actor--and remember,
the U.S. Government just recently designated an Iranian
military entity, the IRGC, as a designated foreign terrorist
organization. It shows a state-funded and state-level military
capability aimed at attacking cities like New York. Hezbollah
is a client terrorist organization of Iran.
We have seen a dramatic uptick in our ability to uncover
Hezbollah activity in New York City examining targets that
include the airport, the Federal buildings, critical
infrastructure, transit, and to document those. The only reason
that these Hezbollah operatives have been given to document
those is to develop target folders for future attacks. We have
seen that in Hezbollah's habits in the past, going back to
1995.
But if you had that attack that occurred on that day,
whether it was the lone wolf, multiple lone wolves, an ISIS
cell as we saw in Sri Lanka, a state actor like Iran, and the
systems that you use to support the response to that, your 9-1-
1 system, your radio systems, your digital systems that are
connected to the internet, were attacked either prior to that
or simultaneously, as we have seen hospital systems go down,
communications systems go down, Government record systems go
down, that would be a devastating scenario.
That is why we have begun in the past 2 or 3 years to
invest so much more in cyber protection of not the banks--they
have their own protection. It is about losing millions and
millions and millions of dollars. We get that. But our focus
has been on protecting what protects us, and that has been the
cyber element of critical infrastructure. That is reservoirs,
hospitals, emergency response systems.
Mr. Walker. I have often thought if you cannot communicate
in a crisis like that, you are opening yourselves up for mass
chaos, and I think that is why we also, with some of the hard
assets--and we have done a great job of hearing this today.
Cyber terrorism is something that I am glad to hear that you
guys continue to be focused on that.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
We now recognize for a second round, Ms. Clarke from New
York.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
This question is for Mr. Klock. The Port Authority is
responsible for some of our region's most important and
critical infrastructure such as the Hudson River, tunnels and
bridges, as well as each of our city's major airports. These
are not only among the most significant terrorist targets in
our Nation, if not the world, but the screening that occurs at
these sites determines whether hazardous materials will make
their way into the rest of our city.
For many years, we have understood the risk of a bomb
detonating in a tunnel or on a bridge, or even on an airplane
or on a PATH subway car that you operate. However, terrorists
are increasingly turning to technology to further their aims,
and we must be prepared for the day that terrorists attempt to
hack a PATH train, commandeer it, derail it, turn it into some
sort of moving missile.
Can you discuss your efforts to bolster cybersecurity at
the Port Authority?
Mr. Klock. Yes, ma'am. That is a very dynamic question, and
I would have to, in all likelihood, defer to some of our
experts in the department when it comes to that. Not to skirt
the issue or the question, but I know Mr. Miller would have a
much better answer than myself.
It is a concern. It is something we live with every day.
From the patrol perspective, every single officer that is out
there has their eyes on a swivel, and they are looking for any
anomalies that go on out there that would possibly springboard
into this type of activity.
But with respect to the cyber component, I am going to have
to defer, if you do not mind, Mr. Miller, if you could touch on
that on our behalf, please.
Mr. Miller. Representative Clarke, the key for us has been
developing the Critical Infrastructure Working Group. This had
never been done before, only because the need was nascent and
we had not figured each other out. But that is chaired by the
NYPD's cyber people and the Manhattan District Attorney's
Office where you get Con Ed, Department of Environmental
Protection, Port Authority, Verizon, AT&T. It is a big table,
but it is everything you do not want to break when the city
needs it--communications, water, health, emergency responders.
The Port Authority is a piece of that, and what we do is we put
all the threat information on the table, we talk about our
shared experiences and what fixes we have in place, and we try
to make sure that the system is not dependent on the weakest
link in the chain, and that has been an incredibly important
community, not just to exchange threat information but also
best practices, and also to do drills. This has been done at
the IBM lab, where you can do a tabletop, where you can
actually make computer systems fail and have other systems
break and then have to make critical decisions, where all of
the players have seen what would happen if multiple systems
failed.
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Miller, let me ask you, with the proposed
budgetary cuts, do you see there being some challenge to
continuing to maintain that type of a task force working group
and maintaining a robust, forward-leaning set-up so that you
can continue to look at these threats as they evolve? Because
as soon as we practice on one means of being able to address a
threat, there is someone else working on a threat we have not
thought about.
Mr. Miller. The cyber realm, the terrorism realm, is a most
dynamic threat realm----
Ms. Clarke. Absolutely.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. In that it is adaptive and it is
resilient. The cyber realm moves at the speed of technology.
Nothing is faster than that. So if you have a completely
effective meeting on cyber threats, 2 weeks later those threats
may all be different. So the structured funding we get in
significant amounts is for counterterrorism. In the cyber realm
we have not seen the significant funding that it would take to
build out these efforts, which we have done on our own on a
shoestring. We have been using forfeiture money from the
District Attorney's Office, as well as the NYPD's own funds,
and some of our partners, but this is not a fully-funded
effort. So when they are talking about cuts, we are going in
the wrong direction for something that is a burgeoning threat
if you look at the ransomware numbers or the latest cyber
numbers which talk about exponential increases in crime, in
victims, and in monetary losses.
Ms. Clarke. Very well.
Mr. Chairman, I would just like to take this opportunity to
suggest that we drill down on this even further and look at
ways in which we can alert the administration and perhaps
legislate in this space. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. Agreed. I could not agree more.
The Chair recognizes for 5 minutes the gentleman from Long
Island, Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would just discuss the mass transit. There are probably
millions of passengers every day in New York City, I guess over
1,000 entrances and exits to the stations, another 300,000 on
PATH, hundreds of thousands more on Long Island Railroad, Metro
North, Amtrak.
So I guess I would ask John and Superintendent Klock, Mr.
Miller and Superintendent Klock, how is the level of
cooperation on this? I am not looking for any details. I do not
want to let the enemy know what you are doing, but as far as
cooperation with yourself, the MTA Police, Port Authority
Police, and Amtrak Police too, for that matter.
Mr. Miller. We have a very coordinated cooperation with the
MTA, with the Transit Authority. As you know, within the NYPD
we have a transit bureau of thousands of police officers who
are focused on just that. We have 5.6 million people who come
through the subway system and who use the buses every day. From
a crime standpoint, we have roughly 1, 1.5 index crimes a day.
If it were a city of 5.6 million people with a single serious
crime a day, it would be a miracle. So it remains a very safe
system.
However, terrorists have shown--and I think all we have to
do is look back to the December 11 attack by Ullah in the Times
Square Station beneath the Port Authority, where the Port
Authority officers reached the scene very quickly and knew
exactly what to do. Some of them had been deployed in theater
and dealt with suicide bombers in the past with the National
Guard and the Reserves. Transit remains a fixation on the part
of terrorists because it is a multiple casualty target and it
is an economic target.
We stay focused with random deployments, and they are
random for a reason. We try to keep a level of unpredictability
of the people who do the explosive swabs, the explosive
detection dogs, the long-gun teams, that you see them here,
then you see them there, and we see them all over the system to
try and keep people who would be doing pre-operational
surveillance or assessment off balance.
MTA Police, great cooperation. Our transit bureau works
with them closely. Amtrak, great cooperation. New Jersey
Transit, which you would not assume we would be that close
with, we have one of their analysts who sits in our
intelligence bureau going over the threat material every day
and communicating back and forth. Port Authority, we talk all
the time between the Port Authority, the State Police, the
National Guard, about the threat picture at the airport. It is
a big focus.
Mr. King. What it reminded me of was the story about Zazi's
sentencing the other day. It reminded me of how close we came
to mass murder just 10 years ago.
Superintendent.
Mr. Klock. Sir, thank you again. If I can just echo what
Mr. Miller said, it is rock solid. As I mentioned in my opening
remarks, the team speaks, communicates, trains, operates, and
when the bell rings, everybody is together.
With respect to our sensitivity to transportation, we know
how vital it is to the region, and we know what would happen if
something cataclysmic occurred. Our world as we know it, not
just locally but around the world, would change dramatically.
That being said, everyone at the table here, as well as all the
other agencies that Mr. Miller mentioned, we are all hooked
hand-in-glove, and we get it. We share the intel, and it gets
all the way--I have said this before--it gets all the way down
to the cop on the beat because that is the one you want to have
a vested interest in this and know what is going on so that
they can spot this and take action immediately, like what
happened on 12/11 back in 2017.
So we are all together. We are. Thank you, sir.
Mr. King. Just on a personal note, if I can conclude, I
want to thank the Chairman, and also thank the Ranking Member,
who braved the language barrier and came here from North
Carolina.
[Laughter.]
Mr. King. You are doing pretty well, I have to say.
Mr. Walker. Thanks. I am getting translations.
[Laughter.]
Mr. King. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, sir.
Gentlemen, last call. Anything else that we can do to
support?
Mr. Miller. I think it would be very important most
particularly for this committee, if any, to spend a couple of
minutes talking about the threat from drones.
So, when we were last here on Staten Island talking to this
committee, and I know Representative King will remember this,
we talked about the need for a change in the law to have a law
enforcement carve-out to interfere with unmanned aircraft,
because prior to that, doing anything to interdict a drone, no
matter what it was carrying, would have been a Federal crime of
interfering with aviation.
Thankfully, and I thank this committee for listening and
bringing forth that message, we had legislation that came up in
the fall that gave authority and power to the Department of
Justice and the Department of Homeland Security to come to
major events and be able to detect and interdict any drone that
could pose a threat.
Since that time, of course, you know we go through a very
rapid season here. I know Yvette Clarke knows this better than
anybody, where we leap from the New York City Marathon that
goes right through your district over to the Thanksgiving Day
Parade and all the ancillary events that happen in the
boroughs, to the lighting of the Christmas Tree, to----
Mr. King. And hopefully the World Series.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. To the World Series, of course.
Those are very difficult events to police. You could throw in
the U.S. Tennis Open game. But these are things where you have
unmanned aircraft flying over heavy crowds, Times Square on New
Year's Eve.
The context is this. ISIS has used these drones in theater
to drop bombs, to attack U.S. forces, to attack U.S. targets.
Their propaganda that came up in their magazines over the fall
and Christmas season featured photographs of drones carrying
packages over New York City, saying ``We have a present coming
for you,'' over Paris and the Eiffel Tower, over other American
targets.
So I am not suggesting an idea that the terrorists have not
already figured out in theater or thought about for U.S. soil.
The FBI, which has the authority to detect and interfere with
drones, is not going to be able to be at every event across
this country. It is just not within their bandwidth, and they
have said no to us zero times when we have asked them for a
major event. But there are many smaller events where we need
this kind of protection.
We need to talk about taking the next step from the fine
legislation that was passed, which is a step in the right
direction but requires the approval of the Attorney General of
the United States to act against a weaponized drone and the
presence of Federal agencies. This is going to have to end up
in a place where the Congress finds a way, with the FAA and the
FCC, because we are talking about aircraft and we are talking
about radio signal, to grant authority to trained, specially-
trained and certified, let's say by the Federal Government,
specially-designated State and local law enforcement officers
who then will have access to the equipment to be able to go
over an event where they say there is going to be no drone
flights allowed over this event, New Year's Eve, Christmas,
what have you. The Super Bowl is a great example. And to be
able to interdict those.
Right now, if the FBI is not sitting there with us, and
there is no particular piece of equipment that works
effectively on its own--you need a suite of tools here--that
would require the help of DHS Science and Technology,
organizations like DARPA from Defense, to develop those tools.
Right now, we are not much further than we were before. We have
the advantage in New York of being the 800-pound gorilla who
can get the FBI Operational Technology Division to come up from
Quantico for a big event, but there are going to be plenty of
times when we need that coverage and it is not there.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for that. That is a scary prospect, and
it is something we have to seriously consider and figure out
how to fix this.
To conclude, I thank the witnesses for their testimony, and
the Members for their questions. The Members of the committee
may have additional questions for the witnesses, and we ask
that you respond expeditiously in writing to those questions.
Pursuant to Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Chairman Max Rose for John J. Miller
Question 1. The homeland security threat posed by ghost guns--
unregistered, untraceable firearms sold or assembled without a serial
number--presents a growing and metastasizing challenge for law
enforcement.
What is your agency doing to address the threat posed by ghost
guns?
Answer. Fortunately. New York City has not seen the numbers of
these untraceable guns that other jurisdictions such as California and
Nevada have but, as we often see in law enforcement, the epidemic seems
to be moving west to east. We began tracking the recovery of ghost guns
in the city as a separate category in 2017. We recovered 32 ghost guns
in 2017, 14 in 2018, and 21 so far this year. The sellers of unfinished
``80%'' receivers have effectively gamed the system. These receivers
can be easily machined into fully-functioning, untraceable weapons, and
you can find instructional videos right on YouTube. The only purpose I
can see for these guns to exist is to evade law enforcement. There is
legislation currently before the New York City Council, as well as the
New York State Assembly and Senate to ban ghost guns, which are net
positives, but this is a Nation-wide issue. Congress must act to stop
the supply of these guns.
Question 2. I have introduced a bill, the Homeland Security
Assessment of Terrorists' Use of Ghost Guns Act, to require the
Department of Homeland Security to conduct annual terrorism threat
assessments regarding the availability of ghost guns in furtherance of
an act of terrorism. This bill will require DHS to disseminate these
annual threat assessments to State, local, and Tribal law enforcement.
Will additional information from the Department of Homeland
Security regarding the threat posed by ghost guns assist your agency's
work in combating this growing homeland security threat?
Answer. Information is power in law enforcement. Any additional
intelligence would be invaluable to our mission of keeping dangerous
weapons out of criminals' hands. Our collaboration with DHS is on-going
and one of our most valuable assets. The work already being done by the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives to track the
proliferation of these weapons Nation-wide is a valuable tool for the
NYPD to anticipate the inevitable influx of these weapons into our
city. And as I previously testified, the NYPD's involvement in the
Joint Terrorism Task Force, the Federally-funded Domain Awareness
System, and the embedded DHS Intelligence Analyst at NYPD headquarters
enable us to share information in real time.
Questions From Chairman Max Rose for Thomas Currao
Question 1. The homeland security threat posed by ghost guns--
unregistered, untraceable firearms sold or assembled without a serial
number--presents a growing and metastasizing challenge for law
enforcement.
What is your agency doing to address the threat posed by ghost
guns?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. I have introduced a bill, the Homeland Security
Assessment of Terrorists' Use of Ghost Guns Act, to require the
Department of Homeland Security to conduct annual terrorism threat
assessments regarding the availability of ghost guns in furtherance of
an act of terrorism. This bill will require DHS to disseminate these
annual threat assessments to State, local, and Tribal law enforcement.
Will additional information from the Department of Homeland
Security regarding the threat posed by ghost guns assist your agency's
work in combating this growing homeland security threat?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Max Rose for Louis P. Klock
Question 1. The homeland security threat posed by ghost guns--
unregistered, untraceable firearms sold or assembled without a serial
number--presents a growing and metastasizing challenge for law
enforcement.
What is your agency doing to address the threat posed by ghost
guns?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. I have introduced a bill, the Homeland Security
Assessment of Terrorists' Use of Ghost Guns Act, to require the
Department of Homeland Security to conduct annual terrorism threat
assessments regarding the availability of ghost guns in furtherance of
an act of terrorism. This bill will require DHS to disseminate these
annual threat assessments to State, local, and Tribal law enforcement.
Will additional information from the Department of Homeland
Security regarding the threat posed by ghost guns assist your agency's
work in combating this growing homeland security threat?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
[all]