- COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020
[Senate Hearing 116-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
COMMERCE, JUSTICE, SCIENCE, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2020
----------
TUESDAY, APRIL 2, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met at 2:00 p.m., in room SD-G50, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Jerry Moran (Chairman) presiding.
Present: Senators Moran, Murkowski, Collins, Boozman,
Capito, Shaheen, Reed, Coons, Schatz, Manchin, and Van Hollen.
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
STATEMENT OF HON. STEVEN DILLINGHAM, DIRECTOR, U.S.
CENSUS BUREAU
ACCOMPANIED BY:
HON. MICHAEL PLATT, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR LEGISLATIVE AND
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
HON. DAVID J. REDL, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION, ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
HON. NEIL JACOBS, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL OBSERVATION AND PREDICTION, PERFORMING THE
DUTIES OF UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR OCEANS AND
ATMOSPHERE
HON. JOHN FLEMING, M.D., ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
HENRY CHILDS, NATIONAL DIRECTOR, MINORITY BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
ADMINISTRATION
HON. GIL KAPLAN, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR INTERNATIONAL
TRADE
MATTHEW BORMAN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR EXPORT
ADMINISTRATION
HON. ANDREI IANCU, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY, DIRECTOR, U.S. PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE
HON. WALTER COPAN, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR STANDARDS
AND TECHNOLOGY, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS
AND TECHNOLOGY
opening statement of senator jerry moran
Senator Moran. The Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
Science, and Related Agencies will come to order. Thank you all
for joining us today.
And we have the opportunity, the burden of a vote at 2:15
p.m. We will see if we can accomplish that without recessing
the subcommittee. It depends upon who is here at the time that
that vote is called.
I am going to go ahead and give my opening statement. Then
we will turn to Senator Shaheen, and then we will begin the
questioning.
Good afternoon. Welcome to our first budget hearing of the
Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
Science, and Related Agencies for this fiscal year 2020.
I am pleased to welcome our panel of witnesses, who
represent a majority of the Department of Commerce's Bureaus
and the Secretary's Offices. If you all didn't know each other
until today, I am glad you have had the opportunity to get
acquainted.
My focus for today's hearing will be to better understand
the Commerce Department's top funding priorities and to
emphasize these programs and activities that are important to
our States, communities, and Nation. The Department of Commerce
executes a broad range of activities critical for our Nation,
which includes conducting a cost-effective and accurate
Decennial Census, working with distressed communities to
support economic growth, promoting and increasing trade and
investment for U.S. businesses, enforcing trade laws to ensure
that American businesses can compete on a level playing field,
and operating weather satellites and forecasting severe
weather, among many others.
The President's fiscal year 2020 request for the Department
of Commerce is $12.2 billion, which is $756 million above the
2019 enacted level, representing a 7 percent increase in the
Department's overall budget. This increase is due to--in
significant part is due to the $2.3 billion in additional
funding requested by the Census Bureau, as the agency prepares
for the 2020 Decennial Census.
Once every 10 years, the Bureau of the Census becomes the
largest budgetary component of the Department as they hire over
400,000 temporary workers to execute the mandated count of the
population of our Nation. And as of yesterday, we are now less
than 1 year away from when the Department will begin receiving
responses to the 2020 Census.
The Census provides vital data about our Nation that
directly impacts each State's representation in Congress, as
well as the distribution of billions in formula-based Federal
funding among States and localities.
The Department must ensure it meets its constitutional
mandate for the 2020 Census, and this subcommittee wants to be
assured that funding requested in fiscal year 2020 can
accomplish that task.
In addition to the Census, the Department of Commerce is
central to our Nation's continued economic growth, and the
Economic Development Administration, or EDA, is a critical
element of that work.
Just a few weeks ago, I was with EDA Assistant Secretary
John Fleming in my home State, and we visited Wichita State
University, where we were able to--I was able to witness the
importance of EDA's work firsthand.
EDA investments are critical for building and furthering
regional capacity and translating innovation into jobs.
Likewise, the National Institute of Standards and Technology's
Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program is strongly
supported in the business community as a positive example of a
nationwide public-private partnership that improves the
competitiveness of the domestic manufacturing industries.
Representing a rural State like I do, although it is very
multifaceted, I have strong support for these economic
development programs. Rather than choosing to eliminate these
opportunities, the Department of Commerce should be looking for
more ways to help States, localities, and industries address
their unique economic needs.
The Department of Commerce also has an important role to
play in maintaining U.S. leadership and long-term
competitiveness in technology and science. The National
Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST, is synonymous with
scientific and technological leadership and innovation.
While I am encouraged by the Department's efforts to
prioritize research and development for funding for the next-
generation technologies, like quantum science, artificial
intelligence, and microelectronics, I am also concerned about
what the proposed cuts to the NIST Scientific and Technical
Research and Services programs will mean for the United States'
long-term leadership in these areas. I look forward to hearing
more details on NIST's plans to increase research in next-
generation technologies while also preserving U.S. scientific
and technical leadership.
In recent months, natural disasters have occupied an
outsized share of headlines across our country, including the
Midwest, specifically Northeast Kansas in my State. Just last
week, I was there to tour disastrous flooding that has impacted
so many communities across the Midwest.
The Commerce Department, through the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, NOAA, is responsible for
understanding and predicting weather and water events and
enabling the protection of life and property through the
effective broadcasting of that information.
The recent spate of natural disasters has highlighted the
importance of this work and also the need to improve on our
ability to forecast and reduce impacts of weather and water
events, which I was glad to see is a component of the 2020
budget request.
I am interested to hear NOAA's plans for improving our
current weather prediction and modeling capabilities and how
the 2020 request will support those efforts. The Department
also oversees the Federal use of spectrum and manages broadband
grants through the NTIA, National Telecommunications and
Information Administration.
There is a concern in my home State and in States across
the country that communities are not fully able to access
broadband because they live in either underserved or unserved
areas. I am interested to hear how the Department is currently
working to address this problem and how the fiscal year 2020
request will further support efforts to understand where
broadband access is lacking in our Nation.
Lastly, the Department of Commerce also plays a significant
role in promoting global trade and enforcing our Nation's trade
policies. The trade-related work of the Department of Commerce
is of particular interest and importance to me and many on this
subcommittee. We focused a lot of attention on it over the last
year.
I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses from the
International Trade Administration and the Bureau of Industry
and Security about their resource needs for fiscal year 2020 to
address the increase in trade activities.
Furthermore, I want to convey the deep concern Kansas
businesses, farmers, and ranchers have shared with me regarding
retaliatory tariffs imposed on American agricultural products
in response to the Department's Section 232 enforcement
activities. My State is a major exporter, and our economy
relies upon the ability to sell products that we grow and
manufacture to consumers around the world.
I agree with sentiments that our Nation must be tougher in
enforcing our trade agreements. However, when enforcing trade
rules, we must be mindful of the negative impacts that
retaliation can have upon our domestic economy. Achieving this
balance will require continued congressional oversight,
including this subcommittee closely monitoring the funding
provided for trade activities and enforcement.
To all of the witnesses, I look forward to hearing your
views today and other matters that will come up during this
hearing.
And I am pleased to now turn to the Ranking Member, Senator
Shaheen, for her opening statement.
statement of senator jeanne shaheen
Senator Shaheen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you to each of the agency heads who appears before us
this afternoon.
I must say, however, that I am extremely disappointed that
the Secretary of Commerce decided not to join us today. As part
of the confirmation process, Secretary Ross agreed, and I
quote, ``to appear and testify before any duly constituted
committee of the Congress on such occasions as you may be
reasonably requested.''
But even after the subcommittee coordinated with his office
on his schedule, even after the Chairman contacted his office,
he has declined to appear to defend his Department's $12.2
billion budget request, to explain why he misled this
subcommittee last year regarding the origin of the citizenship
question, or to answer why the budget does not include funding
for the 2020 Census that he has told us was critical.
Article I, Section 9 of the Constitution designates the
Congress with the power of the purse, and we have a
responsibility to carry out our work in a timely fashion. So I
appreciate the Chairman's going ahead and proceeding with the
hearing. I appreciate all of your being here. But again, I
think it is unfortunate that the Secretary is not here with us
today.
The President's fiscal year 2020 budget request would
increase funding for the Department of Commerce by nearly $800
million, which is a 7 percent increase above the funding
provided in fiscal year 2019.
But we should not be fooled by that increase. The addition
of $2.3 billion for the 2020 Census masks deep cuts to
important Department of Commerce programs that Congress has
already roundly rejected on a bipartisan basis. For the third
year in a row, the President's budget proposes to eliminate the
Economic Development Administration that funds local
infrastructure projects, including last-mile broadband
investments. Communities in New Hampshire and around the
country desperately need these investments to remain
competitive in the 21st century.
It again seeks to eliminate the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership that helps our small- and medium-sized
manufacturers stay competitive, including understanding the
risks of cybersecurity. We also see a reprisal of the proposal
to eliminate more than $550 million in NOAA grant programs that
support our coastal economy and fisheries. This includes $10
million that remove a fee imposed upon New Hampshire fishermen
for At-Sea Monitoring, as well as funding for research related
to our groundfish and lobster fisheries.
Our groundfish fishermen and women in the Northeast have
been dealing with reduced catches for decades, and any
additional fees are likely to drive fishing businesses out of
business.
Now, we are all awaiting the Supreme Court's decision
regarding inclusion of the citizenship question in the 2020
Census. But we have already seen two judges rule that Secretary
Ross violated the law by including the question. With all the
controversy around the citizenship question, we also need to
consider if additional resources are necessary to ensure a fair
and accurate count, as mandated in the Constitution.
Unfortunately, the current budget request for the Census is $2
billion short of the amount the Secretary told this
subcommittee was needed for 2020 after completing his
Independent Cost Estimate, and it lacks the funding Secretary
Ross said was necessary to ensure the Department has funds when
they need them to address technical or natural disasters.
Now I very much appreciate the role that the Department
plays in enforcing our trade laws and leveling the playing
field for U.S. workers by holding foreign companies accountable
when they skirt our laws. But I am concerned about this
administration's desire to implement tariffs on our allies
under the guise of national security.
Increasing tariffs on Canada and the European Union does
not improve our national security, and it certainly doesn't
benefit American businesses. Further, this administration's
trade war has done nothing to reduce our trade deficit with
China. In fact, in 2018, we had the highest-ever trade deficit
with China.
The Chairman and I have worked to ensure that the fiscal
year 2019 omnibus includes sufficient funding to carry out the
exclusion request process for the steel and aluminum tariffs,
but I am concerned about the levy of additional tariffs under
Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, especially on
cars and auto parts. If the administration were really
concerned about trade deficits, it would focus on increasing
exports of our small- and medium-sized businesses.
As Governor, I led New Hampshire's first trade mission
outside of North America. I have seen what a difference trade
promotion makes for businesses in New Hampshire and across the
country. And yet the budget again severely cuts our U.S. and
Foreign Commercial Service.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think it is clear that we have a lot to
discuss today, and I hope that even though the Secretary has
been unwilling to appear today, that he will hear the comments
from this hearing.
Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator Shaheen, thank you very much for
your remarks.
And we have received written testimony from the Secretary--
from Secretary Ross, which will be included in the record in
its entirety.
[The statement follows:]
Prepared Statement on Behalf of Secretary Wilbur Ross and Deputy
Secretary Karen Dunn Kelley
Chairman Moran, Vice Chair Shaheen, and Members of the Senate
Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science and Related
Agencies, thank you for this opportunity to discuss President Trump's
fiscal year 2020 budget request for the U.S. Department of Commerce.
We appreciate your continued leadership in propelling the American
economy forward and ensuring our national security. You help us achieve
our mission of creating a platform of economic growth and opportunity.
We extend our heartfelt thanks for your ongoing support.
Under the Secretary's stewardship, our requested resource
allocations in the fiscal year 2020 budget are centrally focused on
helping American businesses and industries compete globally while
improving the economic conditions and everyday lives of the American
people.
The fiscal year 2020 budget request for the Department of Commerce
is $12.2 billion, which represents an increase of approximately $766
million from the fiscal year 2019 enacted level.
We seek to sustain the Nation's economic successes by carrying
forward key strategic investments from fiscal year 2019 and introducing
new initiatives that are critical for creating the conditions for
further economic growth and opportunities for all Americans. This will
further advance our Nation's position as a global economic powerhouse
and the industries that collectively serve as the economic engine here
in the United States and abroad.
The fiscal year 2020 budget represents the administration's
diligent effort to assess the Department's programs.
As a result, the budget balances our ongoing commitments to protect
the Department's mission critical programs while demonstrating fiscal
responsibility to the Nation's taxpayers, which is in adherence to the
President's directive to make every taxpayer dollar stretch as far as
possible.
The Department's leadership team remains steadfast in accomplishing
our strategic initiatives and core competencies: accelerating American
leadership; enhancing job creation; strengthening U.S. and National
Security; fulfilling Constitutional requirements and supporting
economic activity; and delivering customer-centric service excellence.
In addition, the Department will continue investment and job
creation; preparing for and executing a successful 2020 Decennial
Census; bolstering trade enforcement and export controls to combat
unfair trade practices; supporting research and development in cutting
edge technologies; and providing the observational infrastructure and
personnel to develop timely and accurate weather forecasts.
All of the various missions the Department undertakes to benefit
the Nation's taxpayers are important. However, with finite resources
difficult trade-offs have to be made. In order to preserve our core
missions, significant reductions and eliminations are recommended.
These are primarily in areas of lower priority where we believe another
State, local, or private-sector entity can better provide these
services or administrative functions.
conducting a complete and accurate decennial census
The budget provides $6.1 billion, an increase of more than $2.3
billion from the fiscal year 2019 enacted level, for the U.S. Census
Bureau operations. The budget supports the execution of the 2020 Census
at $6.4 billion in fiscal year 2020 through a combination of $5.3
billion in new appropriations and over $1 billion in available balances
that were appropriated in prior years.
The decennial census is a constitutional requirement and the
Department's highest priority in 2020. This funding will support the
Census Bureau launching of major efforts to count all the residents of
the United States, including self-response operations that will begin
in March 2020 with Internet, telephone, and paper options available for
the entire populace.
In 2020, the systems and operations that form the backbone of the
most automated and high-tech decennial census in history will be
reaching the final phases of integration, testing, and security checks
before being deployed in the field. The field offices and other
nationwide field infrastructure will be opened and operational, and
intense nationwide recruitment and onboarding of hundreds of thousands
of field staff will be well underway.
The advertising campaign and the partnership program will be
operating at peak intensity to get the word out about the census and
help maximize self-response to minimize the far costlier in-person
visits to non-responding households. These operations are essential to
conducting a modern, efficient, and accurate 2020 decennial census.
An accurate decennial census is imperative because of the important
role this data plays in shaping the political landscape and informing
the policy-making process. Most importantly, the decennial census
underpins the apportionment of seats in the House of Representatives
allocated to the States.
In addition, census data is used by governmental entities at the
State and local levels for defining the representative boundaries for
congressional districts, State legislative districts, school districts,
and voting precincts, and in the annual distribution of over $675
billion of Federal funds by various departments and agencies.
combating unfair trade practices
To support the administration's aggressive approach to a global
market that allows U.S. businesses to compete fairly, the budget
provides $460 million for the International Trade Administration (ITA).
The budget will help ITA's enforcement and compliance program level the
playing field for U.S. business by establishing a dedicated team to
investigate allegations of circumvention and duty evasion following
antidumping and countervailing duty investigations.
The budget supports the modernization of the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States (CFIUS) to implement the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA). The budget adds $2.9
million for ITA to implement FIRRMA and $3.3 million to increase the
core competencies and sectoral expertise within the Industry and
Analysis business unit. These investments will increase the analytical
skills and sectoral intelligence available to senior leadership when
considering complex trade issues, including cases under the new CFIUS
regime.
The budget supports conducting necessary additional investigations
under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, including $3.0
million within ITA for ongoing support of the current, and any future,
efforts to process requests for exclusion from tariffs imposed under
Section 232.
The fiscal year 2020 budget also supports $127 million for the
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS). This funding will augment the
bureau's efforts to curtail illegal exports of sensitive products and
technologies while facilitating secure trade with U.S. allies and close
partners.
It provides $2.5 million for BIS's role in the implementation of
the Export Control Reform Act of 2018, including for carrying out
expanded enforcement responsibilities, and $1.5 million for BIS's role
in the implementation of FIRRMA.
sustaining satellites and vessels
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) fiscal
year 2020 budget of $4.5 billion prioritizes core government functions
that promote national security and public safety and foster economic
opportunity.
This budget supports the necessary activities of sustaining current
weather satellites to provide vital forecast information for
significant weather events and supporting ongoing vessel and aircraft
fleet recapitalization efforts. This budget supports the continued
development of the NOAA satellite Geostationary and Polar
constellations that provide vital forecast information for significant
weather events.
As part of NOAA's fiscal year 2020 request, the budget provides
$755 million for NOAA's combined Polar Weather Satellites, allowing for
a combined program with more efficient management and lower overall
program cost while providing resources necessary to ensure continuity
in the Polar orbit.
It also provides $304 million for continued development of the
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites-R series program,
ensuring constellation continuity in the Geostationary orbit.
Additionally, this budget includes several new initiatives that support
the development of NOAA's future satellite capabilities, as well as
positioning NOAA to take advantage of opportunities to procure
observational data from commercial vendors.
Finally, this NOAA budget supports: maintaining National Weather
Service forecasting capabilities while promoting efficient and
effective operations; continuing to rebuild fisheries and promote
aquaculture development; recapitalizing the NOAA fleet to continue at-
sea data collection; and fostering safe and efficient marine and
coastal navigation.
helping american businesses prosper
The budget includes $108 million to support the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) fulfilling its mission to preserve the timeliness,
relevance and accuracy of the many key economic indicators and related
data that it produces in an objective and cost-effective manner.
In 2020, BEA will produce annual gross domestic product statistics
for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico pursuant to recommendations from
the Congressional Task Force on Economic Growth in Puerto Rico. BEA
will also assist in the development of a data service framework, as
called for in the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018 and in alignment with the Federal Data Strategy, focused on
modernizing data collection, analysis and dissemination. BEA will
partner with Census to leverage data through support research.
The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) seeks
authority to spend fee collections of $3.451 billion. The USPTO
continues to fulfill its mission by fully supporting the strategic and
management priorities of issuing reliable and predictable intellectual
property (IP) rights; shortening patent application pendency; enhancing
patent administrative appeal and post-grant processes; fine tuning
trademark operations; conducting outreach, education and engagement
both domestically and internationally; promoting and protecting patent
and trademark IP rights; and investing in information technology
stabilization and modernization.
Minority-owned businesses face unique challenges in obtaining the
capital and support necessary to start and operate businesses. The
Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA) is solely dedicated to
addressing these challenges and helping minority businesses thrive.
To further this mission, the budget proposes $10 million to refocus
the operations of MBDA as a policy office that is positioned to
advocate for minority businesses across all Federal programs. The
fiscal year 2020 will begin the drawdown of business centers operations
in six regions, as they are duplicative of programs operated by other
Federal agencies.
supporting research and development of critical technologies
With a request of $688 million, the fiscal year 2020 budget
supports the National Institute of Standards and Technology's (NIST)
mission to promote U.S. innovation and industrial competitiveness by
advancing measurement science, standards, and technology in ways that
enhance economic security and improve our quality of life.
These programs encompass advanced manufacturing and material
measurements; quantum science, engineering, and metrology; and
artificial intelligence. Fiscal year 2020 funding also enables NIST to
improve cybersecurity and privacy and includes support for the
Manufacturing USA initiative and the National Institute for Innovation
in Manufacturing Biopharmaceuticals.
While the budget reduces overall research funding compared to the
fiscal year 2019 enacted, it includes targeted increases for quantum
science to prioritize efforts to establish and support an industry
consortium to accelerate quantum-related research and applications and
an increase for artificial intelligence (AI) to expand ongoing research
and metrology efforts to promote the adoption of AI technologies into
the marketplace.
The budget continues to support the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration (NTIA) in representing the United States'
interests at multi-stakeholder forums on Internet governance and
digital commerce with a $42 million request. The budget supports the
commercial sector's development of next-generation wireless services,
including 5G and the Internet of Things, by funding NTIA's mission of
evaluating and ensuring the most efficient use of spectrum resources by
government users. Ensuring adequate access to scarce spectrum resources
by both the commercial and government sectors is a crucial factor for
economic growth and national security.
advancing american leadership in commercial space
The fiscal year 2020 budget provides $10 million for the recently
elevated Office of Space Commerce that enables the Department to
provide leadership in advancing the administration's ambitious agenda
to promote the United States as the flag of choice for commercial space
operations. This is essential to technological innovation, economic
growth, jobs, national security, and rejuvenating the American passion
for space exploration.
eliminating duplicative programs, cutting red tape, and improving
operations
The budget supports the orderly closure of the Economic Development
Administration (EDA), which provides small grants with limited impacts
and is an example of fragmentation and overlap that can exist between
Federal economic development programs, such as rural utilities service
grants at the U.S. Department of Agriculture and formula grants to
States from the Department of Transportation.
By eliminating EDA, the budget saves approximately $274 million
from the fiscal year 2019 enacted level.
The budget also eliminates Federal funding for the Manufacturing
Extension Partnership (MEP) program within NIST, which subsidizes up to
half the cost of State centers that provide consulting services to
small- and medium-sized manufacturers. This proposal saves $140 million
from the fiscal year 2019 enacted level and directs MEP centers to
transition solely to non-Federal revenue sources as originally intended
when the program was established. The budget includes wind-down costs
associated with these closures.
In addition to the eliminations outlined above, the Department will
further cut red tape and streamline programs by reorganizing Census,
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and BEA, in accordance with the
Government Reform Plan and President's Management Agenda.
Finally, the budget includes investments that will begin the
implementation of modern capabilities to support administrative
management systems (financial management, acquisitions, property),
enterprise data warehouse and business intelligence reporting solutions
across Commerce.
conclusion
We look forward to working with this Committee and the rest of the
Congress to achieve our shared goals on behalf of the American people.
We appreciate your consideration of our fiscal year 2020 budget request
and look forward to further dialogue on how best to benefit American
families by strengthening our Nation's economy and promoting public
safety.
On behalf of Secretary Wilbur Ross and Deputy Secretary Karen Dunn
Kelley, we are happy to answer any questions that you have about the
Department's fiscal year 2020 budget.
For more information about the Department's fiscal year 2020
budget, please visit the Department's Website at: www.commerce.gov/cj
THE COST OF THE 2020 CENSUS
Senator Moran. Let me begin with you, Director Dillingham.
Let us talk about the Census. To set the stage, last year
Secretary Ross testified that an independent study of the costs
associated with the 2020 Census represented what would be
needed to assure a cost-effective and accurate Census. The
Secretary spoke directly with Members and our staff about the
need for funding based upon his estimate, yet the budget this
year falls short of what Secretary Ross told us would be needed
this year.
Can you please explain why there is a discrepancy between
what was requested, is being requested by the Department now,
and the Secretary's own independent cost estimate?
Dr. Dillingham. Certainly, thank you very much Mr.
Chairman, Vice Chair, Members of the subcommittee. I am pleased
to be here today and to answer your questions.
The issue you raise, and one that is certainly one that is
gaining attention, is what is the cost of the 2020 Census?
Actually, there were three cost estimates. And 2 years ago,
when Secretary Ross looked at the cost estimate, then at $12.5
billion, he had a degree of discomfort with it and wanted it
reexamined.
And in fact, it was reexamined. An independent cost
estimate was put together by career cost estimators, experts in
the field with vast experience, and they came up with a figure
of $14.1 billion. And even within that amount, they built in
certain contingencies and certain foreseeable possibilities.
It was later that Secretary Ross still, with his business
acumen orientation, wanted it reexamined, and this time, he
particularly and personally asked that be included within that
cost estimate were unknowns. And so the $15.6 billion estimate,
which he asked to be performed, did include some additional
funds for unknowns.
I can tell you today that myself and the career leadership
of the Census Bureau, as well as the Congress that has been
funding us basically consistent with the $14.1 billion level,
that we are on schedule, we are on budget, we are on message,
and we are on mission. And we have not encountered any
contingencies that cause us any concerns that we cannot deliver
a complete Census based on the President's Budget.
So that is kind of where we are today, and we would be glad
to discuss some of the reasons why. But largely, there are two
reasons. When you have a cost estimate, what is important over
time--and this is the procedures and the practices and guidance
from the GAO--is that if you don't encounter those obstacles or
unknowns, then, in fact, the confidence level rises.
And that is the case here. The confidence level has risen
that we are on budget. We are meeting all the thresholds and
the milestones that we have established in executing the plan.
So, therefore, based on our success from the last year's
testing in Providence, Rhode Island, based upon the contracts
that we now have in place, based upon instituting an integrated
partnership and outreach campaign, and a variety of other
factors, including the testing of our computer systems and our
cybersecurity, we are very confident that we are on track. We
are on budget and on schedule.
So within this budget that the President has presented, the
leadership of the Department is confident we can get the job
done.
Senator Moran. So the amount that is in the President's
budget for the Census is the amount that--that amount is based
solely upon the estimates now that the Department makes for the
cost of completing the Census?
Dr. Dillingham. Well, it is consistent with it, and we want
to thank this subcommittee, we want to thank the Congress that
in 2018 you had the foresight to give us some money, the
technical term I forget, but some money that was available
early. And so we had that billion dollars. So when there was a
lapse in funding, we were able to continue business as usual.
And we want to commend the Congress for doing that. It was very
important to us.
So in looking at our resource needs and looking at the need
not to have a gap in it, we would appreciate and very much
support this subcommittee and the Congress in continuing to
adequately fund the Census without a gap in funding.
Senator Moran. Is there any plan within the Department to
meet the needed funding if the estimate that is included in
your budget request, and assuming it is appropriated by this
subcommittee and Congress, is there a plan if that is
insufficient to meet the needs for the completion of the
Census?
Dr. Dillingham. Mr. Chairman, we don't have a plan for it
not being sufficient. However, we are all cognizant that if
something really unknown occurs, something major--it could be a
natural disaster. There could be some type of potential
intrusion, cybersecurity issue that no one could have foreseen
or prevented. If something of that nature was to occur, I am
confident that the administration and certainly the Census
Bureau would come forward and ask the Congress for additional
funding.
I will say that if something like that occurs, you will
know it the same time we know it, if not earlier. We are a very
transparent organization, and such special needs will be known
by the executive branch, by the Congress, as well as us, and we
will certainly bring it to your attention.
Senator Moran. Mr. Dillingham, thank you.
Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
FUNDING CONTINGENCIES FOR THE 2020 CENSUS
Dr. Dillingham, I would like to follow up on the questions
from the Chairman. Because last year the Secretary testified
that as part of his implementation of the Independent Cost
Estimate, the assumed self-response rate for the 2020 Census
was reduced from 60.5 percent to 55 percent. And according to
the Secretary's October 2017 request, the Census would need an
additional $153 million to overcome the lower response rate.
However, as I am sure you are aware, the President's budget
does not include this funding, and in fact, the President's
budget does not include funding for several other assumptions
that were presented to the subcommittee with the Independent
Cost Estimate, including $41 million for increased field
staffing, $68 million to pay staff higher wages due to the
tight labor market, and $669 million for contingencies in case
of natural disasters or technical issues.
So that is a total of $932 million that was recommended by
the Secretary but was not included in the final budget request.
So can you tell us what the contingencies are to address that
funding that is missing from the request?
Dr. Dillingham. Well, Senator, we thank you for your
interest and for looking at this very closely.
You mentioned some of the potential contingencies, things
that might be encountered. Again, over time, however, our
confidence level rises. Nevertheless, built into the
President's budget is about $1.2 billion in contingency
funding. This is funding that is available to be shifted, to be
applied to new priorities, to be applied to unforeseen
circumstances. So we do have flexibility with that $1.2
billion.
And again, in working with the cost estimators and working
with our leadership, career leadership, at the Census Bureau,
we are all very confident that we will get the job done and
have a complete count with the President's Budget.
Senator Shaheen. So if the citizenship question is
included, how much additional funding will be necessary?
Dr. Dillingham. Senator, I couldn't give you an exact
amount on that. I can tell you----
Senator Shaheen. Can you give me an estimate? Let us put it
this way, what is the Census Bureau planning for if that
question is included?
Dr. Dillingham. Senator that is a very good question. And
what we are planning for, as you are well aware, with the
elaborate procedures we have in administering the Census, we
have a non-response follow-up. So a key variable that you
pointed out is what is the response rate? And you are, in
fact--that we are aiming for a 60.5 percent response rate.
Under the current budget, we could accommodate--you used the
figure 55.5 percent, and we could analyze and reassess where we
are. And we could, with a contingency funding, meet that need.
However, we don't think that will be the case based on the
end-to-end testing from 2018. We were pleasantly surprised that
without any marketing, without any of the partnerships and
outreach, that we had a self-response rate of over 50 percent
in Rhode Island. We think that with the new ways of answering
the Census by the Internet and by the phone, in the traditional
way by paper, we will have efficiencies.
2020 CENSUS: POSSIBLE QUESTIONS
Senator Shaheen. Did your pilot include a citizenship
question?
Dr. Dillingham. No, it did not.
Senator Shaheen. So you have not planned on--even though it
is clear that that is the intent of the Department, you haven't
planned on the additional funding for a citizenship question?
Dr. Dillingham. Senator, let me----
Senator Shaheen. That is a yes or no. Is that yes or no?
Dr. Dillingham. That is a no, Senator.
Senator Shaheen. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Dillingham. I mean a ``no'' that we haven't planned,
which is a ``yes'' that we have planned. And if you could let
me explain one second.
We are in the early stages right now of doing a special
test, and this test is going to be looking at the impact of the
citizenship question. So we are in the process now of doing a
survey of 480,000 households, half with the question and half
without the question, and we will have the results by October.
Now we are doing that test for the purpose of looking at
what is the operational impact, which is the question that you
asked. You know, how might this impact us? We don't know the
answer yet. So this test will inform us, are we seeing a
different response rate, will we have to deploy more people,
and how should we deploy them in the event that the response
rate drops?
Senator Shaheen. So the $1.2 billion contingency that you
are talking about, that is part of the budget request. What is
that in the budget?
Dr. Dillingham. Excuse me?
Senator Shaheen. What is that for in the budget? What were
you assuming that was going to be needed for?
Dr. Dillingham. It is for exactly that.
Senator Shaheen. For the citizenship question?
Dr. Dillingham. Well, it is for any contingency, but it
would be that if the citizenship question, if we find in our
research that there is a drop in the response rate, that we
would have resources available to deploy our enumerators and
deploy our specialists and our partners, et cetera. And that we
would actually--also we have other resources with our media
campaign that we can target that to those special needs,
special communities, special geographies.
Senator Shaheen. Mr. Chairman, I still have a number of
questions, but we will have a second round.
Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator Collins.
Senator Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
NOAA: MAINE AND CANADA FISHERIES
Mr. Chairman, I am very concerned about the elimination of
some critical programs that are included in this budget,
including EDA, the Manufacturing Extension Partnership, and the
Sea Grant College Program, all of which are critical and have
worked so well in the State of Maine.
But in the interest of time, I am going to focus my
comments on an issue that was raised to me when I attended the
annual Fishermen's Forum in Maine. So I am going to direct this
to Dr. Jacobs, who is the representative of NOAA.
Dr. Jacobs, first let me give you a little background.
There is a long-running territorial dispute between the United
States and Canada pertaining to waters around Machias Seal
Island. That sits approximately 10 miles off the Maine coast,
and it is referred to as the ``gray zone.''
Consequently, each country--the United States and Canada--
manages their lobster and other fisheries in the area through
separate and often conflicting regulations. For example, for
generations since 1917, Maine lobstermen have marked the tails
of egg-bearing females that they catch with a v-notch. And then
they throw them back, return them to the water, so they can lay
their eggs, grow larger, and reproduce in future years.
Maine lobstermen also abide by a maximum size limit,
tossing back oversized lobsters, again to keep the stock
strong. These are great conservation practices that the
industry uses.
But many of the lobstermen in Down East Maine near the New
Brunswick border who fish in this area, who harvest lobsters in
this area, are growing increasingly frustrated that their
Canadian counterparts fishing in exactly the same areas are
undermining the American protections and threatening the
sustainability of the stock.
And let me give you an example of just what this can mean.
This means that when a Maine lobsterman throws back that v-
notched or oversized lobster, it can be pulled up by a Canadian
lobsterman 50 yards away and brought to market. So the
implications of these regulatory discrepancies are very
concerning and very unfair to Maine's lobstermen, scallop
fishery, and also halibut is fished in that area.
So what I am asking is will NOAA work with Maine and
Canadian fisheries officials to explore the possibility of
developing a fisheries agreement that provides for cooperate
management of this unique area?
Dr. Jacobs. Thank you for the question, Senator.
Yes, NOAA would very much look forward to working with you
and your staff to address this issue.
Senator Collins. Thank you. It is a real problem, and we do
need your help.
NOAA: MAINE AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE BARRIERS
Mr. Kaplan, I have been in regular correspondence with
Ambassador Lighthizer about the importance of expeditiously
resolving the international trade barriers that are continuing
to harm Maine seafood exporters. The retaliatory tariff of 25
percent that China has levied on U.S. lobster has been very
detrimental to the industry. Before the tariff, China was the
second-largest importer of U.S. lobster, purchasing $128.5
million worth of the product in 2017.
For the first half of the year, Maine exports of lobster to
China were up by 169 percent compared to the year before. But
once the tariffs were imposed, the Canadian lobster dealers
were able to step into that market and take it away from the
State of Maine, from the American lobster dealers.
So this is a real problem for us, and I would like to know
what is the status of the trade talks with China and what hope
can you provide to my lobster exporters who are struggling day
in and day out, having lost that very lucrative market to our
Canadian neighbors?
Mr. Kaplan. Thank you, Senator, and thank you, all Members
of the subcommittee, for holding his hearing.
As someone who has spent a lot of time at Kittery Point,
Maine, with lobstermen and lobsterwomen in the industry, I am
very sympathetic to what you are saying. I can assure you that
we are doing everything possible to resolve the problems with
China and to resolve the trade disagreements as quickly as
possible. I have been working very hard on that under Secretary
Ross and Ambassador Lighthizer.
The Chinese negotiating team is here now. We have been
meeting almost nonstop either in the United States or in China,
I would say for months now, certainly for this entire year. And
I think we have been making progress, and I think we are
optimistic about an agreement. But I have to say, both as
Ambassador Lighthizer and the President have said, we know
there is still a long way to go. There are many issues we have
to resolve. But we are working nonstop to try to bring this
dispute to a conclusion.
Senator Collins. I hope it will be resolved soon.
Thank you. Thank you.
Senator Murkowski [presiding]: Thank you, Senator Collins.
Senator Manchin, it looks like you are next.
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
My question would be to, I think, Secretary David--is it
Redl?
Mr. Redl. Yes, sir.
NTIA: BROADBAND MAPPING
Senator Manchin. Redl, okay. States like--the rural States
like West Virginia rely on Federal funding for much-needed
investments in broadband. In order to ensure that the funding
is targeted to the right places that need it the most, we need
to have more reliable broadband coverage maps--I don't know if
that has been brought to your attention, the maps are screwed
up royally--and data that accurately depict what people on the
ground are actually experiencing.
I am the only Member of Congress, I think, to formally
challenge the Federal broadband coverage map. And I know
firsthand just how woefully inadequate they are, and everything
has been held up on the Mobility Fund. So my question would be,
are you working with the FCC on this initiative, and how--what
is your approach to that, and how are you doing it?
Mr. Redl. Thank you, Senator. Thank you for your leadership
on this issue. I know it is an issue that is near and dear to
your heart and certainly, your State.
NTIA in the fiscal year 2018 appropriations received $7.5
million to work with the FCC to improve the broadband
availability map. And since that appropriation, we have been
working diligently to get a platform, a cloud-based platform
stood up that will be able to take in data not only from the
FCC, but from a number of other platforms as well. We are
through the procurement phase and are in the process of
standing that up and hope to have that platform available to
policymakers in a very beta form by the end of the second
quarter of this calendar year.
Additionally, we partnered with eight pilot States. We
originally had asked for $50 million in the President's Budget.
Congress gave us $7.5 million. So we scaled back our ambitions
accordingly. We took eight pilot States--your State is one of
them--and they are the States that we are working with to try
to show that we can make this a tool that will be important for
policymakers that will provide accurate data and it will give
you what you need to make good decisions.
Senator Manchin. Let me ask you this. Who is in charge?
Which agency is in charge? Is it you or FCC? And following up
to that, do you have the authority you need to use the data
that you need from us to do that? Do you need new authority
from us?
Someone has got to take the lead on this. And also the
high-cost offsets. If you look at the high-cost offsets, in
States like mine it will cost $1 million average to build a
tower to communicate with and in flat States $250,000. They can
get four towers to our one. And I don't know if there is any
consideration for the terrain that we are in for high State
offsets--high-cost offsets.
Mr. Redl. So, Senator, we have complementary roles, the FCC
and NTIA in this respect. So the FCC, as you know, the high-
cost offsets you are talking about are a universal service fund
mechanism.
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Mr. Redl. And that is in the FCC's purview. What we have
been empowered by Congress to do is work with the FCC, take in
their data--from what would they call the FCC Form 477 data--
and other datasets, and try to produce a more complete picture
of broadband availability in the States.
So it is bringing in not only the FCC's data, but
Department of Interior produced data for us to put on that map.
We are working with providers in your State and other States to
get that data.
Senator Manchin. Is the rural Mobility Fund under your
purview? The $4.5 billion?
Mr. Redl. No, it is not. That is the FCC's fund. So what we
are doing right now--we are currently focused on tackling the
challenge of fixed broadband.
RURAL BROADBAND FUNDING COORDINATION
Senator Manchin. Do you coordinate with USDA?
Mr. Redl. Yes. We coordinate with USDA. The President has
the American Broadband Initiative, which I think you are
familiar with. We are co-chairs of that initiative with USDA.
And so we have been working in that forum to not only try to
map Federal assets, but to coordinate on other areas the
President has asked us to coordinate.
The other two work streams are streamlining Federal
permitting to make it easier to get access to Federal lands and
coordinating Federal-funding streams. And I think that gets to
what you are talking about.
Senator Manchin. Tell you how important from a rural
State--in West Virginia, if you lived in the 1930s, your
grandparents or great-grandparents, in 1930 up to 1935, only 10
percent of West Virginians had electrification. Most of rural
America was not electrified at all. Until FDR came in with
rural electrification, then everyone, no matter where you
lived, no matter if you were by yourself, we made it happen.
This is as important today as part of our--as part of our
necessities and services as electricity was in the 1930s for
anybody to have a chance to survive. And I just--I can only
implore, sir, that you look into this because this is moving
around, and right now, the money has been stopped. There is no
rural broadband funding going out. And the reason it is not
going out is because the maps were so inaccurate to do the job
that needs to be done, and States are going to be left behind.
So USDA, yourself, and FCC, unless you are working
together, we are not going to be able to get this accomplished
in the period of time it needs to be done. So I am imploring
you. We will follow up with further questions we have for you,
but I know my time is about to expire.
Thank you all for being here.
NOAA IMPLEMENTING THE PACIFIC SALMON TREATY
Senator Murkowski. So I am up on the Republican side. At
this moment, I would like to ask Mr. Jacobs, back to fish here.
Pacific Salmon Treaty is the treaty that helps us manage our
coast-wide salmon fisheries with Canada. Used to be a pretty
tense relationship, but the treaty has helped calm some things
down.
We have a new 10-year harvest and conservation agreement
with Canada. It was 3 years of negotiations. It was tough. It
was hard. I appreciate the hard work of the NOAA Fisheries in
this, but I want to talk just a little bit about the funding
right now.
This treaty has been underfunded for a long time. It is
something we have been working to correct. The latest agreement
comes with an initial funding ask of more than $100 million for
conservation and management. This was shaped in part by the
Federal representatives that were negotiating on behalf of
NOAA, and yet in the proposed budget, we are seeing a decrease
in the regular treaty funding and no mention of the critical
funding needed to kick off this new decades-long agreement.
So the question to you is how are we supposed to do this?
How are the States, the Tribes, the Federal Government expected
to implement these conservation measures that is required by
both the treaty and the Endangered Species Act without the
funding?
And I guess bigger to that is whether or not NOAA supports
the funding proposal that was developed by the non-Federal
members of the Pacific Salmon Commission.
Dr. Jacobs. Thank you for the question. I very much enjoyed
the opportunity to discuss some of these issues with you the
other day.
We are still in the process of evaluating the new terms of
the agreement, given the timing of the treaty, which was
January 1. We are evaluating the obligations. So I think it
would be an opportune time to work with you and your staff to
discuss our role in these.
Senator Murkowski. Okay, well I would welcome that. I would
also make--I would want to make sure that the Department is
considering the economic cost to our salmon fisheries if the
necessary funding isn't obtained, and we end up with an
underfunded treaty agreement. So this is pretty key to all of
these discussions.
SALTONSTALL-KENNEDY GRANT PROGRAM
Then sticking with you, Dr. Jacobs, this relates to the
Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant Program. As you know, this is an
important part--an important part of the fisheries is making
sure that we are promoting and developing the markets for our
American seafood, and we do so under the S-K Grant Program.
What we have seen is that in fiscal year 2018, just under $9
million was granted. That number has dropped to barely over $1
million in 2019.
And this is despite the fact that the Commerce Department
received over $150 million in promote and develop funds from
duties on fisheries products. These are funds that are meant to
support the development of the U.S. seafood industry, but what
we have been seeing is year after year, a prioritization out of
NOAA, of NOAA's own programs overfulfilling the intent of the
S-K Act.
So we put report language in last year directing NOAA to
obligate at least 15 percent of the transferred funds to the
competitive grant program. That was not followed. The S-K Act
directs the Secretary to dedicate 60 percent of the promote and
develop funds to industry grants for marketing and development.
So this is about--our calculation is about $92 million in 2019
is what it would be.
So what I am trying to figure out is how are we going to
fulfill the intent of the S-K Act? How do we fix this? Does
Congress need to transfer less to NOAA's operations, research,
and facility lines in order to force NOAA to fulfill the intent
of the S-K provisions? What do we need to do? How can you help
us with this?
Dr. Jacobs. Well, first of all, the S-K is a fantastic
program. We were just in a situation where we had to make some
tough choices in funding operations, research, and facilities,
otherwise known as ORF, was something that we decided we had to
do to maintain our core capabilities.
But we do look forward to working with you to support the
various activities that S-K is directed to support and looking
towards exploring additional options along the lines of
marketing for wild-caught salmon and such.
Senator Murkowski. Well, I guess the concern that I would
have is if you are basically robbing Peter to pay Paul over
here by taking out of the S-K account to help with NOAA's
operations, research, and facilities, do we need to do more
over there? Because believe me, I am a strong supporter of what
NOAA is doing in the research and the operations. So it seems
to me that we have got--we have got some issues here that we
need to work through. I would like to do that with you.
SEAFOOD TRADE
Let me just wrap up with a comment to Mr. Kaplan, and this
is following Senator Collins' comments about the lobster and
losing that market that they have in Maine to Canada. We feel
the same in Alaska when it comes to our seafood and what is
happening with the loss to the Russian market.
When we look at the situation with seafood trade, it really
is highlighted that seafood doesn't have a strong champion
among the various trade agencies. I have heard seafood
described as ``a man without a country.'' And yet for us in our
State, as in Senator Collins' State with their lobster, we are
really kind of caught in the backwash of all of the trade
discussions that are going on. So I would like to have an
opportunity to visit further with you, Mr. Kaplan, on what we
may do.
I have many questions for the record that I am going to be
including, but my time has elapsed, and I will now turn to
Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Chairman.
FLEET RECAPITALIZATION
Dr. Jacobs, NOAA has briefed my office that a thorough
inspection of the Hi'ialakai in dry dock revealed extensive
damage and that the ship will likely wind up being
decommissioned, and I am worried about this. We have already
lost Ka'imimoana, and with Hi'ialakai offline, we are now down
to a single vessel, the Sette, a ship that, according to your
fleet report, has only 4 years of remaining service life. So
what is NOAA's short-term plan to maintain ship operations in
Hawaii and across the Pacific?
Dr. Jacobs. So in the short term, we have a plan that we
will do collaborative work with the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System, which is a combination of NSF
and Navy vessels, other Federal partners. We will also
reprioritize the mission work that the Hi'ialakai was slated to
do with the Oscar Elton Sette, as well as other NOAA vessels.
You will see in the budget request that this is a $3 million
addition.
Senator Schatz. And what about the long term?
Dr. Jacobs. The long-term plan, we are continuing to
examine the fleet recapitalization. We have eight ships that
are exceeding their design life and projected to retire by
2028. We are reexamining----
Senator Schatz. Right. I am going to sort of put a fine
point on this question. The whole fleet is in need of
recapitalization. That is why we are doing the appropriations
in the manner that we are doing them.
We are now in a much more precipitous situation in Hawaii
than we were before because Hi'ialakai was, I think, had 6 more
useful years, and now we are at zero. We lost Ka'imimoana. So
that is at zero. And now we have one ship left with 4 years,
and so it just seems to me that even with competing needs, that
Hawaii's needs are more upon us than really any other part of
the fleet.
Dr. Jacobs. Well, we did examine our other vessels, and we
didn't see any significant metal deterioration on those
vessels, but this is something that we are taking a close look
at. And I can assure you that we will fulfill those missions
either with our own vessels or with partner vessels.
Senator Schatz. And what other factors does NOAA consider
when deciding when to replace a vessel?
Dr. Jacobs. Things like areas of operation, hull
degradation. The various--maintenance history. There is a lot
of things that get factored into this.
Senator Schatz. Mission as well?
Dr. Jacobs. Yes.
Senator Schatz. The size of the area of responsibility?
Dr. Jacobs. Yes. And what the actual mission objectives
were, as well as the specific capabilities of the ships. And in
some cases, the ships are very technically equipped for a
certain mission, and it would be--it would be hard to contract
out or get a, you know, charter vessel to do those same type
missions.
Senator Schatz. Your office has been absolutely cooperative
with us and good about keeping us informed with respect to the
initial assessment of the Hi'ialakai, and I just ask for your
commitment to continue that level of communication, even as you
have to do the analysis and maybe even navigate some of the
politics.
Dr. Jacobs. Absolutely. Thank you for the support.
PLANNING, TESTING, AND PREPARATION FOR THE 2020 CENSUS
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Senator Moran [presiding]: Senator Boozman.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Dillingham, I applaud the effort of the Department of
Commerce's planning, testing, and preparation for the 2020
Census. Can you give my colleagues and I on the subcommittee a
brief update of the preparation process as you prepare for next
year? It is such an important undertaking.
Dr. Dillingham. Certainly, Senator, and we began that
discussion with the Vice Chair and appreciate your interest and
the interest of all Members of the subcommittee and the support
you give us for a fully funded, successful 2020 Census.
As we were discussing, there are a number of reasons that
we are on track, we are on budget, on schedule. And as time
passes and we don't encounter major obstacles, our level of
confidence increases
We did have the 2018 end-to-end test. It was very
successful. It exceeded our expectation on the self-reporting.
It exceeded our expectation in terms of the Internet usage,
which is a very, very promising development, and our systems
all worked. The IT systems were tested. They all work, and so
we were pleased with the end-to-end test.
But one of the additional considerations, in speaking to
this issue with the Vice Chair, that I didn't bring to the
attention, and that is the fact that we also have knowledge
over time. With the American Community Survey, we asked that
same question--we have asked that same question since 2005.
That question in the American Community Survey goes out to 3.5
million households every year. So we have the benefit of more
than 30 million responses to that question, which informs us of
how the question will work. And so we do have experience, and
we have studied the question.
However, this is a different methodology. It has now been
recommended that we place it back into the Decennial Census,
but we have tested it in the American Community Survey. So all
of the testing and the successes that we have had to date raise
our confidence level. And certainly with the career leadership
in the Census Bureau, we are on track, and we are not seeing
anything that causes us great concern that we cannot accomplish
within the President's Budget.
2020 CENSUS COUNT OF RURAL POPULATIONS
Senator Boozman. So many of our States have rural
populations, really rural populations that are hard to count
during a census. What is the Bureau's plan to ensure an
accurate enumeration of the hard to count rural populations? In
particular, how is the Census Bureau planning to use its
resources to partner with State and community-based
organizations in places like Arkansas that can serve as trusted
messengers and trusted voices in historically hard to count
communities?
Dr. Dillingham. Senator, that is an excellent question. And
yesterday, we met with many of our partners and had a media
event at the National Press Club, where we had partners,
certainly representatives of some of our national partners, and
we reached out to other partners. But part of the campaign, as
we call it, the Integrated Media Partnership Campaign, is just
that. We have partnerships--we actually presented a map of the
country and showed the hundreds of partnerships that are being
formed around the Nation.
We have complete count committees in every State. Most
States--I think at least 46, and we hope it will be all
States--have complete count commissions or committees at the
State level, in addition to the local levels. And with those
committees, the hard to count is the focus. The hard to count
is a very special focus in our media campaign.
As you point out, one of the hard to count populations is
in the rural areas. We have a number of other hard to count
populations, dealing with the youth, dealing with the American
Indian and Alaska Native community. We have a variety, based on
our studies, of areas that we really want to target to improve
the response rate.
So we are doing that through our partnerships. Some of
them, we are going to be hiring more than 1,500 Federal
partnership specialists that are assigned in each State,
assigned to communities, assigned to Tribes, assigned to any
hard to count population that we see. But we have also all the
groups that are supporting us.
And I will give you one example. One of the national groups
that gave a wonderful presentation yesterday was the president
of the American Library Association, and they are our partners.
You will be able to go into most of the libraries around the
country, and they will have our materials. They will have our
information. And many will have computers and Internet
connections.
So that if you do want to reply on the Internet, you can
use your local library. So that is a very important resource
and just one example, but we are finding that we are going to
have, ultimately, with many of the local groups, we should have
thousands of partners in this effort, as well as a half-billion
dollar, largest-yet media campaign for paid advertising.
And then, as I looked on the press releases this morning,
we had one to two dozen announcements in the States around the
country of the resources that they are also independently
committing. So we have the corporate community, we have the
local community, State and local governments all joined with
us, and we are very pleased to have those partnerships.
Senator Boozman. Thank you, Dr. Dillingham.
Senator Moran. Senator Van Hollen.
EDA FUNDING LEVEL
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
all of you.
It is hard to know where to start. Let me say that I think
it is really unfortunate that the Secretary decided that he
wasn't going to show up in person to discuss and justify the
budget of the Department of Commerce. He is the leader of the
Department of Commerce. He should be here to talk about his
budget.
Mr. Fleming, I am going to start. Senator Collins mentioned
her disappointment with the President's request for EDA--a big
fat goose egg, zero. I recall during your testimony for your
nomination hearings, you talked about the fact that EDA was a
good economic development tool. Have you changed your mind? Do
you agree it is still a good economic development tool?
Dr. Fleming. Senator, I still agree and, in fact, am even
more encouraged today after learning more about it, and also
the opportunity of Opportunity Zones that go with it, that it
is going to be a very powerful tool.
Senator Van Hollen. And do you support the proposal to
eliminate the budget for the EDA? I think that would probably
eliminate most of your--at least many of your responsibilities,
right?
Dr. Fleming. Well, Senator, I support the President's
budget. I support the President's priorities. Difficult
decisions had to be made, and you know, we do have a budget and
spending that we do have to limit it some place or another.
However, that being said----
Senator Van Hollen. I hear you. I do.
Dr. Fleming. Okay.
Senator Van Hollen. This budget would obviously wipe out a
big area of your responsibility within the Department, and
Secretary DeVos was in a similar hearing the other day
defending the President's cut to Special Olympics, only to have
the President reverse that decision later.
I recall I explained to Secretary Ross last year that
Ivanka Trump had been to Baltimore about 2 years ago to talk
about the importance of an EDA program. So I just can't figure
out who is making the decisions over there, when the President
of the United States throws his own team under the bus when it
comes to these budget decisions.
MBDA FUNDING LEVEL
Let me ask you, Mr. Childs, with respect to the Minority
Business Development Agency (MBDA) program. Again, you proposed
dramatic cuts to the program, including eliminating the
centers, the MBDA centers. But would you agree with me that
current law, which this Congress has put in place, requires as
of now that you comply with the current agreements and
arrangements with MBDA centers?
Mr. Childs. Thank you for the question.
And yes, MBDA will comply with authorization that Congress
has given us, and I take this responsibility personally. I was
just in Baltimore on Friday----
Senator Van Hollen. Good.
Mr. Childs [continuing]. And I was in an area where 56
percent of the buildings were vacated. And this was at 1:30 in
the afternoon, and I saw men just walking the streets because
they didn't have a job to go to, okay? I saw some things that I
probably don't want to talk about here happening. But what I
did not see were banks, I did not see colleges, and I didn't
see the capacity that we need for our youngest people to really
achieve the American dream.
So, yes, I take my responsibilities personally.
Senator Van Hollen. And would you agree that MBDA centers
play a positive role in trying to change the kind of
circumstances you saw in Baltimore?
Mr. Childs. MBDA centers have been doing the best they can.
And for the 50 years of MBDA's existence--we turned 50 this
year--but times have changed. And the future is coming with
artificial intelligence, with digitization, with workforce of
the future, we have to look at a new model to deliver services
to 11 million minority-owned businesses.
Senator Van Hollen. I would suggest that cutting the budget
by $30 million isn't going to help deliver a new model. But let
me ask you this just to underscore the fact, you agree that the
current authorization requires that you continue to abide by
the current agreements that you have got with the centers. Is
that right?
Mr. Childs. That is correct.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you.
TRADE BETWEEN THE U.S. AND MEXICO
Mr. Kaplan, you have probably heard the President talk in
recent days about shutting down the U.S.-Mexico border. Has the
President or anyone from his team asked you for analysis? Have
you done analysis about what the cost to the U.S. economy would
be for shutting down the border for even 1 or 2 days?
Mr. Kaplan. Thank you for the question, Senator.
We have extensive analysis of U.S.-Mexico trade, of the
value of it, of issues related to USMCA. There is certainly a
lot of information we have regarding----
Senator Van Hollen. So what would your estimate be of
shutting down the--the cost to the U.S. economy of shutting the
border down for 24 hours?
Mr. Kaplan. I don't have that right as I am sitting here.
If it were to happen, I think we would look very carefully at
all the effects.
Senator Van Hollen. But you have done this kind of analysis
before of what the cross-border trade is, right?
Mr. Kaplan. Oh, absolutely.
Senator Van Hollen. So you can't give the subcommittee
today even rough estimate of what it would cost the economy if
we shut down the border for 24 hours?
Mr. Kaplan. I don't think I can right now. It is a
hypothetical. But we certainly have loads of data about it.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, I would hope that the President,
before making that kind of decision, which may be hypothetical
today, that he would have gotten the information. My
understanding is that approximately $1.5 billion worth of
commerce happens across that border every day. Do you have any
reason to dispute that number?
Mr. Kaplan. That sounds like a good number.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator Reed.
NAVAL STATION NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND
Senator Reed. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Jacobs, last year the subcommittee provided $4.5
million to NOAA to help plan a new facility at the Naval
Station Newport, Rhode Island for the consolidation of your
vessels and also your Marine Operations Center. Actually, it
was at the suggestion of NOAA because they are looking for
places to move vessels since rising waters and other problems
are compromising their present locations.
And one of the advantages of Newport, which NOAA was aware
of, is that the Navy and the Coast Guard are there. Several
oceanographic institutions are there, the University of Rhode
Island. In fact, that is where the NOAA deck officers are
trained for simulation. So it is an appropriate location.
We didn't get a plan. We got a report. I understand there
are budget issues, et cetera, but can you give us a sort of
sense of the path ahead? Because you are running out of time.
You have got to get these ships in safe harbors and with
appropriate facilities.
Dr. Jacobs. Thank you for the question, Senator.
Yes, we have produced a report. Some of the calculus in
that may be changing because we have to reconcile the report
with the ship recapitalization plan and look at what our future
ship profile will look like.
We are taking a hard look at the facilities right now. This
would include not just the facilities, but the piers. And we
very much would look forward to working with you and your staff
as well as the Navy in examining this as an option.
Senator Reed. Well, thank you, Dr. Jacobs. We look forward
also to working with you, and we had a similar collaboration
with the Navy and Coast Guard, where working together, we were
able to significantly improve the Coast Guard's location and
allow them to berth some additional buoy tenders in Newport.
2020 CENSUS--LIBRARIES
Director Dillingham, I know you had a successful end-to-end
survey because it was in Providence County, Rhode Island. So I
know. Let me reinforce your comment about libraries. I think
they can play an incredibly important role. We saw that in the
end-to-end survey. I think the potential has not been utilized.
So I would encourage you to work closely and deliberately with
the library community all across the country.
As you pointed out, not only is it a community location,
practically every library today has computers and free access
to individuals. They can go in and they can fill out the survey
there, where they couldn't at home because they don't have a
computer, or it is hard to go elsewhere. So I think your
comment about the libraries is right on target.
2020 CENSUS: COUNTERING ELECTRONIC DISRUPTIONS
Let me raise another concern I have, though, and that is
the potential for disinformation campaigns and disruption,
electronic disruption. How well are you prepared at the Census
Bureau to counter disinformation campaigns or any type of cyber
activities?
Dr. Dillingham. Senator, that is an excellent question, and
that is one we wrestle with every day. And we are working with
some of the leading technology firms in the country. We are
working with Facebook. We are working with Twitter. We are
working with Microsoft. We are working with a lot of private
sector experts, as well as working directly with the Department
of Homeland Security and intelligence agencies to see what is
the source of some of this potential disruption and
misinformation.
That is something that we are developing plans, we have
plans, and we are working with our partners to make sure we are
on top of that. And it is very important because this is a new
age. The last Decennial Census didn't really face this type of
challenge. So we are trying to bring together the best people,
the experts.
And we have had, for example, the Microsoft Democracy
Project, as well as the talents of others, to deal with this
and see what we can do. And I can just say every effort is
being made, and the best technologies and minds are being put
to use on it.
Senator Reed. I just have a few more, literally seconds.
But is there an established working group between the
interagencies that is meeting on a regular basis and that is
prepared to go spring into action, if you will? You know, if
they get intelligence, then it is not just filters around. It
actually goes to the agency that can take action or the social
media company that can take action. Is that framework in place
today?
Dr. Dillingham. Well, actually, this week we are having
discussions. My Deputy Director is in California meeting on
just this topic with some of the leading private sector firms.
But I can assure you that with the Federal agencies, we are
coordinating, including the intelligence agencies. And with the
Department of Homeland Security, we are very much engaged with
them on this.
And I have spoken to top officials in the CIO office at
Homeland Security. And the Director of Homeland Security has
testified here on the Hill that there always is a continuing
effort, and particularly to looking at potential elections
impacts. And that the Census is right there with it.
So whatever we are gaining for 2020 applies both to the
Census, some of the strategic thinking, as well as to the
election process. And so we are doing what we can, and we will
continue to do more. And we will reach out to anyone we think
that can help us in this area.
Senator Reed. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Thank you, Senator Reed.
Senator Coons.
MANUFACTURING EXTENSION PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM FUNDING LEVEL
Senator Coons. Thank you, Chairman Moran, Ranking Member
Shaheen, and to the witnesses for joining us today to discuss
the Department of Commerce's budget.
I have many differences with this administration, but one
objective we share is the importance of protecting America's
role as a leading global innovator. And though I might have
pursued this objective in a different way, I applaud the
administration for confronting China on its unfair trade
practices.
But I don't think we can simply counter efforts to steal
and copy our existing innovation if we are to be the home of
high-wage, high-skilled, 21st century jobs. I also think we
have to fund American research, development, and
commercialization of the technologies of the future. So I am
disappointed to see that the President's budget again makes
significant cuts to vital research programs at the Department
of Commerce that promote innovation and partnership with the
private sector, strengthen manufacturing, support our coastal
economies, and help us prepare for extreme weather events.
Dr. Copan, if I might, NIST is an organization I have great
respect for. I am disappointed the administration once again
proposes not to trim or cut or restructure, but to literally
eliminate funding for the Manufacturing Extension Partnership
Program in its fiscal year 2020 budget request. Three-quarters
of all manufacturing firms in our country have fewer than 20
employees. And the MEP has been a wonderful, helpful,
supportive resource for small and medium manufacturers not just
up and down my State of Delaware, but all over the country.
With bipartisan leadership from this subcommittee, we
rejected ill-advised cuts to the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership (MEP) last year. Can you give any comment about the
benefits of the MEP program and answer my concern about
eliminating Federal funding, which I think would profoundly and
negatively impact small manufacturers?
Dr. Copan. Thank you so much for that question, Senator
Coons. And thank you for the support that you and this
committee have provided for the right kinds of decisions that
are so important for this Nation.
The Manufacturing Extension Partnership has been a proven
program since its founding over 30 years ago. And recent
studies have shown that over 10 tax dollars are entered into
the United States Treasury from payroll taxes alone for every
one Federal dollar that is invested in the MEP. So it is clear
that it has a very broadly based impact and strong return on
investment to the United States.
During this budget formulation, some very difficult
decisions have been made. And clearly, part of the expectations
that we have is that this budget process would continue to
consider the benefits and the needs of the Nation for the
future employment for the retooling of the American workforce.
The NIST budget itself has a major lean forward in the
investment in quantum science and engineering, artificial
intelligence, the Internet of things, and many aspects that are
so important for the future of U.S. manufacturing----
Senator Coons. If you will forgive me, I have limited time.
I appreciate your answer. I will take it as an endorsement that
the MEP has not suddenly collapsed in its effectiveness as a
program, but rather, as you put it, the tough choices were
made. And I think we should wisely, on a bipartisan basis,
reject the suggestion that we eliminate one of the most
effective programs to support small manufacturers.
MANUFACTURING USA INSTITUTES
Let me, if I might, continue. Manufacturing USA institutes,
as you well know, are public-private partnerships that are
created to help grow advanced manufacturing in compelling new
segments. There are 14 institutes across the country developing
innovative technologies. Meanwhile, China has copied this
successful strategy and is standing up 40 similar advanced
manufacturing hubs.
Do you think NIST ought to support another Manufacturing
USA institute to help keep pace with our global competitors?
And how would institutes benefit from sustained funding beyond
the current 5- to 7-year limitation in place?
Dr. Copan. Thank you very much for that follow-on question,
Senator Coons.
And the Manufacturing USA institutes have delivered
phenomenal value to the United States, have retooled the
American workforce in advanced manufacturing, and certainly,
they have proven themselves over the initial years of funding
to be a very strong provider of value to the American
manufacturing economy.
Certainly, it is an area that we would anticipate further
conversations with you and with your staff about the future of
the Manufacturing USA institutes. We are aware that the
Department of Energy, for example, has proposed the creation of
yet another DOE-funded institute, and we are delighted at the
values being delivered by the National Institute for Innovation
in Manufacturing Biopharmaceuticals (NIIMBL) in the State of
Delaware.
Senator Coons. Well, thank you. I look forward to working
with Commerce and NIST, with DOE, with DOD, as we move forward
with reauthorization of Manufacturing USA institutes and as we
look at how we can shape them and sustain them.
Mr. Chairman, do we have time for me to ask two more
questions, or are there others clamoring to question?
Senator Moran. Senator Shaheen and I are clamoring, but we
will let you clamor first.
SEISMIC EXPLORATION
Senator Coons. I appreciate your forbearance. If I might,
briefly, Dr. Jacobs. NOAA issued permits for seismic testing
for five companies interested in exploring oil and gas deposits
off the Atlantic. And I, frankly, fail to see the need for
this, as our oil and gas production nationally has increased
and our net imports have decreased. Ten governors of both
parties have opposed seismic testing and drilling off their
coasts.
In my home State of Delaware, we have a significant tourism
industry, and I have heard nothing but objection to the idea of
seismic testing off our coast. Given significant opposition
from States and localities, why persist in seeking to open
additional areas for exploration off the Mid-Atlantic?
Dr. Jacobs. I am assuming this is probably with respect to
the right whales. These are some of the most protective
Incidental Harassment Authorizations (IHAs) for seismic
exploration implemented since last----
Senator Coons. Why don't you explain what an IHA is, if you
would, Dr. Jacobs?
Dr. Jacobs. It is an incidental harassment authorization.
It is NOAA's statutory authority that lies under the Marine
Mammals Protection Act. We issue these in response to an
application. The--we are not actually issuing or denying on the
actual seismic permits. I don't know if you are asking in
respect to the actual seismic----
RESEARCH AND GRANTS PROGRAMS FUNDING LEVELS
Senator Coons. Let me move on, Dr. Jacobs. I can see you
are not particularly prepared for this. Let me just ask a last
question of you, if I might?
The President's budget proposes a more than 40 percent cut
to NOAA research programs and the elimination of Sea Grant
programs. At a time when China is overtaking the United States
in R&D spending and climate change continues to cause more and
more expensive disasters, why would the Department request
reduced investments in these areas?
Dr. Jacobs. We are in a situation where we had to make some
tough budge choices, and we chose to really focus on retaining
our core capabilities to achieve our mission objectives of
protecting life and property. And unfortunately, that largely
came at the expense of various research grants.
Senator Coons. Mr. Platt, I appreciate you have got a very
broad representation from the Department today, but--and I may
have missed this answer earlier, but why are neither the
Secretary nor the Deputy Secretary here?
My impression was the Chairman had planned this hearing in
consultation with the Secretary to accommodate his schedule.
And I--frankly, although all of you are lovely, and I
appreciate your presence, that is sort of the point of having a
Secretary, so that he can answer Department-wide questions.
Mr. Platt. Senator, thank you for that.
After consultations and conversations with the Chairman
and, additionally, his staff, the Department and the
subcommittee came to an agreement that myself and the nine
Bureau heads here would appear before this panel to answer your
questions as this subcommittee does its important work to draft
a budget that both prioritizes and protects the core Government
functions and responsibilities of the Department of Commerce.
Senator Coons. What is the Secretary doing that he is not
available to appear before this subcommittee?
Mr. Platt. The Secretary is carrying out his duties as the
Secretary of Commerce currently. He is doing his job.
Senator Coons. We have enjoyed a good working relationship.
Please convey my regards. I simply miss the opportunity to
question him directly and appreciate all of you appearing here
today instead.
Thank you.
Mr. Platt. Thank you for the opportunity to be here.
SECTION 232 REPORTING
Senator Moran. Senator Coons, thank you. Your clamoring is
over.
Let me talk to Mr. Kaplan. On February 17, Mr. Kaplan, the
Department sent the White House its Section 232 investigative
report on whether auto imports are a threat to national
security. I co-signed a bipartisan letter to Secretary Ross
asking for responses to a number of questions regarding this
report and urged him to publish at least an executive summary
of the report as required by law as soon as possible.
What are the findings and conclusions of the Commerce
Department's auto report, Mr. Kaplan?
Mr. Kaplan. Thank you.
I think at this point it is before the White House and the
President. The 90-day period will end on May 18, and we expect
a decision or further information from the White House around
that time. I am not sure of the exact date. But I can't go into
the report because it is still under review at the White House.
Senator Moran. How does the law require the publishment of
that executive summary? How does that 90-day review at the
White House affect your ability or requirement to publish an
executive summary?
Mr. Kaplan. It is a little complicated, but Section 232
provides that 30 days after making a determination, the
President must submit to Congress a written statement of his
reasons for action or refusal to take action. The statement
must be published in the Federal Register, along with a
secretarial report on the disposition of the Section 232
request. Commerce regulations provide for publication of an
executive summary of the Secretary's report to the President in
the Federal Register. So that all will be done.
Senator Moran. Mr. Platt, do you have anything that I
should know about this topic? The process by which we can
expect some information about the 232 report?
Mr. Platt. Mr. Chairman, the Under Secretary covered the
landscape pretty well.
Senator Moran. Okay. What does that mean in regard to a
response to the letter that we sent to Secretary Ross asking
questions about the report?
Mr. Platt. Mr. Chairman, the Department, obviously, as I
will--I need to find that exact letter. I don't have it in
front of me at this moment. But I will go back to the office
with my staff and find out where that is in the process and get
you a response as soon as possible.
Senator Moran. Thank you very much, Mr. Platt.
Mr. Kaplan or Mr. Borman, does the Department have an
estimate of the number of product exclusion requests the
Department would receive if the 232 tariffs are invoked?
Mr. Kaplan. I don't think we have an estimate at this time.
Senator Moran. And therefore, I assume that the
Department's budget, this budget that we are talking about,
does not account for the possibility of having to run a 232
exclusion process for autos?
Mr. Kaplan. I think that is correct.
Senator Moran. And therefore wouldn't have an estimated
cost, I think you answered that question. You don't know how
many, and you don't know what the cost would be. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Kaplan. I think that is correct.
NOAA'S WEATHER PROGRAMS
Senator Moran. Okay. Mr. Jacobs--Dr. Jacobs, NOAA's weather
programs are very important. I have got to find you, Dr.
Jacobs. Thank you.
Dr. Jacobs, as we have talked before, those programs are
very important to this country, certainly to my constituents. I
just was in Northeast Kansas, saw the tremendous impacts of
tremendous flooding in communities not only in my State, but as
I stand in the very northeast corner, I can see the waters that
go as far as the eye can see into Iowa, and Missouri, and into
Nebraska.
I applaud the job that the National Weather Service did in
forecasting the flooding in the Midwest. I want to inquire what
NOAA is doing to develop seasonal to sub-seasonal forecasts.
How do we get more accurate, more long-range forecasts?
Dr. Jacobs. So the key to accuracy in seasonal and sub-
seasonal is both in a dynamical and statistical modeling
framework. We are doing a lot of work on the dynamical model,
the Finite-Volume Cubed-Sphere Dynamical Core (FV3), which is
the same dynamic core that we use for our global model. On the
statistical side, we essentially analyze the output of that
forecast to draw correlations and trends based on patterns that
we see. There is a lot of promising work we are doing on this
front.
Senator Moran. Are there bottlenecks or challenges in
improving the accuracy of those forecasts? And does the fiscal
year 2020 budget request support the efforts you just
described?
Dr. Jacobs. It does. One of the primary bottlenecks on the
dynamic modeling side is actually compute resources, as well as
harnessing the academic community's development. And the Earth
Prediction and Innovation Center is going to be one of the
capabilities that we put forward to allow the community to
access and develop our model code using commercial cloud
vendors external to NOAA.
QUESTIONS ON THE 2020 CENSUS
Senator Moran. I probably will come back to you, Dr.
Jacobs, but let me again turn to Senator Shaheen.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platt, I am going to direct this question at you, since
you are representing the Office of the Secretary. Last year,
Secretary Ross told this committee that it is necessary to
include a citizenship question in the 2020 Census in order for
the Department of Justice to enforce the Voting Rights Act.
Stating, and I quote, ``Well, the Justice Department is the one
who made the request of us.''
However, as part of ongoing lawsuits brought by States
concerned about the effects of adding a citizenship question to
a complete and accurate count, it was revealed that, in fact,
the Secretary petitioned the Justice Department to request to
add the question after agitation by Steve Bannon and others in
the Trump administration. In fact, just yesterday morning, the
President tweeted that the Census would be ``meaningless and a
waste without the 'all-important citizenship question.' ''
So, Mr. Platt, the documents released as part of the
ongoing lawsuits show that the Secretary spoke with Steve
Bannon and Kris Kobach in early 2017 about adding the
citizenship question. The Secretary then petitioned the Justice
Department to request the addition of a question, including
personally enlisting the help of Attorney General Sessions.
There is a clear fact pattern demonstrating that the
Secretary wanted to include the citizenship question. So he
shopped the idea around until he convinced the Department of
Justice to request adding it. Can you tell us if that is a
correct analysis?
Mr. Platt. Madam Vice Chair, thank you for the opportunity
to be here and address your questions.
The Secretary laid out his reasoning as to the ideas and
the reasoning behind reinstating a citizenship question for the
2020 Decennial Census in his March 26 memo to then Under
Secretary Karen Dunn Kelley. And all of the information is
contained within that decision memo regarding the reinstatement
of the question.
Senator Shaheen. Well, again, Mr. Platt, I have the
Secretary's correspondence right here. I request, Mr. Chairman,
that we enter this in the record. They are relevant emails, and
folks don't have to take my word for it.
As part of the ruling that the addition of the question
broke the law, U.S. District Court Judge Jesse Furman ruled
that, ``Secretary Ross made the decision to add a citizenship
question well before he received DOJ's request (and for reasons
unrelated to the Voting Rights Act).''
In a separate decision against the Department, U.S.
District Judge Richard Seeborg ruled that Secretary Ross
engaged in a ``cynical search to find some reason, any reason,
or an agency request to justify that preordained result.'' I
hope the Supreme Court makes the right decision here.
Mr. Chairman, can we enter these into the record?
Senator Moran. Without objection.
[The information follows on the next page:]
CLIMATE RESEARCH FUNDING
Senator Shaheen. Thank you.
I would like to go now to Mr. Jacobs. In 2016, the New
Hampshire Coastal Risk and Hazards Commission released a report
that found that New Hampshire sea levels are expected to rise
between 6 inches and 2 feet by 2050 and that they could rise as
much as 6\1/2\ feet by the year 2100. We are facing a loss of
oceanfront properties, storm damage, and flooding of record
proportions.
And if you look at the blow-ups behind me--I hope you can
see those, Dr. Jacobs--what they show is the recent king tide
that we had last month. That shows the impact in coastal areas
of those rising seas. You can see the top one is high tide, the
bottom one is low tide, and the difference that it makes when
those tides come in, that major king tide.
So, in New Hampshire, we understand that the climate is
changing, and we know that we are going to continue to see the
impacts of this change. The NOAA climate research program helps
our communities and communities across this country understand
and prepare for the effects of climate change.
However, this budget cuts climate research by 38 percent.
So can you talk about how NOAA is going to continue to help
communities with that kind of a budget cut?
Dr. Jacobs. So the budget that we are proposing still
retains $88 million for climate, $98 million for oceans, and
$110 million for weather. A lot of work we are doing on the
weather side actually bleeds over into the climate capability.
Our forecasting will remain the same both on weather and
climate, as well as seasonal and sub-seasonal.
We very much take seriously sea level rise and getting that
information out to the public, and we are actually investing in
data portals to get the information out to the various
stakeholders, including all of our calculations for potential
sea level rise.
Senator Shaheen. So if the research is going to remain the
same, what are you cutting with that 38 percent?
Dr. Jacobs. The external grants for research will not
remain the same. It is the internal forecasting capabilities.
Senator Shaheen. So the assistance that is provided to
communities to help address this issue is what is being cut?
Dr. Jacobs. A lot of the work we do with our various
academic stakeholders is being cut.
Senator Shaheen. So that the work that academic
stakeholders are doing to address this issue is being cut. Can
you tell me if the Sustainability Institute at the University
of New Hampshire will be affected by these cuts?
Dr. Jacobs. Almost all of our various research institutes
are proposed to take a cut in one way or another. However, a
lot of this research we will be relying on stakeholders to
access our information, as well as our code. We make all of
that available. So my hope is that they can continue to work on
development of a lot of these programs. And to the extent that
we can harness innovation, I am all for that.
Senator Shaheen. I think we are all for harnessing
innovation, but sometimes we need to help provide some
incentives to do that and some help as communities and
universities are trying to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator Capito.
SUPERCOMPUTING CAPABILITIES
Senator Capito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all of you
for being here.
Dr. Jacobs, I am going to stick with you then for a moment
here. I am very proud of the work that NOAA's Environmental
Security Computing Center is doing in Fairmont, West Virginia,
and I believe NOAA shares that opinion. Over the last several
years, the Appropriations Committee has provided billions of
dollars to NOAA and NASA to launch the new GOES satellites, as
well as deploy new technologies.
Can you discuss the funding proposal in this budget for
your supercomputing capabilities?
Dr. Jacobs. So there is two aspects to this. There is--and
I could actually divide those two aspects in half as well. We
have the operational compute and the research compute. A lot of
the research compute, we are examining other alternatives for
cloud-based computing, as well as various hosted solutions.
On operational compute, we are right at the beginning of
drafting a proposal for the refresh. And the supercomputing
that we acquire here, I should mention, thank you very much for
the support in the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and
Information Service (NESDIS) reauthorization because that
actually includes direction for us to examine leasing versus
outright buying capabilities, which is a lot more cost-
effective, a better deal for the taxpayer.
Because we know that when we use operational compute at
roughly 97 percent capacity and we are running these computer
models 24-7, getting on a regular refresh cycle roughly every 3
years is extremely helpful. And obviously, having places to
host it in various data centers is critical for us.
Senator Capito. Thank you.
EDA--INFRASTRUCTURE AND INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS
Dr. Fleming, when you came before the Senate, the EPW
Committee for your confirmation, I told you then, as I will
tell you again, how important the EDA funding has been to a
small State of West Virginia. We have mostly invested over the
last several years--has had $36 million worth of investment for
infrastructure development, industrial expansion,
infrastructure support for entrepreneurship.
I know you represent a State that has a lot of smaller
communities--or did represent a State that has a lot of smaller
communities. As you develop the 2020 budget and we develop it,
will you work with me to make sure that our priority is on
these infrastructure and industrial projects? And do you have
any comments along those lines?
Dr. Fleming. Senator Capito, I would be delighted to do
that and look forward to visiting your lovely State. And also
to remind you that just in 2018, EDA applied $30 million in
grants towards the distressed communities relative to coal and
the loss of coal production.
Senator Capito. Right. And those are being effectively
worked, and we appreciate that.
NATIONAL BROADBAND AVAILABILITY MAP TIMELINE
Mr. Redl, I think this may be a repeat question, but you
probably know what I am going to ask. It is about the broadband
mapping. This has been a commitment that I have made to my
citizens in West Virginia. West Virginia was selected as one of
eight States to broaden and update the National Broadband
Availability Map.
I guess my question is, what is your timeline is my basic
question. But what kind of accuracy--since this has been the
issue that we have had, are you going to be able to assure us
the accuracy of this data, as opposed to the data that we have
seen in the past?
Mr. Redl. Well, thank you, Senator. And thank you, as I
mentioned to your colleague from West Virginia, for the
leadership of the West Virginia delegation on this issue.
Our current timeline is that we expect to have the platform
stood up in the cloud, we hope, by the end of the second half
of this calendar year, with a usable map for policymakers by
the end of fiscal year 2019. And that usable map will be
focused on bringing in nationwide data from sources that we
have access to, like the FCC's Form 477 data, but then
supplementing that with the data we have from States like West
Virginia that are our initial States that we are working with
and as many commercial datasets that we can get our hands on.
And I think that is the key that we are looking at here is
to try and put together a more comprehensive picture of
broadband availability and getting our hands on as much data as
possible. Having stood up the platform and found some target
States, we are now looking to try and work with the providers
to get access to their data, and we have been in productive
conversations with them. But also with companies that produce
commercial datasets, who go out and field test and get actual
data from the field.
We are in the early stages of trying to work through that,
thanks to the fiscal year 2019 appropriation containing an
additional $7.5 million, and we thank you for the ongoing
support from Congress. We are excited that the President also
included another $7.5 million for fiscal year 2020 as a vote of
confidence in what we are doing. We look forward to putting
together a map that you can be proud of.
Senator Capito. Well, and I look forward to that, too. I
guess my note of caution would be from past practices, I am not
sure that the providers--is that like me grading myself on my
test? Yes, it is. And I would encourage you, I know that we, as
a State, have collected much more granular and accurate data.
So I am pleased to know that you are using that.
But I just feel that the provider-provided data is way over
inflated in some cases. And I think it results, too, in some
overbuilding of capacity in some places where there are still
areas that appear to be served and available and affordable
when, in reality, anybody who lives in the neighborhood knows
that is not the case. I know you know this, and that is why I
am glad that NTIA is taking on this task in a much broader
fashion. Because we are never going to solve this problem if we
don't get the accurate data.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Mr. Redl, you seemed to indicate that you
wanted to respond to Senator Capito.
Mr. Redl. I would be happy to. I just wanted to say thank
you. We completely agree. The carriers are certainly going to
be important partners in this process and one part of the
dataset. But our focus at NTIA, in trying to fulfill what
Congress has asked us to do, is to bring as much data in as
possible. And by bringing in as many different data sources,
that is where you will find the discrepancies. That is what we
are trying to do.
So thank you for your support.
Senator Capito. Could I ask one more question?
Senator Moran. Senator Capito.
CENSUS AND SURVEYS
Senator Capito. Okay, sorry. Census, Mr. Census. Mr.
Dillingham--Dr. Dillingham, excuse me. My household, I think,
was selected to have a deep-dive Census question, where the
Census worker came in--I hope this was a Census worker. No, I
am joking. But, yes, came in and talked with me and my husband
as both residents of our home on different kinds of subjects.
The one that she interviewed me on happened to be about
smoking.
What do you do with this data? And how is that formulated,
and how often do you do that?
Dr. Dillingham. Senator, thank you so much for the
question.
We do more than a hundred censuses and surveys, and we
partner with many of our Federal agencies. And I am very much
aware that we do surveys on health issues. We do them with
crime issues. We do them with a number of issues, and some of
the subjects are more sensitive than others.
So we have special arrangements with the Federal agencies.
Sometimes we financially partner, and sometimes we do it as a
reimbursable. So I could certainly look into the health survey
that you participated in.
But in my prior experience in the Federal Government, I was
Director of the Bureau of Justice Statistics, and we had their
Crime Victimization Surveys and trying to measure such things
as sexual assaults and other violent crimes. So we had to make
sure that our staff was specially trained to be very sensitive
to the needs of the respondents and to have extra precautions
and to assure them that that data and the confidentiality of
that data is well protected. So I hope that was your
experience.
Senator Capito. Absolutely was my experience.
Dr. Dillingham. Well, thank you very much.
Senator Capito. Yes, she was excellent. And she had
interviewed my husband on several different other topics. So,
no, we felt very secure about what information we were giving.
I just didn't know. I was curious. I am sure it is a random
search to how get those households, and then I am sure that is
all kept undercover, who it is. But I wasn't aware, I guess,
that the Census does more than just, you know, every 10 years
count the number of people. It does a Census for everything. So
thank you very much.
Dr. Dillingham. Thank you.
Senator Moran. Senator Capito, thank you very much.
SECTION 232
I want to go back to Mr. Kaplan again. Mr. Kaplan, on
Section 232, I think we established that there is no accounting
in this budget for an exclusion process on autos. Last year,
the Department requested a reprogramming for Section 232
expenditures.
Would that be your expectation again, that if the President
imposes the tariffs, there would be a Section 232 process?
There is nothing in this budget to pay for it. And my question
is then now, therefore, what would you expect to occur?
Mr. Kaplan. Well, truthfully, I think it is maybe early to
anticipate this. I don't know what the result is going to be,
and I think I would rather discuss that with you and the
subcommittee if that occasion arises.
Senator Moran. I understand that answer, and I mean, I am
accepting of that answer. But the issue for me and for my
colleagues is, is you are probably going to be asking for the
opportunity to reprogram funds from something we appropriated
them to, to something else.
And just the integrity of the appropriation process is
important as we try to make decisions where we are going to put
money in this budget. But we can have further conversations. As
you indicated, 90 days has not yet expired. That is not very
far away. And I would welcome the chance to have additional
discussions about this.
Mr. Kaplan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. You are very welcome, Mr. Kaplan.
I am going to continue on Section 232 in a different vein.
In that regard, and similar I guess, it is in the same vein.
This could be for you, Mr. Borman, as well. The Department
initially told this committee that it expected to receive
somewhere between 6,000 and 13,000 total Section 232 product
exclusion requests in response to the tariffs on steel and
aluminum.
As of January, now 3 months ago, the Department of Commerce
had received nearly 75,000 requests, 6 times increase over the
original projections. The Department--this is subjective on my
part, I suppose, but the Commerce Department did not adequately
estimate the number of Section 232 steel and aluminum product
exclusion requests, which has led to an increase for funding
and resources to execute the administration's trade agenda.
The question that comes with that is how does the
Department's 2020 request for the Bureau of Industry and
Security and for International Trade address the need to carry
out timely Section 232 exclusion process?
Mr. Borman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
start by thanking you and the Vice Chairman of the committee
for the $4.5 million in the fiscal year 2019 budget for us to
work on the 232 exclusion process.
And I would also like to thank you and the Vice Chairman
and the staff on an unrelated topic, but codifying our
political appointee positions for our Bureau as a result of the
Export Control Reform Act, and particularly your staff Matt
Womble and Jean Toal-Eisen for that.
Now to your question----
Senator Moran. You are welcome.
Mr. Borman. Sorry. So for the 2020 budget, our request for
the Bureau of Industry and Security builds in that $4.5 million
into our base. So that total bureau number includes that $4.5
million, in addition to the two program increases for emerging
technology and foreign investment review.
And in terms of the estimate, the numbers, we based that on
the 2002 and 2001, 201 steel safeguards action, which were--
there were roughly, as I recall about 6,000 exclusion requests.
Obviously, there turned out to be quite a few more in the
current process. But with the $3.5 million reprogramming
authorization that we received in fiscal year 2018, we have
hired contractors to really be able to accelerate our process,
and we have made a number of process improvements. So we have
now processed more than 45,000 of the roughly 80,000 exclusion
requests we have received.
Senator Moran. What is the average wait time before a
decision is made?
Mr. Borman. It is hard to say, because one of the
improvements we made, at the request of many members and
companies, was to add a rebuttal/surrebuttal process, which
makes for more informed decisions but, by definition, pushes
the timeline out.
So I would say right now, if it is a request that did not
have an objection, we just go to Customs and Border Protection
to verify the HTS code, you are probably talking in the 70- to
80- to 90-day timeframe. That also will be much faster now
because CBP is now looking at these right at the initiation of
the request. For the ones that have objections, rebuttals,
surrebuttals, you are still talking well over 100 days until we
get through the first wave.
We also have, hopefully, at the end of this month, early
next month, a new platform for companies to use to submit their
requests, which will certainly expedite the process from where
it is today.
Senator Moran. While Mr. Kaplan was indicative of the
speculation involved in my earlier question, so what do we
learn from what you just described? And what does that mean how
we prepare for 232 in relation to autos? This is, I think, more
of a question for you, Mr. Borman, but I think I have heard Mr.
Kaplan's answer. So, Mr. Borman?
Mr. Borman. The Section 232 on autos was done by Mr.
Kaplan's shop.
Senator Moran. But what should we learn from what you just
described about demand, Mr. Kaplan?
Mr. Kaplan. Well, I think, again, I don't know where that
is all going to come out. But I think what we can learn from
looking at what happened here is we have got to be very well
prepared and predict what might occur if there is any action on
the 232. And we can look at the steel and aluminum situation
and learn from that experience.
PROTECTING SENSITIVE DATA FOR NOAA AND NIST
Senator Moran. Please do. Let me turn to maybe Dr. Copan,
but you as well, Dr. Jacobs. Both of your agencies perform a
wide range of important research and operational activities
that either rely on or produce sensitive data. Much of that
work is done in concert with trusted academic partners. I saw
in a recent Wall Street Journal article that it detailed a
couple of attempts by foreign adversaries to hack more than two
dozen universities and steal valuable research data.
As the prevalence of cyberattacks continue to rise, it is
important that we protect that data that you produce and that
you rely on, as well as your mission of critical operating
systems. Do NOAA's and NIST's 2020 requests address the needs
to protect sensitive data and harden cyber defenses?
We talked a bit about this with Dr. Dillingham on the
Census, but this article did capture my attention. A lot of
money comes out of our appropriations process from the
taxpayers of the United States. A lot of students get engaged
in research. And what is it that we do both on our side and on
the academic side to protect that from adversarial attack?
Dr. Copan. Let me begin with a response, Mr. Chairman.
Cybersecurity continues to be an absolutely top priority
for us at the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
The budget request actually includes a slight increase over the
prior year's investment in cybersecurity and related
technologies, including broad support for the business
community and for small industry, which has control of much
data that is important across the U.S. supply chain.
NIST's work includes not only the development of frameworks
and standards, but also the communication of those processes
and those tools, including to the academic sector and across
the Federal interagency. The entire issue of data security and
integrity and the importance of the use of this information in
the Nation's interest to ensure that we gain the return on
investment and we support our national security interest is
absolutely high priority.
Dr. Jacobs. NOAA's budget request includes an increase of
$5 million, and it is examining both the insider threat, as
well as scrubbing through secure ingest techniques, external
data that we bring in. In most cases, we make a lot of our data
free and openly available to the public. So actually having it
stolen is probably not an issue because we give it away.
But there are other software and operating systems and
things like that that we are concerned about protecting. So
that is where the insider threat comes into play. But one of
our primary concerns is bringing in external data that we use
to initialize and drive our forecasts and scrubbing that data
to make sure that there is no bad things in it before we
assimilate it into our models.
MAINTAINING AMERICA'S LEADERSHIP POSITION IN KEY INDUSTRIES
Senator Moran. Let me ask just again, perhaps Dr. Copan,
how does the 2020 request address the needs to maintain the
United States position as a driving force in innovation, global
scientific and technological innovation? And the other question
will be, where does it fail to do so? I would guess it is an
easier question for you to tell me where we are succeeding, but
what would you want me and others to worry about?
Dr. Copan. Thank you very much for that question, Mr.
Chairman.
And indeed, there are difficult decisions that are involved
in formulation of the proposed budget. The priorities at NIST
are those that have been identified also by the administration
as key areas for leadership in the industries of the future.
And this includes the Nation's priorities in quantum science
and to maintain a position of leadership in quantum information
science.
The role that NIST plays also in measurement science
enables some of the early commercial applications, including
those with quantum simulators and the early quantum hybrid
computational systems. Artificial intelligence is another major
area for the Nation. NIST has a lead role in that field, and
our budget appropriately prioritizes the importance of
artificial intelligence for the future of American productivity
and of our scientific enterprise.
We also focus on the future of the U.S. semiconductor
manufacturing sector and related technologies. And so,
ultimately, our focus in these areas means that there are
several broad areas where NIST has in this budget proposal to
make some cuts. And NIST's research and development agenda is
broad. It covers from the leading edge of measurement science
to the deployment of technology in our manufacturing sectors
across existing markets, as well as emerging markets.
And so as you, I am sure, with the staff have seen, this
means reductions then across the board not only in the
Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program that Senator Coons
asked about, but also in our work in fundamental measurements
around health and biological systems, reductions in our
physical infrastructure resilience programs, reductions in our
user facility maintenance in support of research for the
Nation. Our programs in advanced materials and related
manufacturing support and also reductions in our work in
advanced communications, networks, and scientific data systems.
So, indeed, it is a broad series of impacts.
But, on the other hand, our focus on the priorities of the
industries of the future are intended not only to maintain
NIST's core capabilities, but also to ensure America's
leadership position in these key industries.
NEW DELIVERY MODEL FOR MBDA
Senator Moran. We want to achieve that goal.
Mr. Childs, let me ask you a question and then turn to
Senator Shaheen. We have heard from you about the agency's
desire to expand the Broad Agency grant program. I want to give
you a chance to elaborate on your plan for that program and
tell us how it would be helpful in advancing minority business.
Mr. Childs. Yes, absolutely. Thank you for the opportunity.
As I mentioned earlier, we are trying to look at a new
delivery model for MBDA. And I will just give an example why.
In fiscal year 2018, we spent $10.4 million on our business
centers, and they served about 3,400 clients. Now, there are 11
million minority-owned businesses, and with our business
centers we are able to touch 3,000 plus.
So we have to do a more effective job in moving waves of
minority businesses up the chain at a time. We know that
minority businesses are growing at twice the rate of non-
minority businesses, but they are not the size and scale.
So, through our Broad Area Announcements (BAAs), we asked
the public to come, send us your most innovative projects, and
the response was historic. We had the most applications we have
ever had, about 6,900, and we were only able to fund 35. So 95
percent of the projects were not able to be funded. And we
think with the second year, we are able to get some data to
show the effectiveness of them.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
very much for continuing your questions. I have only a few more
myself.
TRAVEL AND TOURISM
This one is for you Mr. Kaplan. And I know that there has
been concern on the part of this administration for the trade
deficit that we have and the dollars that are leaving the
United States. But one of the areas that I hope is being looked
at as an opportunity to make up some of those loses is through
travel and tourism.
I remember being the Governor of New Hampshire where we did
a hearing at the National Governors Association, and we heard
from the tourism industry that the United States was the only
country in the West that did not advertise internationally to
try and attract travelers to the United States. We passed
something called Brand USA in Congress. It had strong
bipartisan support. It is a public-private partnership, as you
know, that promotes tourism in the U.S. It is funded by the
private sector and by foreign visitors.
And the investment in Brand USA, I would argue, has paid
off dramatically. In New Hampshire, we see a $9 return on
investment for every dollar that the State and local government
puts into promoting tourism, and it is even better at the
Federal level. For every dollar Brand USA spends, tourists and
travelers spend $28.
What we have learned in New Hampshire, where tourism is our
State's second-largest industry, is that international
travelers stay longer, and they spend more money. These
investments support additional jobs in America. They support
additional dollars coming from outside of this country into the
United States.
The authorization for Brand USA to receive fees expires at
the end of fiscal year 2020. If that expires, the ability for
Brand USA to continue to advertise around the world to attract
people to come to the United States would also end. So can you
talk about whether you think this authorization should be
extended?
Mr. Kaplan. Thank you, Senator, or Vice Chair.
I want to emphasize first that we are very concerned about
travel and tourism. We are aware that international travel
accounts for 32 percent of our exports and for 11 percent of
our exports overall. In 2017, U.S. travel and tourism totaled
$251.4 billion from leisure, medical, and educational travel,
including $42.4 billion in education exports alone.
So we are totally committed to this. Our U.S. Export
Assistance Centers (USEACs) all across the country and our
foreign commercial service offices all work on that. I have
visited offices across the country and even in some of the
States to look at the travel programs.
We at ITA continue to certify Brand USA participants, and
we promote tourism. I think the issue of that particular
program is part of the President's budget, and we support that
budget.
Senator Shaheen. And my understanding is that the
President's budget assumes the elimination of Brand USA.
Mr. Kaplan. I think that is correct.
Senator Shaheen. So how will we continue to do that kind of
international advertising if we no longer have an entity that
can do that?
Mr. Kaplan. Well, we have a Travel and Tourism Office at
ITA. And as I said, our USEACs and our foreign commercial
service is very committed to promoting travel and tourism. It
is an enormous, positive industry for the United States and the
service sector, and we will do everything we can to continue
promoting that.
Senator Shaheen. But there are also cuts proposed to the
foreign commercial service as well, right?
Mr. Kaplan. There are, yes.
Senator Shaheen. Well, it seems to me that this budget is
inconsistent with what the President says he wants to do with
respect to reducing the trade deficit.
AT-SEA MONITORING
Dr. Jacobs, I wonder if you could talk to me a little bit
about the reduction, or the elimination of the funding to
support at-sea monitoring for our fishing industry. As you
know, fishermen in the Northeast are facing a changing
environment where catches are down. Revenues have been reduced
dramatically for the fishing industry in the Northeast. And one
of the burdens that has made it harder for them is the cost of
at-sea monitors, which, without support from NOAA, the
fishermen will have to cover those costs themselves.
I appreciate the work that you did and the agency did in
executing the funding last year. I hope we can continue those
conversations. And I wonder if you can talk to me about how you
see continuing to help the fishing industry with those at-sea
monitoring--with at-sea monitoring help.
Dr. Jacobs. Thank you for the question. We very much
appreciate the support for the at-sea monitoring in the past
and look forward to working with you on this in the future.
We do retain $44 million for this around the country, but
it is true there is a $10.3 million decrease. We are committed
to ensuring the accountability of all the fisheries, and we are
currently exploring new and innovative ways to do this,
including electronic monitoring and such, and would really
appreciate the opportunity to work with you and your staff on
this.
Senator Shaheen. And I appreciate the help that is being
provided on the electronic monitoring. I think that everyone is
hoping that as fishermen get used to that and better understand
how that is going to work, that that provides the ultimate
avenue to address this concern. But until that happens, should
I assume, looking at the numbers, that you have cut the entire
$10 million that was in last year's budget to help with the at-
sea monitoring costs?
Dr. Jacobs. Well, we will do everything we can within our
budget to make sure that we ensure accountability in all the
fisheries.
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY FUNDING LEVEL
Senator Shaheen. Well, you know, I have heard a number of
you talk about the need to cut budgets, and the money has to
come from somewhere. And yet the President's proposed budget
includes a 60 percent increase for the Office of the Secretary,
or $38 million. Now I might--maybe, Mr. Platt, you could talk
to us about what that $38 million increase is going to be used
for?
Mr. Platt. Thank you, Madam Vice Chair.
So that is a two-pronged answer. Twenty-two million of that
is for our business application solution project. That is a 5-
year, $215 million effort aimed at modernizing our financial
system. You know, we have owned and operated custom code
financial system for 20 years. The system interfaces, they are
costly to support, and the system is actually outdated compared
to current commercial offerings. The other $10 million, the
majority of that increase request concerns the Office of Space
Commerce.
Senator Shaheen. What does that mean?
Mr. Platt. So that is a--the proposal to reallocate
resources of $3.6 million and 11 positions from NOAA
Operations, Research, and Facilities and $6.4 million in new
appropriations. The office will focus on various sectors of the
space commerce industry, including satellite navigation,
commercial remote sensing, space transportation, and
entrepreneurial activities.
Senator Shaheen. And why would we want to take that out of
NOAA and put it in the Office of the Secretary, when the
expertise is all in NOAA?
Mr. Platt. Well, the expertise is currently still in NOAA
and NESDIS. Well, first of all, the Secretary is very engaged
in this.
Senator Shaheen. Maybe the Secretary should have been here
this afternoon to make the case for why we should move those
dollars from NOAA. Because I certainly don't support that, and
I will do everything I can to ensure that that doesn't happen.
Mr. Platt. So there are three strong arguments for creating
the Bureau within the Department, given the economic and
national security importance of the U.S. commercial space
industry. First, there is a strong side of the administration's
commitment to harness the power of the commercial space
industry. Second, because the Bureau can effectively tap all of
the Department's many organizations that are pertinent to the
commercial industry. And third, because the reconciliation of
key policy issues involving DOD and State require co-equal
representation on behalf of the Department of Commerce.
Senator Shaheen. Well, I appreciate your talking points,
Mr. Platt. You haven't convinced me.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Senator Shaheen, thank you.
It is my practice to always ask the witnesses if they have
anything they would like to add for the record, something you
wished you would have been asked that you weren't. My guess is
that it works, perhaps, mostly the other way. But if there is
something you would like to augment what you said or make
certain that we have in front of us, any words of wisdom,
suggestions, or corrections, I would be glad to hear from any
or all of you.
MBDA BAA APPLICATION CORRECTION
Mr. Childs. I have a word of wisdom, which is don't mess up
your numbers as a businessman. So I told you that our BAA
applications, we got 6,900. I want to correct that, it was 669.
But it was still 94 percent over subscription. So I want to
thank you for letting me correct it.
Senator Moran. Thank you for the correction.
Anyone else? Yes, sir, Mr. Copan.
NIST FACILITIES
Dr. Copan. Mr. Chairman, one of the areas that I did not
have the opportunity to discuss was an important part of the
U.S. infrastructure, and that is facilities. Our United States
Federal laboratories, and NIST is a great example, was built in
the 1950s and 1960s primarily, and we do face challenges.
The budget does provide for some creative financing
solutions for the challenges of maintenance and facilities
construction, but we do appreciate the opportunity to work with
this committee in this important element of the United States
research infrastructure and our future competitiveness in a
much different competitive global environment than this Nation
has ever faced.
Senator Moran. Thank you for raising that.
Anyone else?
Dr. Fleming. Mr. Chairman.
Senator Moran. Yes, sir, Dr. Fleming.
EDA OPPORTUNITY ZONES
Dr. Fleming. With respect to EDA, I made reference to this,
but didn't get a chance to develop it. As you recall, through
the Tax Cut and Jobs Act of 2017, there were created
Opportunity Zones. We have taken that on in terms of that
creates that Census tract that has been selected by governors
across the country is an eligible Census tract with respect to
EDA. And we are particularly offering expertise or the funding
of expertise in order for private capital to be brought into
these Opportunity Zones.
The Treasury has already predicted as much as $100 billion
over time of capital investment. So this is an opportunity to
attract capital investment into distressed areas, which is
where we are most interested. So I thought it was important to
bring this out. I think it is a tremendous development, and I
think it is one in which both sides of the aisle will really
appreciate.
Senator Moran. Doctor, thank you. Mr. Platt.
OFFICE OF SPACE COMMERCE
Mr. Platt. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Vice Chairman, I wanted to clarify that the Office of Space
Commerce, the reason why we need to elevate this is because the
Department has no less than six agencies within it directly
contributing to space commerce activities. And so, the idea is
to elevate it so that we can leverage all of those assets at
the secretarial level.
Senator Moran. Thank you.
Senator Shaheen. Thank you for the clarification.
Senator Moran. Anyone else?
[No response.]
ADDITIONAL COMMITTEE QUESTIONS
Senator Moran. No further questions from the Members of the
subcommittee. Senators may submit additional questions for the
subcommittee's official hearing record. We would request that
the Department of Commerce--we would request the Department of
Commerce responses within 30 days.
[The following questions were not asked at the hearing, but
were submitted to the Department for response subsequent to the
hearing:]
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR RICHARD C. SHELBY
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Gil Kaplan, International Trade Administration
Question 1. Several of my constituents have raised concerns about
Commerce's application of ``total adverse facts available'' (``AFA'')
in anti-dumping investigations and reviews. As you know, in 1994,
Congress enacted the statute authorizing the Department of Commerce to
apply AFA in situations in which data is erroneous or missing from the
record, and the party involved failed to cooperate to the best of its
ability. Congress strengthened that law in the Trade Preferences
Extension Act of 2015.
However, I am concerned about the possible abuse of the Department
of Commerce's authority to apply AFA, in a couple of ways: first, the
inconsistent and arbitrary manner in which it is applied; and second,
the over-use of total AFA.
1a. In individual anti-dumping cases, what is the basis on
which Department of Commerce officials decide that a party's
response is so inadequate that it must be entirely rejected and
replaced with total AFA?
Answer. Commerce has a statutory obligation to vigorously
enforce U.S. trade laws to prevent foreign competitors from
gaining an unfair advantage through injurious dumping and
subsidization. In conducting an antidumping or countervailing
proceeding, the full cooperation of the respondent is essential
to ensure that the Department can render decisions that are
accurate and fully informed. Decisions to apply total AFA to a
respondent are made on a case-specific and respondent-specific
basis; therefore, there are no pre-established guidelines for
determining when it is appropriate to apply total AFA beyond
those outlined in the AD/CVD laws and set forth in court
rulings. Specifically, sections 776(a)(2)(B) and (D) of the
Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (the Act), provides that if a
respondent fails to provide information within the established
deadlines or provides information but the information cannot be
verified, Commerce shall use, subject to section 782(d) of the
Act, facts otherwise available in reaching the applicable
determination. Moreover, section 776(b) of the Act provides
that, if Commerce finds that an interested party failed to
cooperate by not acting to the best of its ability to comply
with a request for information, Commerce may use an inference
adverse to the interests of that party in selecting the facts
otherwise available. In addition, the Statement of
Administrative Action explains that Commerce may employ an
adverse inference ``to ensure that the party does not obtain a
more favorable result by failing to cooperate than if it had
cooperated fully.''
1b. In other words, how does the Department of Commerce
decide that no information submitted by the respondent can be
used, and that partial AFA cannot be used to fill the gaps?
Answer. When Commerce determines that a respondent's failures
are so pervasive that they undermine Commerce's confidence in
the reliability of the respondent's reporting, then Commerce
will determine that the application of total AFA is appropriate
because it cannot rely on any of the respondent's responses or
reported data for calculating an accurate AD/CVD rate.
1c. On what basis do Department of Commerce officials decide
that an error or gap in the data is due to a refusal to
cooperate by a responding party, as opposed to just an error or
confusion? Recall, that Congress included in the law (19 USC
1677e(b)) the requirement that Commerce find a failure to
cooperate before AFA may be applied.
Answer. In Nippon Steel, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) noted that while the statute
does not provide an express definition of the ``failure to act
to the best of its ability'' standard, the ordinary meaning of
``best'' is ``one's maximum effort.'' \2\ Thus, according to
the Federal Circuit, the statutory mandate that a respondent
act to the ``best of its ability'' requires the respondent to
do the maximum it is able to do. The Federal Circuit indicated
that inadequate responses to an agency's inquiries would
suffice to find that a respondent did not act to the best of
its ability. While the Federal Circuit noted that the ``best of
its ability'' standard does not require perfection, it does not
condone inattentiveness, carelessness, or inadequate record
keeping.\3\ The ``best of its ability'' standard recognizes
that mistakes sometimes occur; however, it requires a
respondent to, among other things, ``have familiarity with all
of the records it maintains,'' and ``conduct prompt, careful,
and comprehensive investigations of all relevant records that
refer or relate to the imports in question to the full extent
of'' its ability to do so.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Nippon Steel, 337 F.3d at 1382-83.
\3\ Id. at 1382.
\4\ Id.
1d. What oversight is conducted by Department of Commerce
supervisors to ensure that total AFA is applied consistently by
staff across cases--that is, in similar situations, it is
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
applied (or not applied) in the same way?
Answer. Before Commerce makes any decision in an AD/CVD
proceeding, whether that be a decision to apply total-AFA,
partial-AFA, or any other adjustment or determination, Commerce
staff undertake an extensive concurrence process. This
concurrence process involves meetings to discuss the issues and
interested parties' comments among the case team analysts,
accountants, lawyers, policy professionals, managers, office
directors, and finally, senior and executive level decision-
makers. All Commerce decisions reflect the input and review of
all offices and decision-makers to ensure these determinations
are applied fairly and consistently across proceedings.
1e. Does Commerce have policies and procedures in place to
ensure that total AFA is not misused? If so, please provide a
written copy of those policies and procedures.
Answer. All Commerce's determinations to apply total-AFA are
subject to a rigorous review and concurrence process and are
made in strict accordance with the statute and Commerce's
regulations.
1f. What is the trend in the number of cases in which
Commerce has applied total AFA over the past 5 years (i.e.,
2013-2018)?
Answer. The number of cases in which Commerce has applied
total AFA to at least one of the selected mandatory respondent
companies that failed to cooperate in an AD/CVD investigation
or administrative review has increased in each of the 5 years
from 2013 through 2018.
1g. For each year, please provide the number of cases that
the Department of Commerce imposed total AFA? The circumstances
under which the decision was made to impose total AFA? And, an
explanation of why, in those cases, did it determine that
partial AFA could not be used?
Answer. The table below shows the number of AD/CVD final
decisions for both AD/CVD investigations and administrative
reviews in which Commerce relied on total AFA for at least one
mandatory respondent. In approximately half of the cases, one
or more mandatory respondents did not participate in the
proceeding and therefore received total AFA. For the other half
of the cases, the mandatory respondents receiving total AFA
filed at least one questionnaire response but nonetheless
failed to cooperate to the best of its ability. For each of the
cases in the table below, Commerce has provided information
that includes the case number, the name of the product under
investigation or review, and URL links to the published Federal
Register notice and the Issues and Decision Memorandum (IDM)
for the final decisions. See Attachment 1. The IDM explains the
circumstances under which Commerce determined to use total AFA
in each case or refers the reader back to the preliminary
determination memorandum that contains the explanation for the
circumstances under which Commerce determined to use total AFA.
The final Federal Register notices and IDMs are the official
Commerce documents that describe the issues Commerce
considered, and that respond to arguments parties made, for
Commerce's final decisions. Accordingly, in those cases listed
in Attachment 1 in which a party timely commented for purposes
of Commerce's final decision that Commerce should rely on
partial AFA rather than total AFA, that issue and the reasons
underlying Commerce's decision not to do so are discussed in
the IDM for that case. Where a party did not timely comment
that Commerce should rely on partial AFA rather than total AFA
for purposes of Commerce's final decision, and/or the IDM did
not address that question, Commerce cannot now speak to the
issue, as it is outside of the issues Commerce addressed in its
final decision documents.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Year
Total AFA Final Determination
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013
28
2014
49
2015
45
2016
64
2017
70
2018
88
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ATTACHMENT 1
AD/CVD INVESTIGATIONS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case
Published
Cite
Issues & Decision
Number
Product
Date
Number
Memorandum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Carbon And Certain
11/19/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
012
Alloy Steel Wire
68860.
frn/2014/1411frn/
Rod
2014-27412.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Carbon And Certain
11/19/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
013
Alloy Steel Wire
68858.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Rod
27410-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Heavy Walled
7/21/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Rectangular
47355.
frn/summary/turkey/
Welded Carbon
2016-17316-1.pdf
Steel Pipes And
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Heavy Walled
7/21/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Rectangular
47349.
frn/summary/turkey/
Welded Carbon
2016-17315-1.pdf
Steel Pipes And
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-523-
Circular Welded
10/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
812
Carbon-Quality
75026.
frn/summary/oman/
Steel Pipe
2016-26108-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Large Residential
12/15/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
033
Washers
90776.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
30150-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Carbon And Alloy
1/26/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
047
Steel Cut-To-
8510.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
Length Plate
01710-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Silicon Metal
3/8/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
850
9835.
frn/summary/brazil/
2018-04668-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-602-
Silicon Metal
3/8/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
9839.
frn/summary/
australia/2018-04657-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-602-
Silicon Metal
3/8/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
9834.
frn/summary/
australia/2018-04667-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-351-
Silicon Metal
3/8/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
9838.
frn/summary/brazil/
2018-04661-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Carton Closing
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
055
Staples
13236.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
06206-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Cast Iron Soil
7/11/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
063
Pipe Fittings
32075.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
14827-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Cast Iron Soil
7/17/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
062
Pipe Fittings
33205.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
14925-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Forged Steel
7/30/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
863
Fittings
36519.
frn/2018/1807frn/
2018-16194.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Forged Steel
10/5/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
839
Fittings
50345.
frn/2018/1810frn/
2018-21728.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Forged Steel
10/5/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
067
Fittings
50339.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
21729-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Forged Steel
10/5/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
068
Fittings
50342.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
21734-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Large Diameter
11/14/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
881
Welded Pipe
56811.
frn/2018/1811frn/
2018-24806.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Large Diameter
11/14/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
882
Welded Pipe
56819.
frn/summary/india/
2018-24804-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-549-
Frozen Warmwater
8/19/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
828
Shrimp
50379.
frn/summary/thailand/
2013-20166-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-560-
Frozen Warmwater
8/19/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Shrimp
50383.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2013-20164-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Hardwood and
9/23/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
987
Decorative
58283.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
Plywood
23077-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
858
Tubular Goods
41967.
frn/summary/india/
2014-16859-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
857
Tubular Goods
41981.
frn/summary/india/
2014-16868-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-823-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Tubular Goods
41969.
frn/summary/ukraine/
2014-16875-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-517-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
804
Tubular Goods
41986.
frn/summary/saudi-
arabia/2014-16867-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-560-
Monosodium
9/29/2014.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
826
Glutamate
58329.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2014-23126-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Monosodium
9/29/2014.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
992
Glutamate
58326.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
23136-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Crystalline
12/23/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
011
Silicon
76962.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Photovoltaic
30071-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Passenger Vehicle
6/18/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
016
And Light Truck
34893.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Tires
15058-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Passenger Vehicle
6/18/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
017
And Light Truck
34888.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Tires
15059-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Sugar
9/23/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
845
57341.
frn/summary/mexico/
2015-24195-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-201-
Sugar
9/23/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
846
57337.
frn/summary/mexico/
2015-24195-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
026
Resistant Steel
35316.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Products
12965-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
027
Resistant Steel
35308.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Products
12962-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
878
Resistant Steel
35303.
frn/summary/korea-
Products
south/2016-12979-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
879
Resistant Steel
35310.
frn/summary/korea-
Products
south/2016-12978-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
874
Flat Products
53409.
frn/summary/japan/
2016-19378-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
826
Flat Products
53428.
frn/summary/turkey/
2016-19373-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
827
Flat Products
53433.
frn/summary/turkey/
2016-19379-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-535-
Circular Welded
10/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
904
Carbon-Quality
75045.
frn/summary/pakistan/
Steel Pipe
2016-26114-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-535-
Circular Welded
10/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
903
Carbon-Quality
75028.
frn/2016/1610frn/
Steel Pipe
2016-26113.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Off-The-Road Tires
1/10/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
870
2946.
frn/summary/india/
2017-00264-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Stainless Steel
2/8/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
042
Sheet And Strip
9716.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
02576-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Stainless Steel
2/8/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
043
Sheet And Strip
9714.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
02577-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Steel Concrete
5/22/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
876
Reinforcing Bar
23195.
frn/2017/1705frn/
2017-10873.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Steel Concrete
5/22/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
829
Reinforcing Bar
23192.
frn/summary/turkey/
2017-10346-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Steel Concrete
5/22/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
Reinforcing Bar
23188.
frn/summary/turkey/
2017-10505-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Steel Concrete
7/27/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
859
Reinforcing Bar
34925.
frn/summary/taiwan/
2017-15840-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-560-
Biodiesel
11/16/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
53471.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2017-24858-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-357-
Biodiesel
11/16/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
53477.
frn/summary/
argentina/2017-24857-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Carbon And Alloy
11/28/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Steel Wire Rod
56214.
frn/2017/1711frn/
2017-25659.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-560-
Biodiesel
3/1/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
8835.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2018-04138-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-357-
Biodiesel
3/1/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
820
8837.
frn/summary/
argentina/2018-04137-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Carbon And Alloy
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
891
Steel Wire Rod
13228.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-06143-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Polyethylene
9/24/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
852
Terephthalate
48285.
frn/summary/brazil/
(Pet) Resin
2018-20719-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-560-
Polyethylene
9/24/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
Terephthalate
48278.
frn/summary/
(Pet) Resin
indonesia/2018-20720-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-535-
Polyethylene
9/24/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
905
Terephthalate
48281.
frn/summary/pakistan/
(Pet) Resin
2018-20722-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyethylene
9/24/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
862
Terephthalate
48287.
frn/summary/taiwan/
(Pet) Resin
2018-20723-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Polyethylene
9/24/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
896
Terephthalate
48283.
frn/summary/korea-
(Pet) Resin
south/2018-20721-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Plastic Decorative
2/1/2019..
84 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
075
Ribbon
1055.
frn/summary/prc/2019-
00755-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Plastic Decorative
2/1/2019..
84 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
076
Ribbon
1064.
frn/summary/prc/2019-
00754-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Diffusion-Annealed
4/10/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
869
Nickel-Plated
19868.
frn/summary/japan/
Flat-Rolled Steel
2014-08106-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
817
Tubular Goods
41973.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2014-16862-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
870
Tubular Goods
41983.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2014-16874-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Grain-Oriented
10/1/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
871
Electrical Steel
59224.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2014-23393-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Grain-Oriented
10/1/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
994
Electrical Steel
59226.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
23391-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Grain-Oriented
10/1/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
995
Electrical Steel
59221.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
23390-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
53-Foot Domestic
4/17/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
015
Dry Containers
21209.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
08904-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
53-Foot Domestic
4/17/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
014
Dry Containers
21203.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
08903-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
854
28959.
frn/summary/taiwan/
2015-12247-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-557-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
817
28968.
frn/summary/malaysia/
2015-12252-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-557-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
28969.
frn/summary/malaysia/
2015-12250-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Steel Nails
5/22/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
29622.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2015-12254-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Polyethylene
3/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
861
Terephthalate
13327.
frn/summary/india/
Resin
2016-05710-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Polyethylene
3/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
025
Terephthalate
13337.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Resin
05715-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyethylene
3/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
024
Terephthalate
13331.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Resin
05707-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Polyethylene
3/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
862
Terephthalate
13334.
frn/summary/india/
Resin
2016-05712-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Cold-Rolled Steel
5/24/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
029
Flat Products
32725.
frn/2016/1605frn/
2016-12186.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Cold-Rolled Steel
5/24/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
030
Flat Products
32729.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
12183-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
881
Flat Products
49953.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2016-17941-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
882
Flat Products
49943.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2016-17939-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Amorphous Silica
1/25/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
038
Fabric
8405.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
01636-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Amorphous Silica
1/25/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
039
Fabric
8405.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
01635-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
887
Steel Cut-To-
16369.
frn/summary/korea-
Length Plate
south/2017-06631-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
858
Steel Cut-To-
16372.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Length Plate
2017-06703-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-433-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
812
Steel Cut-To-
16366.
frn/summary/austria/
Length Plate
2017-06634-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
888
Steel Cut-To-
16341.
frn/summary/korea-
Length Plate
south/2017-06632-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Finished Carbon
4/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Steel Flanges
18108.
frn/2017/1704frn/
2017-07680.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Finished Carbon
6/29/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
872
Steel Flanges
29479.
frn/summary/india/
2017-13628-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Finished Carbon
6/29/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
871
Steel Flanges
29483.
frn/summary/india/
2017-13627-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Finished Carbon
6/29/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
835
Steel Flanges
29481.
frn/summary/italy/
2017-13629-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-791-
Carbon And Alloy
1/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
823
Steel Wire Rod
2141.
frn/summary/safrica/
2018-00572-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Fine Denier
1/23/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
061
Polyester Staple
3120.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Fiber
01152-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Aluminum Foil
3/5/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
053
9282.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
04401-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Aluminum Foil
3/5/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
054
9274.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
04402-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Carbon And Alloy
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Steel Wire Rod
13230.
frn/summary/italy/
2018-06134-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Carbon And Alloy
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
Steel Wire Rod
13233.
frn/summary/spain/
2018-06147-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-475-
Carbon And Alloy
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Steel Wire Rod
13242.
frn/summary/italy/
2018-06133-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Fine Denier
5/30/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
060
Polyester Staple
24740.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Fiber
11714-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Common Alloy
11/15/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
073
Aluminum Sheet
57421.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
24869-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Common Alloy
11/15/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
074
Aluminum Sheet
57427.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
24867-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Hardwood and
9/23/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
986
Decorative
58273.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
Plywood
23088-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Ferrosilicon
7/31/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
820
44393.
frn/summary/russia/
2014-18059-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-307-
Ferrosilicon
7/31/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
44397.
frn/summary/
venezuela/2014-18061-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Chlorinated
9/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
870
Isocyanurates
56059.
frn/summary/japan/
2014-22311-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Chlorinated
9/22/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
991
Isocyanurates
56560.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
22501-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
1,1,1,2-
10/20/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
998
Tetrafluoroethane
62597.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
24903-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Calcium
12/15/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
008
Hypochlorite
74065.
frn/2014/1412frn/
2014-29370.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Boltless Steel
8/26/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
019
Shelving Units
51775.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Prepackaged For
20785-1.pdf
Sale
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Boltless Steel
8/26/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
018
Shelving Units
51779.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Prepackaged For
20794-1.pdf
Sale
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-471-
Uncoated Paper
1/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
807
3105.
frn/summary/portugal/
2016-01024-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Uncoated Paper
1/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
842
3115.
frn/summary/brazil/
2016-01028-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
Resistant Steel
35320.
frn/summary/italy/
Products
2016-12969-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
864
Resistant Steel
35323.
frn/summary/india/
Products
2016-12967-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
863
Resistant Steel
35329.
frn/summary/india/
Products
2016-12986-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-475-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
833
Resistant Steel
35326.
frn/summary/italy/
Products
2016-12971-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-602-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Flat Products
53406.
frn/summary/
australia/2016-19375-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
883
Flat Products
53419.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2016-19380-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
884
Flat Products
53439.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2016-19377-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-791-
Carbon And Alloy
12/5/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
822
Steel Cut-To-
87544.
frn/2016/1612frn/
Length Plate
2016-29071.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Biaxial Integral
1/11/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
036
Geogrid Products
3284.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
00428-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Biaxial Integral
1/11/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
037
Geogrid Products
3282.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
00429-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Carbon And Alloy
1/26/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
048
Steel Cut-To-
8507.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
Length Plate
01712-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
1-
3/23/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
046
Hydroxyethylidene-
14872.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
1, 1-Diphosphonic
05804-1.pdf
Acid (Hedp)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
1-
3/23/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
045
Hydroxyethylidene-
14876.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
1, 1-Diphosphonic
05805-1.pdf
Acid (Hedp)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
875
Steel Cut-To-
16349.
frn/summary/japan/
Length Plate
2017-06629-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Emulsion Styrene-
7/19/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Butadiene Rubber
33062.
frn/summary/mexico/
2017-14951-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Emulsion Styrene-
7/19/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
890
Butadiene Rubber
33045.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2017-14950-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Hardwood Plywood
11/16/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
051
Products
53460.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
24863-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Hardwood Plywood
11/16/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
052
Products
53473.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
24864-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Carbon And Alloy
11/28/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
Steel Wire Rod
56214.
frn/2017/1711frn/
2017-25659.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Cold-Drawn
12/11/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
874
Mechanical Tubing
58172.
frn/summary/india/
2017-26609-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-823-
Carbon And Alloy
1/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
Steel Wire Rod
2135.
frn/summary/ukraine/
2018-00571-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Carbon And Alloy
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
Steel Wire Rod
13239.
frn/summary/turkey/
2018-06137-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Carbon And Alloy
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
Steel Wire Rod
13249.
frn/summary/turkey/
2018-06136-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Stainless Steel
4/12/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
065
Flanges
15790.
frn/2018/1804frn/
2018-07587.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Cold-Drawn
4/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
873
Mechanical Tubing
16296.
frn/summary/india/
2018-07851-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Cold-Drawn
4/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
838
Mechanical Tubing
16289.
frn/summary/italy/
2018-07848-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Cold-Drawn
4/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
892
Mechanical Tubing
16319.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-07854-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Stainless Steel
6/11/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
064
Flanges
26959.
frn/2018/1806frn/
2018-12482.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Stainless Steel
8/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
877
Flanges
40745.
frn/summary/india/
2018-17688-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Stainless Steel
8/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
878
Flanges
40748.
frn/summary/india/
2018-17696-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Large Diameter
11/14/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
077
Welded Carbon and
56816.
frn/2018/1811frn/
Alloy Steel
2018-24807.txt
Structural
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Large Diameter
11/14/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
078
Welded Carbon and
56805.
frn/2018/1811frn/
Alloy Steel
2018-24805.txt
Structural Pipe
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Xanthan Gum
6/4/2013..
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
985
33351.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
13220-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-433-
Xanthan Gum
6/4/2013..
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
33354.
frn/summary/AUSTRIA/
2013-13218-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Silica Bricks And
11/27/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
988
Shapes
70918.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
28551-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-557-
Welded Stainless
5/30/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Steel Pressure
31090.
frn/summary/malaysia/
Pipe
2014-12586-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Welded Stainless
5/30/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
Steel Pressure
31092.
frn/summary/vietnam/
Pipe
2014-12587-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Welded Stainless
5/30/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
Steel Pressure
31093.
frn/summary/thailand/
Pipe
2014-12588-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Non-Oriented
10/14/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
872
Electrical Steel
61609.
frn/summary/MULTIPLE/
2014-24372-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Non-Oriented
10/14/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Electrical Steel
61609.
frn/summary/MULTIPLE/
2014-24372-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-401-
Non-Oriented
10/14/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Electrical Steel
61609.
frn/summary/MULTIPLE/
2014-24372-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Non-Oriented
10/14/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
Electrical Steel
61614.
frn/summary/taiwan/
2014-24368-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Crystalline
12/23/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
010
Silicon
76970.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Photovoltaic
30092-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Crystalline
12/23/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Silicon
76966.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Photovoltaic
2014-30107-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-523-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
28972.
frn/summary/oman/
2015-12248-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
874
28955.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2015-12257-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-523-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
28958.
frn/summary/oman/
2015-12263-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
875
28966.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2015-12246-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-602-
Silicomanganese
2/22/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
8682.
frn/summary/
australia/2016-03627-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Polyethylene
3/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
855
Terephthalate
13319.
frn/summary/canada/
Resin
2016-05703-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-523-
Polyethylene
3/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
Terephthalate
13336.
frn/summary/oman/
Resin
2016-05705-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-523-
Polyethylene
3/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
Terephthalate
13321.
frn/summary/oman/
Resin
2016-05713-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Cold-Rolled Steel
5/24/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
873
Flat Products
32721.
frn/2016/1605frn/
2016-12191.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
865
Flat Products
49938.
frn/summary/india/
2016-17950-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
866
Flat Products
49932.
frn/summary/india/
2016-17948-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Iron Mechanical
10/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
856
Transfer Drive
75039.
frn/summary/canada/
Components
2016-26106-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Iron Mechanical
10/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
032
Transfer Drive
75032.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Components
26104-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Iron Mechanical
10/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
031
Transfer Drive
75037.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Components
26105-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Off-The-Road Tires
1/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
869
4848.
frn/summary/india/
2017-00869-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Ammonium Sulfate
1/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
050
4850.
frn/2017/1701frn/
2017-00843.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Ammonium Sulfate
1/25/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
049
8403.
frn/2017/1701frn/
2017-01653.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Ferrovanadium
3/23/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
886
14874.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2017-05808-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Emulsion Styrene-
7/19/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
849
Butadiene Rubber
33048.
frn/summary/brazil/
2017-14954-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-455-
Emulsion Styrene-
7/19/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Butadiene Rubber
33061.
frn/summary/poland/
2017-14952-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Softwood Lumber
11/8/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
857
51806.
frn/summary/canada/
2017-24203-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
100- To 150-Seat
12/27/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
859
Large Civil
61255.
frn/summary/canada/
Aircraft
2017-27874-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Fine Denier
1/23/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
876
Polyester Staple
3122.
frn/summary/india/
Fiber
2018-01151-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Fine Denier
5/30/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
893
Polyester Staple
24743.
frn/summary/korea-
Fiber
south/2018-11711-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Fine Denier
5/30/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
860
Polyester Staple
24745.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Fiber
2018-11712-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Fine Denier
5/30/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
875
Polyester Staple
24737.
frn/summary/india/
Fiber
2018-11710-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Sodium Gluconate,
9/21/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
071
Gluconic Acid,
47876.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
And Derivative
20606-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Sodium Gluconate,
9/21/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
072
Gluconic Acid,
47879.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
And Derivative
20605-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Drawn Stainless
2/26/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
983
Steel Sinks
13019.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
04379-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Frozen Warmwater
8/19/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
989
Shrimp
50391.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
20170-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Steel Concrete
9/15/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
Reinforcing Bar
54965.
frn/summary/turkey/
2014-21986-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Steel Concrete
9/15/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
Reinforcing Bar
54963.
frn/summary/turkey/
2014-21989-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Melamine
11/6/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
020
68851.
frn/2015/1511frn/
2015-28352.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Melamine
11/6/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
021
68847.
frn/2015/1511frn/
2015-28351.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-274-
Melamine
11/6/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
807
68849.
frn/summary/trinidad/
2015-28349-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-274-
Melamine
11/6/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
806
68846.
frn/summary/trinidad/
2015-28350-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Uncoated Paper
1/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
022
3112.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
01020-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Uncoated Paper
1/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
023
3110.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
01013-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-602-
Uncoated Paper
1/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
807
3108.
frn/summary/
australia/2016-01019-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
856
Resistant Steel
35313.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Products
2016-12975-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-583-
Corrosion-
6/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
857
Resistant Steel
35299.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Products
2016-12977-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
822
Flat Products
49950.
frn/summary/russia/
2016-17938-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-821-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
823
Flat Products
49935.
frn/summary/russia/
2016-17937-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Welded Stainless
9/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
867
Pressure Pipe
66921.
frn/summary/india/
2016-23577-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Welded Stainless
9/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
868
Pressure Pipe
66925.
frn/summary/india/
2016-23575-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
1,1,1,2-
3/1/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
044
Tetrafluoroethane
12192.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
(R-134A)
03961-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Phosphor Copper
3/3/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
885
12433.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2017-04130-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Dioctyl
6/26/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
889
Terephthalate
28824.
frn/summary/korea-
(Dotp)
south/2017-13285-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Cold-Drawn
12/11/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
059
Mechanical Tubing
58175.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
26608-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Cold-Drawn
4/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
845
Mechanical Tubing
16326.
frn/summary/germany/
2018-07850-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-441-
Cold-Drawn
4/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
Mechanical Tubing
16293.
frn/summary/
switzerland/2018-
07853-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Cold-Drawn
4/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
058
Mechanical Tubing
16322.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
07849-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-423-
Citric Acid And
6/5/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Certain Citrate
26001.
frn/summary/belgium/
Salts
2018-12012-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-301-
Citric Acid And
6/5/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Certain Citrate
26002.
frn/summary/colombia/
Salts
2018-12008-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Citric Acid And
6/5/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
833
Certain Citrate
25998.
frn/summary/thailand/
Salts
2018-12009-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-549-
Citric Acid And
6/5/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
834
Certain Citrate
26004.
frn/summary/thailand/
Salts
2018-12011-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Rubber Bands
11/20/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
069
58547.
frn/2018/1811frn/
2018-25294.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Rubber Bands
11/20/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
070
58538.
frn/2018/1811frn/
2018-25296.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-557-
Frozen Warmwater
8/19/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
814
Shrimp
50381.
frn/summary/malaysia/
2013-20168-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Steel Threaded Rod
3/14/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
14476.
frn/2014/1403frn/
2014-05681.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Prestressed
5/5/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Concrete Steel
25571.
frn/summary/mexico/
Rail Tie Wire
2014-10241-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Prestressed
5/5/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
990
Concrete Steel
25572.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Rail Tie Wire
10240-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Prestressed
5/5/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
829
Concrete Steel
25574.
frn/summary/thailand/
Rail Tie Wire
2014-10237-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Steel Concrete
9/15/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Reinforcing Bar
54967.
frn/summary/mexico/
2014-21982-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Welded Line Pipe
10/13/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
876
61366.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2015-25980-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Welded Line Pipe
10/13/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
822
61362.
frn/summary/turkey/
2015-25990-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Welded Line Pipe
10/13/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
877
61365.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2015-25967-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Welded Line Pipe
10/13/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
823
61371.
frn/summary/turkey/
2015-25983-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-560-
Uncoated Paper
1/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
828
3101.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2016-01023-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-560-
Uncoated Paper
1/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
829
3104.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2016-01026-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Hydrofluorocarbon
6/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
028
Blends And
42314.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Components
15298-1.pdf
Thereof
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Heavy Walled
7/21/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
847
Rectangular
47352.
frn/summary/mexico/
Welded Carbon
2016-17314-1.pdf
Steel Pipes And
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Heavy Walled
7/21/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
880
Rectangular
47347.
frn/summary/korea-
Welded Carbon
south/2016-17313-
Steel Pipes And
1.pdf
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Circular Welded
10/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
807
Carbon-Quality
75030.
frn/summary/uae/2016-
Steel Pipe
26107-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-542-
Off-The-Road Tires
1/10/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
2949.
frn/summary/sri-
lanka/2017-00266-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Steel Cut-To-
16360.
frn/summary/germany/
Length Plate
2017-06628-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-423-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
812
Steel Cut-To-
16378.
frn/summary/belgium/
Length Plate
2017-06626-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
834
Steel Cut-To-
16345.
frn/summary/italy/
Length Plate
2017-06630-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-427-
Carbon And Alloy
4/4/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
828
Steel Cut-To-
16363.
frn/summary/france/
Length Plate
2017-06627-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-822-
Carbon And Alloy
11/28/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
806
Steel Wire Rod
56214.
frn/2017/1711frn/
2017-25659.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-403-
Silicon Metal
3/8/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
9829.
frn/summary/norway/
2018-04666-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-834-
Silicon Metal
3/8/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
9831.
frn/summary/
kazakhstan/2018-
04664-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-412-
Carbon And Alloy
3/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
826
Steel Wire Rod
13252.
frn/summary/UK/2018-
06144-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Tapered Roller
6/22/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
894
Bearings
29092.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-13447-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Low Melt Polyester
6/22/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
895
Staple Fiber
29094.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-13448-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Low Melt Polyester
6/22/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
861
Staple Fiber
29099.
frn/summary/taiwan/
2018-13449-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Uncoated
8/9/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
861
Groundwood Paper
39412.
frn/summary/canada/
2018-17020-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-122-
Uncoated
8/9/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
862
Groundwood Paper
39414.
frn/summary/canada/
2018-17017-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Drawn Stainless
2/26/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
984
Steel Sinks
13017.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
04280-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-552-
Frozen Warmwater
8/19/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Shrimp
50387.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2013-20172-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-331-
Frozen Warmwater
8/19/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Shrimp
50389.
frn/summary/ecuador/
2013-20169-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Frozen Warmwater
8/19/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
854
Shrimp
50385.
frn/summary/india/
2013-20167-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
850
Tubular Goods
41979.
frn/summary/taiwan/
2014-16861-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
817
Tubular Goods
41964.
frn/summary/turkey/
2014-16860-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
Tubular Goods
41971.
frn/summary/turkey/
2014-16873-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-565-
Oil Country
7/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Tubular Goods
41976.
frn/summary/
philippines/2014-
16865-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Non-Oriented
10/14/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
997
Electrical Steel
61607.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
24377-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Non-Oriented
10/14/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
996
Electrical Steel
61609.
frn/summary/MULTIPLE/
2014-24372-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Non-Oriented
10/14/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
873
Electrical Steel
61605.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2014-24379-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-552-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
28962.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2015-12278-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-583-
Steel Nails
5/20/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
855
28964.
frn/summary/taiwan/
2015-12277-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-122-
Supercalendered
10/20/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
854
Paper
63535.
frn/summary/canada/
2015-26634-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Flat Products
49946.
frn/summary/brazil/
2016-17951-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-351-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Flat Products
49940.
frn/summary/brazil/
2016-17952-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-412-
Cold-Rolled Steel
7/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Flat Products
49929.
frn/summary/uk/2016-
17940-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
845
Flat Products
53424.
frn/summary/brazil/
2016-19381-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-421-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Flat Products
53421.
frn/summary/
netherlands/2016-
19371-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-351-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
846
Flat Products
53416.
frn/summary/brazil/
2016-19376-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-412-
Hot-Rolled Steel
8/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Flat Products
53436.
frn/summary/uk/2016-
19374-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Carbon And Alloy
12/5/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
847
Steel Cut-To-
87544.
frn/2016/1612frn/
Length Plate
2016-29071.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Carbon And Alloy
12/5/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
828
Steel Cut-To-
87544.
frn/2016/1612frn/
Length Plate
2016-29071.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Truck And Bus
1/27/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
041
Tires
8606.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
01862-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Truck And Bus
1/27/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
040
Tires
8599.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
01861-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-122-
Softwood Lumber
11/8/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
858
51814.
frn/summary/canada/
2017-24204-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Tool Chests And
11/29/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
057
Cabinets
56582.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
25768-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Tool Chests And
4/10/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
Cabinets
15361.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2018-07316-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Tool Chests And
4/10/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
Cabinets
15361.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2018-07316-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tool Chests And
4/10/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
056
Cabinets
15365.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
07315-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tool Chests And
4/10/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
056
Cabinets
15365.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
07315-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Polytetrafluoroeth
5/21/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
880
ylene (Ptfe)
23422.
frn/summary/india/
Resin
2018-10780-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Ripe Olives
6/18/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
817
28193.
frn/summary/spain/
2018-12991-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-469-
Ripe Olives
6/18/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
28186.
frn/summary/spain/
2018-12990-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Polytetrafluoroeth
9/26/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
879
ylene (Ptfe)
48594.
frn/summary/india/
Resin
2018-20847-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polytetrafluoroeth
9/26/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
066
ylene (Ptfe)
48590.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Resin
20846-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-851-
Grain-Oriented
9/29/2014.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Electrical Steel
65283.
frn/summary/czech/
2014-23124-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Grain-Oriented
10/1/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
Electrical Steel
59223.
frn/summary/russia/
2014-23389-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AD/CVD ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEWS
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Case
Published
Cite
Issues & Decision
Number
Product
Date
Number
Memorandum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen And Canned
9/24/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Warmwater Shrimp
57047.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2014-22732-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Activated Carbon
11/25/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
904
70163.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
27926-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Lightweight
4/7/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Thermal Paper
18602.
frn/summary/germany/
2015-07974-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen And Canned
9/15/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Warmwater Shrimp
55328.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2015-23159-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Activated Carbon
10/9/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
904
51172.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
25810-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Certain Preserved
9/8/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Mushrooms
62081.
frn/summary/india/
2016-21634-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Activated Carbon
9/8/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
904
62088.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
21660-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen And Canned
9/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Warmwater Shrimp
62717.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2016-21882-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Small Diameter
2/16/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
929
Graphite
10876.
frn/2017/1702frn/
Electrodes
2017-03141.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Seamless Refined
2/21/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
838
Copper Pipe And
11178.
frn/2017/1702frn/
Tube
2017-03338.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen And Canned
2/23/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Warmwater Shrimp
11431.
frn/2017/1702frn/
2017-03503.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Citric Acid And
4/18/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Citrate Salt
18284.
frn/2017/1704frn/
2017-07805.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Multilayered Wood
5/15/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
971
Flooring
22311.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
09746-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Prestressed
6/1/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
820
Concrete Steel
25240.
frn/2017/1706frn/
Wire Strand
2017-11322.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-485-
Carbon And Alloy
9/25/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Seamless
44561.
frn/2017/1709frn/
Standard, Line,
2017-20401.txt
And Pressure Pipe
(Under 4 1/2
Inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Activated Carbon
11/7/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
904
51607.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
24184-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pencils, Cased
1/23/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
827
3112.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
01032-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Xanthan Gum
2/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
985
6513.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
02915-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tissue Paper
3/19/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
894
Products
11966.
frn/2018/1803frn/
2018-05485.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Citric Acid And
4/3/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Citrate Salt
14263.
frn/2018/1804frn/
2018-06721.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Carbazole Violet
4/12/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
838
Pigment 23
15788.
frn/summary/india/
2018-07616-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Multilayered Wood
6/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
971
Flooring
27750.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
12772-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Small Diameter
7/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
929
Graphite
32833.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Electrodes
15114-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Multilayered Wood
7/26/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
970
Flooring
35461.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
15799-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen And Canned
9/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Warmwater Shrimp
46704.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2018-20030-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Activated Carbon
10/22/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
904
53214.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
22969-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Chlorinated
1/22/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
898
Isocyanurates
4386.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
01185-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
ccc
2/11/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
9668.
frn/summary/TAIWAN/
2013-03083-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Polyethylene
5/21/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Terephthalate
29700.
frn/summary/uae/2013-
(Pet) Film
12086-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Garlic, Fresh
6/17/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
36168.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
14329-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Circular Welded
10/31/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
65272.
frn/summary/thailand/
Pipes And Tubes
2013-25808-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Chlorinated
12/3/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
814
Isocyanurates
72633.
frn/summary/spain/
2013-28945-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Chlorinated
1/30/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
898
Isocyanurates
4875.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
01898-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Polyethylene
2/28/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Terephthalate
11406.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2014-04432-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Polyethylene
2/28/2014.
78FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Terephthalate
11412.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2014-04436-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Polyethylene
4/30/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Terephthalate
24401.
frn/summary/uae/2014-
(Pet) Film
09891-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Garlic, Fresh
6/30/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
36721.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
15279-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Chlorinated
8/1/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
814
Isocyanurates
44745.
frn/2014/1408frn/
2014-18230.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-427-
Uranium
9/29/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
58322.
frn/summary/france/
2014-23133-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Magnesia Carbon
10/16/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
955
Bricks
62101.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
24659-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Chlorinated
1/28/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
898
Isocyanurates
4539.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
01604-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyethylene
2/25/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Terephthalate
10051.
frn/summary/taiwan/
(Pet) Film
2015-03897-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Polyethylene
4/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Terephthalate
19964.
frn/summary/uae/2015-
(Pet) Film
08581-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Garlic, Fresh
6/15/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
34141.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
14656-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Crystalline
7/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
980
Silicon
41003.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Photovoltaic
17241-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-427-
Uranium
9/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
55089.
frn/summary/france/
2015-23050-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Large Residential
9/15/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
869
Washers
55336.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2015-23163-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Circular Welded
10/2/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
59732.
frn/2015/1510frn/
Pipes And Tubes
2015-25168.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Polyethylene
2/16/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Terephthalate
7750.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2016-03083-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Polyethylene
2/16/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Terephthalate
7753.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2016-03082-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Polyethylene
4/11/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Terephthalate
21314.
frn/summary/uae/2016-
(Pet) Film
08234-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Garlic, Fresh
6/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
39897.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
14423-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Welded Astm A-312
7/18/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
Stainless Steel
46647.
frn/summary/korea-
Pipe
south/2016-16945-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Crystalline
7/19/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
980
Silicon
46904.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Photovoltaic
17064-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Silicomanganese
8/22/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
823
56583.
frn/2016/1608frn/
2016-20009.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Polyethylene
12/9/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Terephthalate
89056.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2016-29570-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyethylene
12/9/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Terephthalate
89061.
frn/2016/1612frn/
(Pet) Film
2016-29568.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Polyethylene
12/19/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Terephthalate
91903.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2016-30425-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Monosodium
12/9/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
992
Glutamate
89062.
frn/2016/1612frn/
2016-29564.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Chlorinated
1/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
898
Isocyanurates
4852.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
00825-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-560-
Monosodium
2/22/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
826
Glutamate
11342.
frn/2017/1702frn/
2017-03418.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Polyethylene
4/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Terephthalate
17631.
frn/summary/uae/2017-
(Pet) Film
07364-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
4/18/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
913
The-Road Tires
18285.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
07807-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Oil Country
4/18/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
858
Tubular Goods
18282.
frn/summary/india/
2017-07806-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Welded Astm A-312
5/19/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
Stainless Steel
22970.
frn/summary/korea-
Pipe
south/2017-10203-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Garlic, Fresh
6/14/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
27230.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
12302-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Crystalline
7/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
980
Silicon
32678.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
Photovoltaic
14957-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Crystalline
9/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
011
Silicon
42792.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
Photovoltaic
19292-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Circular Welded
10/10/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
46961.
frn/summary/thailand/
Pipes And Tubes
2017-21747-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyethylene
12/1/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Terephthalate
56947.
frn/2017/1712frn/
(Pet) Film
2017-25905.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Monosodium
12/8/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
992
Glutamate
57949.
frn/2017/1712frn/
2017-27062.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Chlorinated
2/6/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
898
Isocyanurates
5243.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
02315-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Polyethylene
2/8/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Terephthalate
5612.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2018-02517-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Polyethylene
2/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Terephthalate
6162.
frn/summary/india/
(Pet) Film
2018-02830-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Passenger Vehicle
3/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
017
And Light Truck
11694.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Tires
05377-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Passenger Vehicle
3/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
016
And Light Truck
11690.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Tires
05376-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-560-
Monosodium
3/29/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
826
Glutamate
13475.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2018-06346-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Polyethylene
4/4/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
Terephthalate
14416.
frn/summary/uae/2018-
(Pet) Film
06837-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
4/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
913
The-Road Tires
16055.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
07721-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Garlic, Fresh
6/15/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
831
27949.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
12898-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Crystalline
7/23/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
980
Silicon
24828.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Photovoltaic
15692-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Circular Welded
10/15/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
51927.
frn/summary/thailand/
Pipes And Tubes
2018-22237-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Chlorinated
10/24/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
814
Isocyanurates
53607.
frn/summary/spain/
2018-23221-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Monosodium
12/13/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
992
Glutamate
64106.
frn/2018/1812frn/
2018-26974.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
12/26/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
913
The-Road Tires
66243.
frn/2018/1812frn/
2018-27863.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-405-
Carboxymethylcellu
2/20/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
lose
11817.
frn/summary/FINLAND/
2013-03740-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Glycine
4/8/2013..
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
20891.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
08108-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Hand Trucks
5/16/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
891
28801.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
11683-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Preserved
6/6/2013..
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
Mushrooms
34037.
frn/2013/1306frn/
2013-13431.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Circular Welded
12/31/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
501
Carbon Steel
79665.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2013-31344-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Polyethylene
1/10/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
841
Terephthalate
1827.
frn/summary/brazil/
(Pet) Film
2014-00174-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Preserved
3/4/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
Mushrooms
12150.
frn/2014/1403frn/
2014-04643.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Hand Trucks
7/29/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
891
44008.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
17872-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Glycine
10/31/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
64747.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
25859-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Power
3/31/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
867
Transformers
17034.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2015-07382-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Circular Welded
4/13/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Non-Alloy Steel
19633.
frn/summary/mexico/
Pipe
2015-08430-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Preserved
6/8/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
Mushrooms
32355.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
13975-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Hand Trucks
6/11/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
891
33246.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
14365-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-405-
Carboxymethylcellu
6/24/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
lose
36320.
frn/2015/1506frn/
2015-15538.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Light-Walled
8/5/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Rectangular Pipe
46542.
frn/summary/turkey/
And Tube
2015-19095-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-421-
Carboxymethylcellu
9/2/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
lose
53112.
frn/2015/1509frn/
2015-21773.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Glycine
10/15/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
62026.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
26270-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Light-Walled
11/12/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Rectangular Pipe
69941.
frn/2015/1511frn/
And Tube
2015-28754.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Aluminum
12/1/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
967
Extrusions
75060.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
30502-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Circular Welded
12/10/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
501
Carbon Steel
76674.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2015-31188-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Polyethylene
12/15/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
841
Terephthalate
77605.
frn/2015/1512frn/
(Pet) Film
2015-31564.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Aluminum
12/14/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
968
Extrusions
77325.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
31425-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Preserved
3/10/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
Mushrooms
12692.
frn/2016/1603frn/
2016-05409.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Power
3/16/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
867
Transformers
14087.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2016-05940-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-427-
Brass Sheet &
3/16/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
602
Strip
14091.
frn/2016/1603frn/
2016-05992.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Light-Walled
5/10/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Rectangular Pipe
28823.
frn/2016/1605frn/
And Tube
2016-11032.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Glycine
10/20/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
72567.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
25430-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Aluminum
11/28/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
967
Extrusions
85516.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
27346-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Diffusion-Annealed
12/16/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
869
Nickel-Plated
91116.
frn/summary/japan/
Flat-Rolled Steel
2016-30306-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Circular Welded
12/20/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
501
Carbon Steel
92785.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2016-30541-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Aluminum
12/20/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
968
Extrusions
92778.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
30581-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Power
3/13/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
867
Transformers
13432.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2017-04824-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Oil Country
4/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
870
Tubular Goods
18105.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2017-07684-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Oil Country
4/20/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
817
Tubular Goods
18611.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2017-08023-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Circular Welded
5/23/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Non-Alloy Steel
23886.
frn/summary/mexico/
Pipe
2018-11031-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Circular Welded
6/13/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Non-Alloy Steel
27039.
frn/summary/mexico/
Pipe
2017-12187-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Preserved
7/3/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
Mushrooms
30841.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
13939-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Certain Hot-Rolled
7/7/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Carbon Steel Flat
31559.
frn/summary/russia/
Products
2017-14278-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Steel Nails
9/28/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
45266.
frn/2017/1709frn/
2017-20800.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Glycine
10/12/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
47474.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
22068-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-552-
Steel Nails
10/17/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
48213.
frn/2017/1710frn/
2017-22457.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Circular Welded
10/24/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
501
Carbon Steel
49179.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2017-23020-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Aluminum
11/13/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
967
Extrusions
52265.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
24407-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Certain Circular
11/20/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
008
Welded Carbon
55093.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Steel Pipes And
2017-25087-1.pdf
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Diffusion-Annealed
12/7/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
869
Nickel-Plated
57715.
frn/summary/japan/
Flat-Rolled Steel
2017-26380-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Aluminum
12/8/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
968
Extrusions
57951.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
26488-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Steel Nails
2/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
854
6163.
frn/summary/taiwan/
2018-02897-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Pasta, Certain
2/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
6516.
frn/summary/turkey/
2018-02899-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-557-
Steel Nails
2/9/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
5757.
frn/summary/malaysia/
2018-02628-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Light-Walled
3/12/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Rectangular Pipe
10664.
frn/summary/mexico/
And Tube
2018-04896-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Power
3/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
867
Transformers
11679.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-05375-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Oil Country
4/18/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
870
Tubular Goods
17146.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-08114-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Stainless Steel
7/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
828
Butt-Weld Pipe
32636.
frn/2018/1807frn/
Fittings
2018-15012.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Aluminum
7/25/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
968
Extrusions
35208.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
15798-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Aluminum
7/27/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
967
Extrusions
35614.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
16071-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Certain Circular
10/16/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
008
Welded Carbon
52204.
frn/2018/1810frn/
Steel Pipes And
2018-22501.txt
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Circular Welded
12/7/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
501
Carbon Steel
63155.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2018-26544-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Diffusion-Annealed
12/14/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
869
Nickel-Plated
64327.
frn/summary/japan/
Flat-Rolled Steel
2018-27120-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-557-
Stainless Steel
2/1/2019..
84 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Butt-Weld Pipe
1052.
frn/2019/1902frn/
Fittings
2019-00748.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyester Staple
1/11/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
905
Fiber
2366.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
00463-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Nails
3/18/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
909
16651.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
06173-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen Fish Filets
3/21/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
17350.
frn/summary/VIETNAM/
2013-06550-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Uncovered
3/22/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
928
Innersprings
17635.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
06682-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Sodium
3/28/2013.
78 FR
No comment final
908
Hexametaphosphate
18956.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Laminated Woven
3/29/2013.
78 FR
No comment final
916
Sacks
19209.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesia Carbon
4/15/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
954
Bricks
22230.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
08807-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyester Staple
6/28/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
905
Fiber
38939.
frn/2013/1306frn/
2013-15459.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Frozen And Canned
9/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
893
Warmwater Shrimp
56209.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
22226-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen And Canned
9/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Warmwater Shrimp
56211.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2013-22228-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Honey
9/16/2013.
78 FR
No comment final
863
56860.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Kitchen Appliance
1/25/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
941
Shelving And
5414.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
Racks
01584-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Threaded Rod
11/5/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
932
66330.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
26509-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Activated Carbon
11/26/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
904
70533.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
28359-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Kitchen Appliance
1/17/2014.
79 FR
No comment final
941
Shelving And
3176.
Racks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen And Canned
3/19/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
802
Warmwater Shrimp
15309.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2014-06080-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen Fish Filets
4/7/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
19053.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2014-07714-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Nails
4/8/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
909
19316.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
07829-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Steel Wire Garment
5/1/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
849
Hangers
24669.
frn/2014/1405frn/
2014-10011.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Steel Wire Garment
5/8/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
812
Hangers
26405.
frn/2014/1405frn/
2014-10634.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Wire Garment
6/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
918
Hangers
31298.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
12730-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Laminated Woven
6/16/2014.
79 FR
No comment final
916
Sacks
34285.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Uncovered
9/19/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
928
Innersprings
56338.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
22419-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Frozen And Canned
9/26/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
893
Warmwater Shrimp
57872.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
23011-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Hot-Rolled
11/13/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
865
Carbon Steel Flat
67415.
frn/2014/1411frn/
Products
2014-26794.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Threaded Rod
12/3/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
932
71743.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
28461-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Frozen And Canned
12/18/2014
79 FR
No comment final
893
Warmwater Shrimp
75533.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen Fish Filets
1/16/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
2394.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2015-00649-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyester Staple
1/28/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
905
Fiber
4542.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
01601-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Steel Wire Garment
3/9/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
849
Hangers
12458.
frn/2015/1503frn/
2015-05469.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Wire Garment
3/13/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
918
Hangers
13332.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
05828-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Nails
4/8/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
909
18816.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
08101-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesia Carbon
4/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
954
Bricks
19961.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
08591-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Laminated Woven
4/21/2015.
80 FR
No comment final
916
Sacks
22165.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Honey
5/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
863
27633.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
11577-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Potassium
8/19/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
001
Permanganate
50264.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
20493-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Threaded Rod
11/12/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
932
69938.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
28751-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Wire Garment
11/12/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
918
Hangers
69942.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
28757-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Nails
3/16/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
909
14092.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
05994-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen Fish Filets
3/29/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
17435.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2016-07072-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Potassium
8/25/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
001
Permanganate
58476.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
20423-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Uncovered
9/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
928
Innersprings
62729.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
21859-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Threaded Rod
11/22/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
932
83800.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
28109-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesia Carbon
1/6/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
954
Bricks
1695.
frn/2017/1701frn/
2017-00027.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Uncovered
3/16/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
928
Innersprings
13975.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
05276-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Nails
3/20/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
909
14344.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
05429-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen Fish Filets
3/27/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
15181.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2017-05934-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Wire Garment
4/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
918
Hangers
18115.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
07683-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyester Staple
5/22/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
905
Fiber
23187.
frn/2017/1705frn/
2017-10351.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Chlorinated
6/15/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
991
Isocyanurates
27466.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
12449-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Potassium
6/20/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
001
Permanganate
28044.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
12822-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Stainless Steel
6/30/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Bar
29826.
frn/summary/spain/
2017-13793-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Steel Nails
9/14/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
804
43219.
frn/2017/1709frn/
2017-19531.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Threaded Rod
11/7/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
932
51611.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
24178-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Wire Garment
11/17/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
918
Hangers
54324.
frn/2017/1711frn/
2017-24964.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Seamless Refined
11/20/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
964
Copper Pipe And
55091.
frn/2017/1711frn/
Tube
2017-25085.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Honey
1/9/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
863
1015.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
00186-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Uncovered
3/2/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
928
Innersprings
8967.
frn/2018/1803frn/
2018-04287.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Nails
3/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
909
11683.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
05370-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Frozen Fish Filets
3/23/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
12717.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2018-05935-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Stainless Steel
4/3/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Bar
14252.
frn/summary/spain/
2018-06722-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Chlorinated
6/11/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
991
Isocyanurates
26954.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
12483-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-471-
Uncoated Paper
8/10/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
807
39982.
frn/summary/portugal/
2018-17294-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Hot-Rolled
9/17/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
865
Carbon Steel Flat
46914.
frn/2018/1809frn/
Products
2018-20071.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Uncoated Paper
10/18/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
842
52804.
frn/summary/brazil/
2018-22720-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Threaded Rod
11/15/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
932
57429.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
24942-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tapered Roller
1/16/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Bearings
3396.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
00835-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Circular Welded
1/24/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
910
Carbon Quality
5170.
frn/2013/1301frn/
Steel Pipe
2013-01413.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Silicon Metal
5/20/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
806
29322.
frn/2013/1305frn/
2013-11968.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Wooden Bedroom
6/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
890
Furniture
35249.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
13987-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyethylene
6/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
924
Terephthalate
35245.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
(Pet) Film
13985-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Seamless Refined
6/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
964
Copper Pipe And
35251.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
Tube
13965-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Cut-to-
12/17/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
849
Length Carbon
76279.
frn/2013/1312frn/
Steel
2013-29994.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Citric Acid And
1/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
937
Citrate Salt
101.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
31410-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Circular Welded
3/31/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
910
Carbon Quality
18012.
frn/2014/1403frn/
Steel Pipe
2014-07133.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Grating
4/1/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
947
18276.
frn/2014/1404frn/
2014-07259.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Seamless Refined
4/28/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
964
Copper Pipe And
23324.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Tube
09608-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Multilayered Wood
5/9/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
970
Flooring
26712.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
10698-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyethylene
7/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
924
Terephthalate
37715.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
(Pet) Film
15574-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Wooden Bedroom
9/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
890
Furniture
51954.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
20827-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
1-
9/19/2014.
76 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
934
Hydroxyethylidene-
56341.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
1, 1-Diphosphonic
22416-1.pdf
Acid (Hedp)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Narrow Woven
10/10/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
952
Ribbons With
61288.
frn/2014/1410frn/
Woven Selvedge
2014-24272.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Citric Acid And
11/3/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
937
Citrate Salt
65182.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
26074-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Circular Welded
2/27/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
910
Carbon Quality
10665.
frn/2015/1502frn/
Steel Pipe
2015-04203.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Cut-to-
3/16/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
849
Length Carbon
13522.
frn/2015/1503frn/
Steel
2015-05959.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Non-Malleable Cast
5/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
875
Iron Pipe
27632.
frn/2015/1505frn/
Fittings
2015-11655.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Seamless Refined
6/5/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
964
Copper Pipe And
32087.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Tube
13809-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyethylene
6/11/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
924
Terephthalate
33241.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
(Pet) Film
14349-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Wooden Bedroom
6/17/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
890
Furniture
34619.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
14967-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Crystalline
7/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
979
Silicon
40998.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Photovoltaic
17238-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Multilayered Wood
7/15/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
970
Flooring
41476.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
17368-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Utility Scale Wind
9/15/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
814
Towers
55333.
frn/summary/vietnam/
2015-23155-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Narrow Woven
10/15/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
952
Ribbons With
62018.
frn/2015/1510frn/
Woven Selvedge
2015-26265.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Polyethylene
11/16/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
924
Terephthalate
70754.
frn/2015/1511frn/
(Pet) Film
2015-29209.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Cut-to-
12/7/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
849
Length Carbon
75966.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
Steel
30789-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Citric Acid And
12/14/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
937
Citrate Salt
77323.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
31427-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Wooden Bedroom
4/11/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
890
Furniture
21319.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
08233-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Seamless Refined
6/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
964
Copper Pipe And
39893.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Tube
14426-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Crystalline
6/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
979
Silicon
39905.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Photovoltaic
14532-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Silicon Metal
7/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
806
47157.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
16948-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Multilayered Wood
7/19/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
970
Flooring
46899.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
17049-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Steel Grating
8/5/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
947
51861.
frn/2016/1608frn/
2016-18541.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Narrow Woven
10/19/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
952
Ribbons With
72039.
frn/2016/1610frn/
Woven Selvedge
2016-25306.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Certain Cut-to-
12/19/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
849
Length Carbon
91904.
frn/2016/1612frn/
Steel
2016-30427.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Circular Welded
1/13/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
910
Carbon Quality
4301.
frn/2017/1701frn/
Steel Pipe
2017-00668.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Wooden Bedroom
2/15/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
890
Furniture
10743.
frn/2017/1702frn/
2017-03046.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Xanthan Gum
2/23/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
985
11428.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
03505-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Multilayered Wood
6/5/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
970
Flooring
25766.
frn/2017/1706frn/
2017-11561.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Citric Acid And
6/14/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
937
Citrate Salt
27226.
frn/2017/1706frn/
2017-12301.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Crystalline
6/27/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
979
Silicon
29033.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
Photovoltaic
13426-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Crystalline
7/7/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Silicon
31555.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Photovoltaic
2017-14281-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Crystalline
7/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
010
Silicon
32170.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
Photovoltaic
14611-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Light-Walled
10/12/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Rectangular Pipe
47477.
frn/summary/turkey/
And Tube
2017-22072-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Narrow Woven
11/17/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
952
Ribbons With
54325.
frn/2017/1711frn/
Woven Selvedge
2017-24966.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-523-
Steel Nails
1/29/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
4030.
frn/summary/oman/
2018-01594-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Steel Nails
1/29/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
874
4028.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-01593-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Wooden Bedroom
2/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
890
Furniture
6516.
frn/2018/1802frn/
2018-02896.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-552-
Utility Scale Wind
3/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
814
Towers
11172.
frn/2018/1803frn/
2018-05151.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Light-Walled
5/25/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Rectangular Pipe
24278.
frn/2018/1805frn/
And Tube
2018-11302.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Crystalline
6/28/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Silicon
30401.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Photovoltaic
2018-13858-1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Crystalline
7/27/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
979
Silicon
35616.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Photovoltaic
16072-1.pdf
Cells, Whether Or
Not Assembled
Into Modules
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-523-
Steel Nails
11/19/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
58231.
frn/summary/oman/
2018-25145-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Xanthan Gum
12/19/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
985
65143.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
27426-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Lined Paper
4/15/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Products
22232.
frn/summary/INDIA/
2013-08790-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Circular Welded
10/30/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
64916.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2013-25816-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Frontseating
12/9/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
933
Service Valves
73825.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
29333-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Citric Acid And
1/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
938
Citrate Salt
108.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
31411-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Aluminum
1/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
967
Extrusions
96.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
31408-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Aluminum
1/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
968
Extrusions
106.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
31407-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pure Magnesium
1/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
94.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
31412-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Corrosion-
3/28/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
Resistant Carbon
17503.
frn/summary/korea-
Steel Flat
south/2014-06995-
Products
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Circular Welded
8/27/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
51140.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2014-20400-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Drill Pipe
12/29/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
966
78037.
frn/2014/1412frn/
2014-30384.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Citric Acid And
12/31/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
938
Citrate Salt
78799.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
30661-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Aluminum
12/31/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
968
Extrusions
78788.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
30659-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Aluminum
12/31/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
967
Extrusions
78784.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
30662-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Lined Paper
4/10/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Products
19278.
frn/summary/india/
2015-08331-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Lined Paper
4/13/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Products
19637.
frn/summary/india/
2015-08423-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
4/15/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
912
The-Road Tires
20197.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
08673-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pure Magnesium
5/8/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
26541.
frn/2015/1505frn/
2015-11217.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Carbon And Certain
5/12/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
Alloy Steel Wire
27147.
frn/summary/mexico/
Rod
2015-11452-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Utility Scale Wind
7/17/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
982
Towers
42478.
frn/2015/1507frn/
2015-17621.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Frontseating
7/24/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
933
Service Valves
44031.
frn/2015/1507frn/
2015-17838.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Brass Sheet &
10/13/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
602
Strip
61369.
frn/summary/germany/
2015-25988-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Circular Welded
10/13/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
61361.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2015-25989-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Certain Hot-Rolled
1/11/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
820
Carbon Steel Flat
1165.
frn/2016/1601frn/
Products
2016-00365.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Lined Paper
2/4/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Products
5986.
frn/2016/1602frn/
2016-02150.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Pasta, Certain
2/17/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
8043.
frn/summary/italy/
2016-03252-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
4/20/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
912
The-Road Tires
23272.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
09165-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesium Metal
4/28/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
896
25386.
frn/2016/1604frn/
2016-09884.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Carbon And Certain
5/19/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
Alloy Steel Wire
31592.
frn/summary/mexico/
Rod
2016-11858-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Furfuryl Alcohol
6/8/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
835
36873.
frn/2016/1606frn/
2016-13576.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pure Magnesium
6/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
38670.
frn/2016/1606frn/
2016-14059.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Brass Sheet &
7/7/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
602
Strip
44274.
frn/2016/1607frn/
2016-16137.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Certain Cut-To-
9/19/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Length Carbon-
64138.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2016-22403-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Pasta, Certain
12/16/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
91120.
frn/summary/italy/
2016-30324-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Lightweight
12/16/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
920
Thermal Paper
91115.
frn/2016/1612frn/
2016-30308.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Certain Hot-Rolled
1/6/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
820
Carbon Steel Flat
1700.
frn/2017/1701frn/
Products
2017-00037.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesium Metal
3/8/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
896
12928.
frn/2017/1703frn/
2017-04549.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Lined Paper
3/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Products
14201.
frn/summary/india/
2017-05357-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Lined Paper
4/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Products
18112.
frn/summary/india/
2017-07697-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
4/21/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
912
The-Road Tires
18733.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
08011-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Carbon And Certain
5/22/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
Alloy Steel Wire
23190.
frn/summary/mexico/
Rod
2017-10349-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-557-
Polyethylene
5/23/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Retail Carrier
23530.
frn/2017/1705frn/
Bags
2017-10522%20.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-552-
Steel Wire Garment
5/25/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Hangers
24106.
frn/2017/1705frn/
2017-10725.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pure Magnesium
6/5/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
25771.
frn/2017/1706frn/
2017-11564.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Steel Concrete
6/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
Reinforcing Bar
26907.
frn/summary/turkey/
2017-12108-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Steel Concrete
6/14/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Reinforcing Bar
27233.
frn/summary/mexico/
2017-12304-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Certain Cut-To-
8/18/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Length Carbon-
39410.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2017-17494-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Polyethylene
9/21/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
Retail Carrier
44160.
frn/2017/1709frn/
Bags
2017-20125.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Circular Welded
10/12/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
502
Carbon Steel
47479.
frn/summary/turkey/
Pipes And Tubes
2017-22072-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Pasta, Certain
12/5/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
57428.
frn/summary/italy/
2017-26165-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Lightweight
2/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
920
Thermal Paper
7013.
frn/2018/1802frn/
2018-03162.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Lined Paper
4/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Products
16054.
frn/summary/india/
2018-07724-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Steel Concrete
4/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
Reinforcing Bar
16051.
frn/summary/turkey/
2018-07722-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
4/17/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
912
The-Road Tires
16829.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
07991-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Carbon And Certain
4/17/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
Alloy Steel Wire
16832.
frn/summary/mexico/
Rod
2018-07993-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesium Metal
5/17/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
896
22952.
frn/2018/1805frn/
2018-10562.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-557-
Polyethylene
5/23/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Retail Carrier
23894.
frn/2018/1805frn/
Bags
2018-11030.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Steel Concrete
6/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Reinforcing Bar
27754.
frn/summary/mexico/
2018-12771-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pure Magnesium
6/19/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
28412.
frn/2018/1806frn/
2018-13134.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Certain Cut-To-
7/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Length Carbon-
32840.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2018-15137-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Corrosion-
3/14/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
Resistant Carbon
16247.
frn/summary/KOREA-
Steel Flat
south/2013-05934-
Products
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Lined Paper
4/17/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Products
22845.
frn/summary/INDIA/
2013-08900-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
New Pneumatic Off-
4/16/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
912
The-Road Tires
22513.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
08894-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Lightweight
4/18/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Thermal Paper
23220.
frn/summary/germany/
2013-09049-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesium Metal
5/9/2013..
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
896
27185.
frn/2013/1305frn/
2013-11056.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Carbon And Certain
5/14/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
830
Alloy Steel Wire
28190.
frn/summary/mexico/
Rod
2013-11464-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Seamless Refined
6/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
838
Copper Pipe And
35244.
frn/summary/mexico/
Tube
2013-13983-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Frozen And Canned
7/16/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Warmwater Shrimp
42492.
frn/summary/india/
2013-17044-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Drill Pipe
8/5/2013..
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
966
47275.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
18856-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Citric Acid And
10/30/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Citrate Salt
64914.
frn/summary/canada/
2013-25818-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Lined Paper
10/31/2013
78 FR
No comment final
901
Products
65274.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-423-
Stainless Steel
12/31/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
Plate In Coils
79662.
frn/summary/belgium/
2013-31345-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tapered Roller
1/27/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Bearings
4327.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
01503-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Cold-Rolled And
1/31/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
Corrosion-
5378.
frn/summary/korea-
Resistent Carbon
south/2014-02071-
Steel Flat
1.pdf
Products
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Pasta, Certain
2/28/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
11409.
frn/summary/italy/
2014-04430-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Lined Paper
5/7/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Products
26205.
frn/summary/india/
2014-10519-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-533-
Lined Paper
5/12/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Products
26935.
frn/summary/india/
2014-10861-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pure Magnesium
5/22/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
832
29416.
frn/2014/1405frn/
2014-11894.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Lightweight
6/18/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Thermal Paper
34719.
frn/summary/germany/
2014-14243-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesium Metal
6/20/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
896
35310.
frn/2014/1406frn/
2014-14481.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Citric Acid And
7/1/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Citrate Salt
37286.
frn/summary/canada/
2014-15419-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-580-
Certain Cut-To-
8/11/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
837
Length Carbon-
46770.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2014-18950-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Frozen And Canned
8/28/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
822
Warmwater Shrimp
51306.
frn/summary/thailand/
2014-20524-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Frozen And Canned
8/28/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Warmwater Shrimp
51309.
frn/summary/india/
2014-20401-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-423-
Stainless Steel
10/29/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
Plate In Coils
64365.
frn/summary/belgium/
2014-25746-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Frontseating
12/2/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
933
Service Valves
71385.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
28415-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Lined Paper
12/23/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
901
Products
76965.
frn/2014/1412frn/
2014-29783.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tapered Roller
1/27/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Bearings
4244.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
01489-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Pasta, Certain
2/18/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
818
8604.
frn/summary/italy/
2015-03334-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Magnesium Metal
3/24/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
896
15555.
frn/2015/1503frn/
2015-06727.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Narrow Woven
4/13/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Ribbons With
19635.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Woven Selvedge
2015-08436-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Seamless Refined
6/12/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
838
Copper Pipe And
33482.
frn/summary/mexico/
Tube
2015-14451-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Frozen And Canned
9/10/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Warmwater Shrimp
54524.
frn/summary/india/
2015-22869-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Residential
9/16/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
868
Washers
55595.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2015-23156-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Large Residential
9/15/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
842
Washers
55335.
frn/summary/mexico/
2015-23158-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Citric Acid And
10/15/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Citrate Salt
62016.
frn/summary/canada/
2015-26278-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Drawn Stainless
11/10/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
983
Steel Sinks
69644.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
28644-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Seamless Refined
11/12/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
838
Copper Pipe And
69944.
frn/2015/1511frn/
Tube
2015-28754.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Citric Acid And
12/14/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
938
Citrate Salt
77318.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
31419-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tapered Roller
1/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Bearings
1396.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
00432-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Narrow Woven
4/18/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Ribbons With
22578.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Woven Selvedge
2016-08904-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-122-
Citric Acid And
5/10/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
853
Citrate Salt
28827.
frn/2016/1605frn/
2016-11033.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Frozen And Canned
6/22/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
822
Warmwater Shrimp
40671.
frn/2016/1606frn/
2016-14808.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Prestressed
6/23/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
843
Concrete Steel
40850.
frn/summary/mexico/
Rail Tie Wire
2016-14913-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Drawn Stainless
8/15/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
983
Steel Sinks
54042.
frn/2016/1608frn/
2016-19264.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Ammonium Nitrate
9/6/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
61185.
frn/2016/1609frn/
2016-21332.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Large Residential
9/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
842
Washers
62714.
frn/summary/mexico/
2016-21500-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Residential
9/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
868
Washers
62715.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2016-21858-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Frozen And Canned
9/13/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Warmwater Shrimp
62867.
frn/summary/india/
2016-22008-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Ammonium Nitrate
9/19/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
64134.
frn/2016/1609frn/
2016-22387.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tapered Roller
1/17/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Bearings
4844.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
00827-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Narrow Woven
4/19/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Ribbons With
18432.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Woven Selvedge
2017-07926-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Drawn Stainless
6/23/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
983
Steel Sinks
28639.
frn/2017/1706frn/
2017-13121.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Frozen And Canned
7/3/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
822
Warmwater Shrimp
30836.
frn/summary/thailand/
2017-13941-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Large Residential
7/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
842
Washers
32169.
frn/summary/mexico/
2017-14610-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Residential
9/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
868
Washers
42788.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2017-19290-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Frozen And Canned
9/16/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Warmwater Shrimp
43517.
frn/summary/india/
2017-19912-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Narrow Woven
10/16/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
844
Ribbons With
48061.
frn/2017/1710frn/
Woven Selvedge
2017-22329.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Tapered Roller
1/10/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Bearings
1238.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
00242-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Large Residential
1/31/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
868
Washers
4467.
frn/2018/1801frn/
2018-01868.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Narrow Woven
3/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
953
Ribbons With
11177.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
Woven Selvedge
05150-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Large Residential
3/19/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
842
Washers
11963.
frn/summary/mexico/
2018-05482-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Drawn Stainless
5/21/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
983
Steel Sinks
23424.
frn/2018/1805frn/
2018-10562.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Frozen And Canned
7/16/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
840
Warmwater Shrimp
32835.
frn/summary/india/
2018-15115-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Welded Line Pipe
7/18/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
876
33919.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2018-15327-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Welded Line Pipe
7/19/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
823
34113.
frn/summary/turkey/
2018-15435-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-560-
Uncoated Paper
8/9/2018..
84 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
828
39410.
frn/2018/1808frn/
2018-17066.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-560-
Uncoated Paper
10/17/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
829
52383.
frn/summary/
indonesia/2018-22633-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
2/15/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
11143.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
03481-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Diamond Sawblades
2/20/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
855
11818.
frn/summary/Korea-
south/2013-03865-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Certain Preserved
2/21/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Mushrooms
12034.
frn/2013/1302frn/
2013-04041.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Kitchen Appliance
4/11/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
942
Shelving And
21594.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
Racks
08514-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Freshwater
4/15/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Crawfish Tailmeat
22228.
frn/summary/PRC/2013-
08791-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Stainless Steel
4/15/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Bar
22227.
frn/2013/1304frn/
2013-08792.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-428-
Antifriction
5/21/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
Bearings, Ball
29702.
frn/2013/1305frn/
2013-12085.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Circular Welded
6/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Non-Alloy Steel
35248.
frn/summary/korea-
Pipe
south/2013-13989-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
6/17/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
36166.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
14374-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Diamond Sawblades
6/18/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
855
36524.
frn/summary/korea-
south/2013-14538-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyester Staple
6/28/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
833
Fiber
38938.
frn/2013/1306frn/
2013-15448.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pencils, Cased
7/18/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
827
42932.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
17160-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Oil Country
8/14/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
944
Tubular Goods
49475.
frn/summary/prc/2013-
19733-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Polyethylene
8/19/2013.
78 FR
Document available in
821
Retail Carrier
50376.
Central Records Unit
Bags
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Freshwater
4/25/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Crawfish Tailmeat
22947.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
09479-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-412-
Antifriction
6/20/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
Bearings, Ball
35312.
frn/summary/MULTIPLE/
2014-14493-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Antifriction
6/20/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
804
Bearings, Ball
35312.
frn/2014/1406frn/
2014-13262.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
6/24/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
35723.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
14717-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Seamless Refined
6/30/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
838
Copper Pipe And
36719.
frn/summary/mexico/
Tube
2014-15280-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Multilayered Wood
8/4/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
971
Flooring
45178.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
18339-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Stainless Steel
8/13/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Bar
47437.
frn/summary/brazil/
2014-19148-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Oil Country
9/3/2014..
79 FR
Document available in
944
Tubular Goods
52301.
Central Records Unit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Polyethylene
9/2/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
Retail Carrier
51953.
frn/2014/1409frn/
Bags
2014-20862.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Certain Cut-To-
9/11/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Length Carbon-
54264.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2014-21708-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyester Staple
9/11/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
833
Fiber
54265.
frn/2014/1409frn/
2014-21707.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Small Diameter
9/25/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
929
Graphite
57508.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Electrodes
22870-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Stainless Steel
10/22/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Bar
63081.
frn/summary/spain/
2014-25196-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Carbon And Alloy
11/17/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
850
Seamless
68408.
frn/2014/1411frn/
Standard, Line,
2014-27165.txt
And Pressure Pipe
(Over 4 1/2
Inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Freshwater
12/18/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Crawfish Tailmeat
75535.
frn/2014/1412frn/
2014-29660.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Narrow Woven
12/29/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
953
Ribbons With
78036.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Woven Selvedge
30390-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Steel Nails
12/30/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
804
78396.
frn/summary/uae/2014-
30541-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-412-
Antifriction
1/27/2015.
80 FR
Document available in
801
Bearings, Ball
4248.
Central Records Unit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Antifriction
3/27/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
804
Bearings, Ball
4248.
frn/2015/1503frn/
2015-06137.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-475-
Pasta, Certain
3/2/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
11172.
frn/summary/italy/
2015-04340-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Stainless Steel
3/11/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Bar
12805.
frn/2015/1503frn/
2015-05563.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-469-
Stainless Steel
3/11/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Bar
12798.
frn/2015/1503frn/
2015-05561.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Helical Spring
3/17/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
822
Lock Washers
13833.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
05957-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Small Diameter
3/17/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
929
Graphite
13825.
frn/2015/1503frn/
Electrodes
2015-06105.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Certain Cut-To-
4/24/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Length Carbon-
22971.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2015-09582-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pencils, Cased
5/11/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
827
26897.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
10622-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
6/8/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
32344.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
13942-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Steel Nails
6/9/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
804
32527.
frn/summary/uae/2015-
14078-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Circular Welded
6/10/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Non-Alloy Steel
32937.
frn/summary/korea-
Pipe
south/2015-14214-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyester Staple
7/2/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
833
Fiber
38174.
frn/2015/1507frn/
2015-16376.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Brass Sheet &
7/6/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Strip
38437.
frn/2015/1507frn/
2015-16510.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Polyethylene
7/8/2015..
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
Retail Carrier
39056.
frn/summary/thailand/
Bags
2015-17732-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Multilayered Wood
7/14/2015.
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
971
Flooring
41007.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
17079-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Stilbenic Optical
10/13/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Brightening
61368.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Agents
2015-25966-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Drawn Stainless
11/10/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
984
Steel Sinks
69638.
frn/summary/prc/2015-
28664-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-475-
Pasta, Certain
12/17/2015
80 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
78710.
frn/2015/1512frn/
2015-31799.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Circular Welded
2/4/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
911
Carbon Quality
5989.
frn/2016/1602frn/
Steel Pipe
2016-02151.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-475-
Pasta, Certain
2/23/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
8918.
frn/summary/italy/
2016-03750-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Brass Sheet &
3/21/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
601
Strip
15038.
frn/2016/1603frn/
2016-06298.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Freshwater
4/13/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Crawfish Tailmeat
21840.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
08501-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Multilayered Wood
5/23/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
971
Flooring
32291.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
12005-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-549-
Polyethylene
6/8/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
821
Retail Carrier
36891.
frn/2016/1606frn/
Bags
2016-13468.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
6/14/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
38673.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
14047-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Stainless Steel
6/22/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Bar
40670.
frn/2016/1606frn/
2016-14811.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Stilbenic Optical
7/6/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Brightening
43991.
frn/summary/taiwan/
Agents
2016-15834-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Oil Country
9/2/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
850
Tubular Goods
60671.
frn/2016/1609frn/
2016-21212.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Stainless Steel
9/8/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
Bar
62086.
frn/summary/india/
2016-21656-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Small Diameter
9/9/2016..
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
929
Graphite
62474.
frn/summary/prc/2016-
Electrodes
21782-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Certain Cut-To-
9/12/2016.
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Length Carbon-
62712.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2016-21857-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-520-
Steel Nails
10/17/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
804
71482.
frn/summary/uae/2016-
25057-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-557-
Polyethylene
10/31/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
813
Retail Carrier
75378.
frn/summary/malaysia/
Bags
2016-26220-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Carbon And Alloy
11/16/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
850
Seamless
80635.
frn/2016/1611frn/
Standard, Line,
2016-27519.txt
And Pressure Pipe
(Over 4 1/2
Inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Carbon And Alloy
11/16/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
851
Seamless
80640.
frn/2016/1611frn/
Standard, Line,
2016-27520.txt
And Pressure Pipe
(Under 4 1/2
Inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Solid Urea
11/18/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
81738.
frn/2016/1611frn/
2016-27819.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Pasta, Certain
12/15/2016
81 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
806
90775.
frn/2016/1612frn/
2016-30151.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-475-
Granular
1/13/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
703
Polytetrafluoroet
4291.
frn/2017/1701frn/
hylene Resin
2017-00736.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Lightweight
3/20/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
921
Thermal Paper
14349.
frn/2017/1703frn/
2017-05430.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Freshwater
4/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Crawfish Tailmeat
17634.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
07363-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Pencils, Cased
5/30/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
827
24675.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
11053-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
6/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
26912.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
12106-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Stainless Steel
6/12/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
Bar
26916.
frn/summary/india/
2017-12107-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Stainless Steel
6/16/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Bar
27691.
frn/2017/1706frn/
2017-12524.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-823-
Silicomanganese
8/9/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
37197.
frn/2017/1708frn/
2017-16790.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Certain Cut-To-
9/6/2017..
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Length Carbon-
42075.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2017-18824-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Stilbenic Optical
9/13/2017.
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Brightening
42973.
frn/2017/1709frn/
Agents
2017-19418.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Freshwater
10/12/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Crawfish Tailmeat
47469.
frn/summary/prc/2017-
22071-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-475-
Pasta, Certain
10/16/2017
82 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
48060.
frn/2017/1710frn/
2017-22328.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Oil Country
1/10/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
816
Tubular Goods
1240.
frn/summary/turkey/
2018-00263-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-489-
Oil Country
2/14/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
817
Tubular Goods
6511.
frn/summary/turkey/
2018-02898-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Stainless Steel
2/9/2018..
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
Bar
6840.
frn/2018/1802frn/
2018-03160.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
4/20/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
17527.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
08289-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Stainless Steel
5/22/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
825
Bar
23633.
frn/2018/1805frn/
2018-10878.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Circular Welded
6/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Non-Alloy Steel
27541.
frn/summary/korea-
Pipe
south/2018-12692-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Certain Cut-To-
7/13/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Length Carbon-
32629.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2018-15018-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-351-
Hot-Rolled Steel
9/26/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
845
Flat Products
48592.
frn/2018/1809frn/
2018-20845.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Stilbenic Optical
10/1/2018.
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
848
Brightening
49360.
frn/2018/1810frn/
Agents
2018-21325.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
High Pressure
12/10/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
978
Steel Cylinders
63471.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
26651-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-570-
Diamond Sawblades
12/14/2018
83 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
900
64331.
frn/summary/prc/2018-
27123-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-421-
Carboxymethylcellu
2/12/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
lose
9884.
frn/summary/
NETHERLANDS/2013-
03212-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Polyethylene
2/11/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
824
Terephthalate
9670.
frn/summary/INDIA/
(Pet) Film
2013-03082-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Certain Cut-To-
5/17/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Length Carbon-
29113.
frn/summary/korea-
Quality Steel
south/2013-11888-
Plate
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Circular Welded
6/7/2013..
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Non-Alloy Steel
34342.
frn/summary/mexico/
Pipe
2013-13557-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Polyvinyl Alcohol
6/24/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
841
37794.
frn/2013/1306frn/
2013-14915.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Narrow Woven
8/19/2013.
78 FR
Document available in
844
Ribbons With
50377.
Central Records Unit
Woven Selvedge
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-485-
Carbon And Alloy
10/23/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Seamless
63164.
frn/2013/1310frn/
Standard, Line,
2013-24838.txt
And Pressure Pipe
(Under 4 1/2
Inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-588-
Carbon And Alloy
10/29/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
850
Seamless
64475.
frn/2013/1310frn/
Standard, Line,
2013-25603.txt
And Pressure Pipe
(Over 4 1/2
Inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-823-
Certain Cut To
11/12/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
Length Carbon
67334.
frn/2013/1311frn/
Steel Plate
2013-27013.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Solid Urea
11/12/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
67335.
frn/2013/1311frn/
2013-27010.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Certain Circular
11/29/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
008
Welded Carbon
71563.
frn/summary/TAIWAN/
Steel Pipes And
2013-28693-1.pdf
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Certain Cut To
12/9/2013.
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
808
Length Carbon
73827.
frn/2013/1312frn/
Steel Plate
2013-29340.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-421-
Carboxymethylcellu
12/27/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
lose
78812.
frn/2013/1312frn/
2013-31114.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Circular Welded
12/31/2013
78 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
805
Non-Alloy Steel
79664.
frn/2013/1312frn/
Pipe
2013-31343.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-405-
Carboxymethylcellu
1/10/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
lose
1826.
frn/summary/finland/
2014-00173-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Light-Walled
1/23/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Rectangular Pipe
3779.
frn/2014/1401frn/
And Tube
2014-01167.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-201-
Light-Walled
1/31/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
836
Rectangular Pipe
5375.
frn/summary/mexico/
And Tube
2014-02068-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-475-
Pasta, Certain
3/4/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
819
12154.
frn/2014/1403frn/
2014-04747.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
C-570-
Kitchen Appliance
3/17/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
942
Shelving And
14668.
frn/summary/prc/2014-
Racks
05832-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-580-
Circular Welded
7/1/2014..
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
809
Non-Alloy Steel
37284.
frn/summary/korea-
Pipe
south/2014-15418-
1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-489-
Light-Walled
7/23/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
815
Rectangular Pipe
42761.
frn/2014/1407frn/
And Tube
2014-17347.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-533-
Stainless Steel
7/28/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
810
Bar
43712.
frn/summary/india/
2014-17721-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-583-
Certain Circular
8/14/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
008
Welded Carbon
47615.
frn/2014/1408frn/
Steel Pipes And
2014-19277.txt
Tubes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-821-
Solid Urea
10/9/2014.
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
801
61055.
frn/2014/1410frn/
2014-24157.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-405-
Carboxymethylcellu
12/22/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
803
lose
76302.
frn/summary/finland/
2014-29924-1.pdf
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-421-
Carboxymethylcellu
12/30/2014
79 FR
http://ia.ita.doc.gov/
811
lose
78395.
frn/2014/1412frn/
2014-30547.txt
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1h. If the trend shows that the Department of Commerce has
imposed total AFA more frequently in recent years, please
explain why.
Answer. The most likely explanation is that the number of
final determinations issued by Commerce has increased. Commerce
issued final decisions in over five times as many
investigations in 2018 as it did in 2013. On average, in each
of the last 3 years of the period, Commerce issued over 65
final decisions in AD/CVD investigations alone. From 2013
through 2018, the number of AD and CVD orders enforced by
Commerce increased from 279 to 408. Each AD/CVD order can give
rise to administrative reviews on a yearly basis--each of which
leads to separate final determinations. When placed in this
context, and relying on numbers alone, it is reasonable that
among an increased number of final determinations in
investigations and administrative reviews from year to year
there might likewise be an increased number of final
determinations in which Commerce relied on total AFA.
_______________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR JERRY MORAN
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 1. The Department, through NOAA, executes the procurement
of our Nation's weather satellites. These satellites are critical for
accurate weather forecasting of hurricanes, tornadoes, and severe
storms. They also require billions in tax-payer dollars and strict
program oversight to ensure they stay on-budget and on-schedule.
In fiscal year 2020, NOAA is proposing to restructure NESDIS'
budget, including merging JPSS with the next generation of polar
orbiting satellites, Polar Follow-on.
1a. What benefits, other than cost-savings, would be achieved
by merging JPSS and PFO procurements into a single program?
Answer. Combining the Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS)
program of record and the Polar Follow On program (PFO) into
one Polar Weather Satellites (PWS) program will maximize
flexibility, responsiveness, and sustainability across NOAA's
polar satellites. PWS will allow NOAA to operate the JPSS and
PFO programs together. The PWS program will continue operations
of the current two polar satellites (NOAA/NASA S-NPP and NOAA-
20 (JPSS-1)) and the planned operations of three future
satellites (JPSS-2, -3, and -4). This merger will enable
efficient development of the remaining three satellites by
directing resources to mitigate risk and maximize cost and
schedule performance to areas including labor, parts,
equipment, and funding.
Combining and managing across NOAA's polar satellites now and
into the future will eliminate duplicative management, along
with reducing risk and increasing flexibility in the production
stages of future satellites. This flexibility provides
protection against catastrophic events (e.g., impacts to the
supply chain, launch failure, on-orbit failure). Developing all
missions together enables us to realize efficiencies and the
flexibility to apply resources across satellite activities as
needed. NOAA expects PWS to experience benefits similar to
those already realized by the GOES-R Series program. For
example, the GOES-R Series program was able to replace a faulty
component on GOES-S with one on GOES-U, allowing GOES-S to
maintain its scheduled launch date. Similar flexibility for PWS
will allow for the efficient execution of the program and
transparency across NOAA's polar satellites.
1b. Considering the significant budget pressure polar
orbiting satellites place on the Department's budget overall,
what measures will be put into place to ensure their
procurement stays on track and within budget?
Answer. The Department of Commerce (DOC) and NOAA will
continue to ensure JPSS and PFO through the PWS program stay on
schedule and within budget. Oversight is provided through
monthly status reviews of NOAA's major satellite programs,
including both JPSS and PFO to the Goddard Space Flight Center
(GSFC)-NESDIS Center Management Council (CMC) and the NOAA-NASA
Agency Program Management Council (APMC), along with monthly
financial reviews, which are completed and briefed to the NOAA
Chief Financial Officer.
The fiscal year 2020 President's budget includes a request
for a new governance structure to provide portfolio management,
which will enable better planning and management of risks and
resources across a set of observations. The PWS program will be
managed by the Office of Low Earth Orbit Observations to
enhance management oversight, reduce risk, and increase
flexibility, while allowing for future innovation of necessary
polar observations. Although the PWS program will be managed by
the Office of Low Earth Orbit Observations, PWS will continue
to be its own budget line and NOAA will continue to ensure PWS
oversight through the various councils and financial reviews
discussed above. In addition, in accordance with Public Law
112-55 Section 105(c)(2), NOAA will continue to track
individual life cycle costs (LCCs) and schedules as established
for the JPSS program of record (SNPP, JPSS-1 and JPSS-2) within
their Baseline Report submitted to Congress in November 2014.
NOAA will track the LCC and schedules for the PFO (JPSS-3 and
JPSS-4) through their upcoming Baseline Report, which will be
submitted to Congress in fiscal year 2020. To ensure accuracy
of the LCC presented in the upcoming PFO Baseline Report, DOC
initiated an Independent Cost Estimate of the PFO program
during fiscal year 2019. In addition, NOAA is committed to
continued transparency, accountability, and communication of
PWS procurement, operations, costs, and schedule through the
Major Satellite Annual Report and quarterly satellite briefings
to NOAA's Appropriations and Authorization Committee staff.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Mike Platt, Department of Commerce
Question 2. The shared services model has been presented to the
subcommittee as a more efficient and effective way for the Department
and its bureaus to carry out administrative tasks--such as hiring
actions, cost-accounting services, and IT management.
However, we are still waiting to see the results of shared-services
on the Department's overall administrative functions. This is
particularly the case with executing hiring actions in a timely manner,
as I am aware that several bureaus have a large number of vacancies and
that it can take in upwards of 12-18 months to complete hiring actions.
2a. For each of the past five fiscal years (fiscal year 2013-
fiscal year 2018), please provide discrete performance metrics
that demonstrate that the shared services model is being
applied correctly and resulting in improved services for the
Department of Commerce Bureaus.
Answer. The Department of Commerce (DOC) launched Enterprise
Services (ES) in the Fall of 2015 to design, build, and
implement a shared services model at DOC. Since its launch, ES
has worked with DOC stakeholders and senior leadership to
assess services provided within four mission support functions
(Human Resources, Acquisitions, Information Technology, and
Financial Management) to determine fitness for shared services
delivery. In December fiscal year 2017, ES was formally
approved by the House and Senate as an organization within the
Office of the Secretary (OS).
While ES does not currently provide recruiting and hiring
services to DOC, ES is currently in the procurement phase of
implementing an end-to-end recruiting and hiring (Talent
Acquisition) solution. ES plans to begin offering recruiting
and hiring services in the Summer of 2020. Currently, NOAA,
Census, BEA, NIST (including NTIS) and the DOC Human Capital
Client Services-serviced bureaus receive recruiting and hiring
services from their respective organizations.
However, ES does currently provide some Human Resources (HR)
services, including Personnel Action Request (PAR) processing,
Payroll and Benefits, and Acquisition Services to include
Strategic Sourcing for the entire DOC and full-lifecycle
Acquisition Services for those bureaus that do not have
procurement authority. These services have been migrated to ES
in a strategically-sequenced manner. HR service delivery began
with Personnel Action Request (PAR) processing including the
Department's first-ever HR Contact Center in December 2016,
followed by Payroll and Benefits processing in April 2018. ES
assumed full lifecycle Acquisition Services for those DOC
bureaus that do not have procurement authority in fiscal year
2016 and fiscal year 2017.
ES does not have performance metrics for the past 5 years
since, as a young organization, it first started offering
services in Q1 of fiscal year 2017. ES does have HR performance
measures and Acquisition Services measures beginning October
2017 which have been shared below.
Human Resources Data
ES PAR, Payroll, and Benefits Action Volumes in Fiscal Year
2018: In fiscal year 2018, ES drastically expanded the number
of PAR, Payroll, and Benefits actions it was processing on
behalf of the Department. In October 2017, the beginning of the
fiscal year, ES processed 926 actions and only offered PAR
services. However, in the month of July 2018, ES processed
3,416 PAR actions along with 709 Payroll actions and 260
Benefits actions. This increase in processing volumes
demonstrate ES' ability to scale and assume the transactional
services from the bureaus, allowing them to focus on mission-
critical functions rather than mission-enabling functions.
Accuracy of ES PAR Processing by Pay Period from Fiscal Year
2018 Pay Periods 06-17: Since Payroll and Benefits services are
still new, ES currently only has metrics for PAR processing
services. However, ES' PAR processing accuracy figures help
prove their ability to offer quality services while continuing
to scale its customer base. From pay period 6 (3/18/2018-3/31/
2018) through pay period 17 (8/19/2018-8/31/2018), ES met or
exceeded their target PAR accuracy SLA of 98 percent accuracy 9
out of 12 pay periods and reached 100 percent accuracy 5 times.
Acquisition Services Data
Fiscal Year 2018 Cumulative Cost Avoidance ($M): Acquisition
Services has had the most demonstrable financial impact on the
Department. In fiscal year 2018, ES far exceeded its cumulative
annual target of $22.1M in cost avoidance. ES met and surpassed
that goal before the end of Q3 and reached $54.6M in total cost
avoidance by the end of fiscal year 2018.
Customer Satisfaction for Acquisition Services \1\: ES'
Acquisition Services far exceeding its cost avoidance goal, was
couple with a perfect 100 percent customer satisfaction rating
when survey data was collected in both December and July of
fiscal year 2018. This surpassed the 90 percent customer
satisfaction rating ES had originally set as its target.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Data represents responses from BEA, BIS, EDA, ITA, OS, OIG,
MBDA, NTIA, and NTIS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Mike Platt, Department of Commerce
Question 3. Last year, the committee did not receive responses to
the fiscal year 2019 Budget Hearing Questions for the Record until
March 7, 2019--301 days after the hearing, and after the fiscal year
2019 appropriations bill was enacted for the Department of Commerce.
This is unacceptable.
3a. Does the Department of Commerce have policies and
procedures in place to ensure that Questions for the Record and
other inquiries from congress are responded to in a timely
manner? If so, please provide a written copy of those policies
and procedures.
Answer. We apologize for the delay in responding to fiscal
year 2019 Questions for the Record (QFRs). The Department takes
seriously its responsibility to provide timely responses to
Congress. In early 2019, Department leadership instituted a new
policy for providing responses to questions for the record, to
encourage accurate, complete, and timely responses.
Process for QFRs Submitted by Appropriations Committees
-- All QFRs should be submitted directly to the Office of Budget
(OB) from the appropriations committees. If QFRs are
accidentally submitted to a bureau, that bureau should forward
them unchanged to OB.
-- Once QFRs are received, OB will (1) send an unchanged courtesy
copy to the Office of General Counsel (OGC) and the Office of
Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs (OLIA), and (2)
assign the QFRs to the appropriate bureau(s) to prepare
responses.
-- Within 15 days from the time of receipt, bureaus should
provide QFR responses to OB.
-- Within 15 days of receipt from bureaus, OB will review,
consult with bureaus if necessary, and send QFR responses to
the Office of Policy and Strategic Planning (OPSP), and
courtesy copy OLIA and OGC.
-- Within 15 days OPSP will comment and clear QFR responses and
notify OB, OLIA, and OGC. If notification is not received
within 15 days, QFR responses will be considered cleared by
OPSP.
-- If any of the 15-day deadlines are not met for any set of
QFRs, those QFRs shall be brought before the Policy Committee
for resolution and disposition.
-- OB will immediately send the cleared QFR responses to the
Office of Management and Budget and courtesy copy OLIA and OGC.
-- Upon approval by OMB, OB will send the final QFR responses to
the appropriate appropriations committee or subcommittee and
courtesy copy OLIA.
Concurrent with the transmission of the answers to the fiscal
year 2020 Budget Hearing Questions for the Record, please
provide the following information:
3b. The number of days the fiscal year 2020 Questions for the
Record were with the individual Bureaus for response and
review.
Answer. Drafting responses to questions for the record is an
iterative process that involves various entities within the
Department of Commerce. In order to provide the Committee with
the requested information, we have provided our best estimates.
The fiscal year 2020 Questions for the Record were with the
individual Bureaus for 24 days. (This estimate does not include
any back and forth during the review process with the various
DOC components or OMB.)
3c. The number of days the fiscal year 2020 Questions for the
Record were with the Department of Commerce Office of Budget
for response and review.
Answer. Drafting responses to questions for the record is an
iterative process that involves various entities within the
Department of Commerce. In order to provide the Committee with
the requested information, we have provided our best estimates.
The fiscal year 2020 Questions for the Record were with the
Office of Budget for 30 days.
3d. The number of days the fiscal year 2020 Questions for the
Record were with the Department of Commerce Office of
Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs for response and
review.
Answer. Drafting responses to questions for the record is an
iterative process that involves various entities within the
Department of Commerce. In order to provide the Committee with
the requested information, we have provided our best estimates.
The Office of Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs
reviewed draft responses and provided comments to the fiscal
year 2020 Questions for the Record at various stages of the
review process.
3e. The number of days the fiscal year 2020 Questions for the
Record were with the Department of Commerce Office of Policy
and Strategic Planning for response and review.
Answer. Drafting responses to questions for the record is an
iterative process that involves various entities within the
Department of Commerce. In order to provide the Committee with
the requested information, we have provided our best estimates.
The fiscal year 2020 Questions for the Record were with the
Office of Policy and Strategic Planning for 46 days.
3f. The number of days the fiscal year 2020 Questions for the
Record were with the White House Office of Management and
Budget for response and review.
Answer. QFRs are reviewed and approved by the Office of
Management and Budget on a rolling basis and include multiple
response engagements.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. David Redl, National Telecommunications and Information
Administration
Question 4. On March 14, 2019, the FCC began the auction of the
24GHz radio frequency spectrum band.
4a. Can you provide a detailed timeline of the inter-agency
events that preceded the arbitration decision by the Department
of State?
Answer. In 2016, NOAA and NASA indicated that there were
issues with near band interference into passive operations in
the 23.6-24 GHz band from proposed 5G operations in the 24.25-
27.5 GHz band during work of the international task group set
up to review and propose regulatory rules for international
operation. From 2016 to 2019, NASA, NOAA, NTIA, FCC, and State
worked together on verifying technical studies performed by
NASA and NOAA. These discussions were active prior to and
during the FCC's 24 GHz auction.
We are pleased to state that the interagency group (NOAA,
NTIA, NASA, the FCC, and the State Department) has since
resolved the question. The United States recently sent a
delegation to the 34th Meeting of the Permanent Consultative
Committee II of the Inter-American Telecommunications
Commission to negotiate the final positions for the Americas
region to be submitted to WRC-19. At this meeting, the United
States proposed an out-of-band emissions limit of -28 dBW/200
MHz to protect the data collection services in the 23.6-24 GHz
band. Negotiations with other American countries resulted in an
Inter-American proposal that (1) agreed to identify the 24-26
GHz band for 5G deployment (domestically the United States has
made only the 24.25-24.45 GHz and 24.75-25.25 GHz sub-bands
available) and (2) agreed to an out-of-band emissions limit of
-28 dBW/200 MHz to protect the data collection services.
Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Peru,
Dominican Republic, and Uruguay supported this position, which
will be presented to the World Radiocommunication Conference on
October 28-November 22, 2019 in Sharm El-Sheikh.
----------
[1] Use of Spectrum Bands Above 24 GHz For Mobile Radio
Services, et al., Second Report and Order, Second Further
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Order on Reconsideration, and
Memorandum Opinion and Order, 32 FCC Rcd 10988 (2017).
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 4.
4a. I understand NOAA and NASA have conducted a joint study
to document the acceptable interference thresholds for
proliferation of 5G within the 24GHz band. Please provide the
committee with a copy of that study and an executive summary of
the results.
Answer. The NOAA-NASA study was provided to the committee on
June 26, 2019.
4b. What effects will proliferation of 5G within the 24GHz
band, with an interference threshold of -20dBW, have on NOAA
satellites that collect measurements of water vapor?
Answer. NOAA and NASA have conducted impact assessments using
5G model inputs developed by the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU). These model inputs assume a
hypothetical deployment of 5G equipment that may or may not
reflect actual deployments. NOAA has worked closely with the
FCC through an interagency process to ensure that appropriate
protection levels are adopted that enable operation of 5G
systems while ensuring that NOAA continues to obtain the sensor
data needed for accurate weather forecasting.
4c. Has NOAA begun to consider how proliferation of 5G within
the 24GHz band, with an interference threshold of -20dBW, might
impact out year acquisition of NOAA's polar orbiting
satellites? And, if so, what are the expected impacts?
Answer. NOAA is working through the interagency process on
appropriate protection levels. The final protection levels for
a range of radio spectrum bands that are important for NOAA's
weather forecast capabilities will be established by the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) at the World
Radiocommunication Conference (WRC) in November 2019. The ITU
is currently considering a range of protection levels, and NOAA
will work within the U.S. delegation to the WRC to support the
U.S. position and adopt of protection levels that enable
deployment of 5G terrestrial wireless systems while preserving
accurate weather data collection.
Depending on the final protection levels adopted by the ITU
in November and the actual deployment that occurs, the effect
of 5G operations on NOAA's passive sensors could range from no
impact to more significant impacts. After the conclusion of the
WRC, NOAA will work with its interagency partners to develop
any necessary mitigation strategies to ensure NOAA is able to
meet its mission of protecting lives and property. NOAA looks
forward to working with Congress as this process continues.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 5. Currently, the U.S. imports
90 percent of consumed
seafood, and a vast amount comes from countries routinely engaged in
unfair trade practices. I believe America is poised to be the leader in
seafood production through greater access to wild fisheries and support
for domestic aquaculture.
You have both publicly expressed a desire to take advantage of our
Nation's vast coastlines and resources to become self-sufficient in
fishing, and support growth of the domestic aquaculture industry.
5a. Has the Department of Commerce developed a Seafood
Strategy Initiative or something analogous that would
effectuate your stated desires to increase domestic seafood
production and reduce the U.S. seafood trade deficit?
Answer. Secretary Ross and the Department of Commerce have
been clear about their goal of reducing the trade deficit in
seafood products. That said, many of the dynamics that drive
our seafood trade balance, such as U.S. consumer preferences,
the volume and composition of U.S. seafood production, and
global seafood demand, lie outside of the Department's control.
In any case, the Department of Commerce is committed to
shifting the balance of trade and increasing the value and
volume of U.S. seafood production by supporting increased
investment in, and productivity of, the Nation's aquaculture
industry, reducing regulatory burden, where appropriate, and
promoting free, fair, and reciprocal trade within the global
marketplace.
5b. If so, why has the Department of Commerce not publicly
released or taken any action on the Strategy?
Answer. The Department has undertaken several actions to
address the seafood trade deficit and promote domestic seafood
production. This includes engaging with all eight regional
fishery management councils to identify opportunities to reduce
regulatory burden, where appropriate. NOAA has completed 16
deregulatory actions to date at a cost savings of nearly $50
million per year. There are approximately 70 deregulatory
actions under development that we expect to be finalized in
fiscal year 2019 or later.
The Administration continues to make aquaculture a priority.
The fiscal year 2020 funding request for the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) includes $13 million for aquaculture,
which will be used to continue work to advance the domestic
marine aquaculture industry, create jobs, provide sustainable
seafood, and reduce the U.S. seafood trade deficit. In
addition, NOAA is co-chairing a newly established interagency
working group that is developing a plan to improve regulatory
efficiency and predictability for marine aquaculture permitting
and management. In addition, the Department continues to
support research and development of aquaculture through several
programs across NOAA. Recently, the National Ocean Service
released the Gulf Aquamapper and the Ocean Reports Tool. Both
web-based tools will assist prospective aquaculture facilities
in identify optimal locations to site their facilities.
5c. If no such Strategy has been developed, explain what the
Department of Commerce is doing to increase domestic seafood
production and reduce the U.S. seafood trade deficit?
Answer. As noted in the previous answer, the Department has
undertaken several actions to reduce the seafood trade deficit
and continues to develop additional actions for implementation.
We would be pleased to work with the Committee in furtherance
of its views on how best to reduce the seafood trade deficit.
_______________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR LISA MURKOWSKI
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 1. The Pacific Salmon Treaty is the mechanism through
which the United States manages our coast-wide salmon fisheries with
Canada. The agreement is renegotiated every 10 years. This year we have
a new 10-year harvest and conservation agreement with Canada, after 3
years of negotiations by Commissioners from Alaska, Washington, Oregon,
and NOAA. This latest agreement comes with an initial funding ask of
more than $100 million for conservation and management that was shaped
in part by the Federal representatives negotiating on behalf of NOAA,
and includes mitigation measures to ensure no adverse impacts of the
Treaty on other species, like endangered resident killer whales.
Despite this new agreement coming into effect and the associated
funding commitment requested by the Commissioners, the Department's
budget request include a cut in the regular Treaty funding, and no
mention of the critical funding needed to kick off this new decade-long
agreement.
1a. Does NOAA support the funding proposal developed by the
non-Federal members of the Pacific Salmon Commission, for both
implementation of the agreement and mitigation?
Answer. NOAA supports funding necessary to implement the
recently renegotiated Pacific Salmon Treaty Agreement. However,
negotiations for the new Pacific Salmon Treaty Agreement
concluded late in 2018 and the work to estimate the funding for
implementation and mitigation of the new Agreement was on-going
into 2019. Therefore, costs associated with the new Agreement
were not finalized prior to the formulation of the President's
fiscal year 2020 budget request. NOAA is aware of the non-
Federal commissioner's financial package as it continues its
development of the President's fiscal year 2021 budget request.
1b. Will NOAA include the U.S. Commissioners' request for
Pacific Salmon Treaty implementation and mitigation funding in
its fiscal year 2021 budget request?
Answer. The fiscal year 2021 budget process is in the
formulation stages within NOAA and the Department of Commerce.
All budget discussions/decisions are pre-decisional at this
time.
1c. How much of the fiscal year 2019 implementation funding
for Pacific Salmon Treaty ($15.5M, funded under NMFS's Salmon
Management Activities account) will be withheld by the agency
for administrative fees?
Answer. In fiscal year 2018, approximately $2.2 million in
overall fees were assessed from the $14.0 million in
appropriated funding, equating to a rate of approximately 16
percent to the Pacific Salmon Treaty (PST) budget line. The
Federal budget appropriation structure for NOAA does not
contain dedicated budget lines for compulsory mission support
functions. As such, an equitable percentage of each budget line
must be contributed to overall fees assessed to operate the
organization. Overall fee assessment includes, but is not
limited to, the following necessary expenses: Congressional
mandates (e.g., prior year de-obligations and the Hollings
Undergraduate Scholarship Program), NOAA and NMFS HQ overhead
(e.g., information technology, acquisition and grant
administration, general counsel support, and core financial
management), and NMFS programmatic operating expenses (e.g.,
facility operation and lease costs, safety and security, and
program staffing). The overall fees assessed from Pacific
Salmon Treaty activities are needed to support the
implementation of NOAA's full participation in Pacific Salmon
Treaty obligations. fiscal year 2019 execution year is
currently in progress, and final figures will be available at
the close of the fiscal year.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Steven Dillingham, U.S. Census Bureau
Question 2. Alaska has one of the hardest populations to count in
the Census. Without sufficient Federal resources to conduct the census,
Alaskans and Alaska Natives could be under-counted in 2020. We know
that certain areas and populations are at higher risk of an undercount
in Alaska, such as rural areas and those with large Alaska Native
populations. In 2010, the Census undercounted American Indians and
Alaska Natives living on reservations by 4.9 percent percent, and
undercounted Alaskans in the State's special-enumeration districts by
almost 8 percent. The administration is requesting $6.2 billion in new
funding for the Census Bureau, including $5.3 billion for the 2020
Census. This request assumes that the Census Bureau will carry over
about $1 billion in funds available in fiscal year 2019, money which
itself represents forward funding originally included in the fiscal
year 2018 appropriations bill. However, Congress made $1 billion in
additional resources available to the Census Bureau in fiscal year 2019
to support specific steps that could help reduce the persistent
undercount of harder-to-reach population groups. In both fiscal year
2018 and 2019, the Appropriations Committees directed the Census Bureau
to focus on several activities, including (1) partnership, (2) targeted
communications, and (3) questionnaire assistance centers. If the Census
Bureau carries over to fiscal year 2020 the entire $1 billion in
additional resources Congress made available in fiscal year 2019, it
will not be able to fulfill the directives set forth in Appropriations
report language.
2a. Will the Census Bureau able to increase the number of
Partnership Program staff to a level of effort comparable to
the 2010 Census? Will the Census Bureau be able to expand
targeted communications, also to a level of effort comparable
to or greater than the 2010 Census?
Answer. The Census Bureau's Partnership Program staffing plan
is driven by research and past experience. The Census Bureau
plans to almost double the number of partnership specialists it
hires, from approximately 800 in the 2010 Census to 1,501 for
the 2020 Census. The Census Bureau believes that this will
allow for a strong and effective Partnership Program. As of
July 31, 2019, the Census Bureau has four partnership
specialists on board and working in Alaska, along with four in
queue, meaning they have been hired and will come on-board as
soon as their background investigations are completed
successfully. The current partnership staff have already signed
up 183 local partners and held 161 local partnership events as
of July 31. Partnership efforts are well underway in Alaska.
In 2010, the Census Bureau spent just over $167 million on
advertising with 49 percent of the buy devoted to national
media that skews mainly to the diverse mass audience--targeting
audiences that consume English-language media. The remaining 51
percent of the media buy was devoted to local/hyperlocal media
that targeted ethnic audiences. The overall communications
contract spending for the 2020 Census will be significantly
higher than 2010, and the proportion of advertising devoted to
ethnic audiences will be at least as high, if not higher.
Specific funding levels by audience will not be available until
close to the end of 2019.
2b. The Census Bureau is planning to undertake an integrated
media campaign focused on hard-to-count areas, including
placing Census materials in public libraries. Rural Alaska has
limited broadband Internet and few public libraries. How will
the Census Bureau ensure Alaska's hard-to-count populations are
accurately counted?
Answer. Much of Alaska, and especially rural Alaska villages,
will be enumerated in person. Large parts of the State are part
of the Remote Alaska Type of Enumeration Area (TEA). In areas
that are part of this TEA, an enumerator will make an initial
visit to the housing unit and concurrently collect census
responses in person and update the address list. Based on
experience, the Census Bureau believes this type of enumeration
is best suited for remote areas of Alaska that have unique
challenges associated with accessibility, low housing unit
density, and are sparsely populated.
2c. Congress directed the Census Bureau to plan for physical
Questionnaire Assistance Centers (QACs) in hard-to-count
communities. Do you plan to open QACs in hard-to-count
communities? Specifically, do you plan to open QACs in hard-to-
count communities in Alaska?
Answer. The Census Bureau has no plans to operate in-person
Questionnaire Assistance Centers (QAC) for the 2020 Census. The
QACs in 2010 operated primarily as locations for the
distribution and collection of Be Counted forms that allowed
respondents without a Census ID to submit a response. With the
advent of Internet self response (which allows responses
without an ID), the QACs are no longer necessary. The Census
Bureau plans to use its national and local partners (including
its partner, the American Library Association), partnership
specialists, and telephone assistance via the Census
Questionnaire Assistance (CQA) operation to assist respondents
in completing the 2020 Census. The Census Questionnaire
Assistance operation provides flexible and adaptive language
support and questionnaire assistance for respondents by
answering questions about specific items on the census form or
other frequently asked questions about the 2020 Census and
provides an option for respondents to complete a census
interview over the telephone. Ranging in size from
approximately 300 to 1,200 staff, the 10 call centers will
collectively utilize 8,300 staff during the peak of operations.
CQA staff will be available to answer calls from March 9, 2020
through July 31, 2020. The operational hours are Sunday through
Saturday from 7:00 am to 2:00 am Eastern Time.
The Census Bureau will provide support and emphasis for all
hard-to-count areas. This is particularly true in Alaska where,
as in 2010, we will enumerate remote areas with a special
``Update/Enumerate'' operation beginning in January 2020. In
Update/Enumerate, field staff will visit housing units in
person to update the address and feature data and enumerate
respondents face-to-face. Update/Enumerate offers respondents
in areas with limited or no (broadband) Internet access and
limited cell phone access (with expensive data plans in remote
areas) an effective and familiar enumeration method. A map
available on the Census Bureau's website at https://
gisportal.data.census.gov/arcgis/apps/webappviewer/
index.html?id=cbf242acb9f849f381090cf144715340 shows the ``Type
of Enumeration Area (TEA)'' used by the Census Bureau to
enumerate the population. As this map shows, the vast majority
of Alaska will be enumerated using face-to-face methods.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Gil Kaplan, International Trade Administration
Question 3. In southeast Alaska, several companies are currently
paying extra fees associated with import tariffs for their round log
products, threatening to kill what is left of an already stressed
industry in that part of my State. In Alaska's Mat-Su Valley near
Anchorage, a multi-million dollar timber deal that that centered around
exporting logs to China via Alaska's Port MacKenzie is now on hold
indefinitely, resulting in lost revenue for the Mat-Su and foregone
investment in Port MacKenzie. Alaskans want to retain a robust timber
industry in Alaska and the important economic benefits it brings to
communities.
3a. Please describe your agency's efforts to engage with
Alaskan timber producers to develop markets for Alaskan
products and identify and remove trade barriers in foreign
markets, including China.
Answer. As the Department of Agriculture is the Federal lead
in this area, the Department of Commerce respectfully requests
this question be directed to the Department of Agriculture. The
Department of Commerce is not involved in the development of
export markets for this category of goods.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 4. The Department's budget prioritizes the development and
growth of our Nation's seafood industry, through both commercial
fisheries and domestic aquaculture production. Aside from proper
science-based management, an important part of growing this industry is
the promotion and development of American seafood through the
Saltonstall-Kennedy grant program. In 2018, just under $9 million was
granted for promotion and development projects across the country. This
year, in 2019, that number dropped to barely over $1 million, despite
the fact that the Commerce Department received over $150 million in
Promote and Develop funds from duties on fisheries products--funds that
are meant to support the development of the U.S. seafood industry. I am
concerned that the Department consistently prioritizes NOAA's own
programs over fulfilling the intent of the SK Act. Report language that
I asked for directing NOAA to obligate at least 15 percent of the
transferred funds to the competitive grant program was not followed.
4a. Please provide a detailed accounting of how Promote and
Develop funds were spent across NOAA Operations, Research, and
Facilities in fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019, to the
programmatic level, including personnel costs and salaries.
Answer. In fiscal year 2018, NOAA used the $144 million in
funds transferred from the Promote and Develop account in
accordance with the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018
(Public Law 115-141) language to offset Operations Research and
Facilities for two budget lines: Fisheries Data Collections,
Surveys and Assessments, and Interjurisdictional Fisheries.
Funding within Fisheries Data Collections, Surveys and
Assessments includes the following: Expand Annual Stock
Assessments, Fisheries Statistics, Fish Information Networks,
Survey and Monitoring Projects, and Cooperative Research. To
execute our mission objectives in these budget lines,
approximately 41 percent of the $144 million was used for
Federal labor and benefits, 50 percent were provided externally
as contracts and grants, and 9 percent for other costs such as
rent, charters, equipment and supplies. fiscal year 2019
execution year is currently in progress, in accordance with the
spend plan provided to Congress for fiscal year 2019 as was
also done in fiscal year 2018. NOAA expects similar percentages
with the $158 million in offset to ORF in fiscal year 2019.
4b. How does your agency consider the expected transfer of
Promote and Develop funds into the ORF account when formulating
NOAA's budget request? What offices, programs, science centers,
and research efforts rely most heavily on the transferred
funds?
Answer. NOAA formulates the ORF budget based on Agency
priorities and Department and OMB budget guidance. In recent
years, NOAA has requested all funds coming from P&D to offset
ORF appropriations and terminating the S-K Grant program.
However, the final amount to be transferred to ORF is
determined by Congress through language in the final
appropriations law. Pursuant to this language, the funding
transferred from the Promote and Develop account to the ORF
account supports two budget lines, which are Fisheries Data
Collections, Surveys, and Assessments and the
Interjurisdictional Fisheries Grants. Fisheries data
collections, surveys, and assessments are part of NMFS' core
functions to provide accurate and timely assessments of fish
and shellfish stocks that support commercial and recreational
fisheries. This budget line funds both internal and external
science conducted across all NMFS regions and within NMFS
Headquarters offices. Interjurisdictional Fisheries Grants
supports coastal States, with promoting and encouraging State
activities in support of the management of interjurisdictional
resources including management of resources throughout their
range and promoting and encouraging research in the use of
ecosystems and interspecies approaches.
4c. Section 2(e) of the Saltonstall Kennedy Act (15 U.S.C.
713c-3(e)) directs the Secretary to dedicate 60 percent of the
Promote and Develop fund to industry grants for marketing and
development. How does the agency intend to fulfill this
statutory obligation in fiscal year 2020?
Answer. Of the funds that remained in the Promote and Develop
account after the Congressionally directed Operations,
Research, and Facilities (ORF) offset to fisheries research and
development projects, in fiscal year 2018 NOAA obligated 84
percent, and in fiscal year 2019 NOAA obligated 100 percent,
through an annual grant competition as required by the
Saltonstall-Kennedy Act sections 2(c) and 2(e). NOAA intends to
continue to ensure that at least 80 percent of the funds
remaining in the P&D account after the ORF offset are directed
to the annual grants competition in fiscal year 2020. NOAA will
not obligate any funds for the National Fisheries Research and
Development projects (section 2(d) of the Saltonstall-Kennedy
Act) in fiscal year 2020 until the actual funding level for the
annual grant competition is established.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 5. The National Weather Service maintains an important
presence in Alaska, especially in rural areas where accurate and timely
forecasts are critical for the safety of remote communities. As of
November 1 of 2018, there were 5 of 11 Weather Service Offices (WSOs)
with staffing deficiencies in rural Alaska. Secretary Ross conveyed to
me that by the end of 2018, staffing deficiencies would be resolved at
the remaining WSOs. He also committed that NWS has no plans to close
any of these rural offices.
5a. Have staffing deficiencies been resolved at all Alaska
Weather Service Offices? If not, please provide an update on
the level of staffing deficiencies for Alaska WSOs.
Answer. The role of NWS staff at the NWS WSOs in Alaska has
been changing. After careful analysis, in fiscal year 2016, the
NWS began automating launches of weather balloons that collect
data of the atmosphere. Launching the balloons by hand was the
last remaining task that the weather technicians at WSOs in
Alaska performed. With the automation of this process, Alaska
Region management and the National Weather Service Employees
Organization agreed to reduce the staffing profile from three
employees to one employee as the automated upper air systems
(autosondes) become operational. The other two positions per
WSO would be reassigned to focus their work on improving
aviation, marine, sea ice, seasonal and climate forecasts for
all Alaskans, and to meet the emerging requirements of the new,
open Arctic. Currently seven autosondes have been successfully
deployed at WSOs in Alaska; and NWS anticipates that all
autosondes will be deployed at WSOs by the end of fiscal year
2019/early fiscal year 2020.
There are currently no plans to close any office. Though the
Alaska Region has had difficulty filling positions at WSOs, it
aims to have one meteorologist technician at each office by the
end of summer 2019 and will focus on providing decision support
services for the local communities.
5b. Please provide an update on NWS's efforts to shift
weather balloon launches over to an automated system. Has NWS
conducted any outreach in rural communities about how this
automation might impact staffing, forecasting capabilities, and
other NWS duties?
Answer. The NWS autolauncher project is progressing well in
the Alaska Region with seven currently operating, six NWS
purchased and installed, and one (Utqiagvik, previously known
as Barrow) shared with the Department of Energy. Data
availability from those sites is currently at 96.8 percent,
which is on par with the standard for the National network.
Four more sites are planned for conversion in fiscal year 2019,
and two in fiscal year 2020, for a total of 13 in Alaska.
The NWS Alaska Region has spent considerable effort in dialog
with rural Alaskans to inform them of manpower distribution
changes, and the positive impact it will have on science and
service delivery. Positions that were previously dedicated to
launching upper air balloons are now being repurposed to focus
on improving aviation, marine, sea ice, seasonal and climate
forecasts for all Alaskans, and to meet the emerging
requirements of the new, open Arctic. NWS has reassured rural
Alaskans that forecasts and warnings will continue as they are
currently issued, and that remaining WSO staff will provide
decision support activities for their local community.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 6. Alaska produces roughly 60 percent of all the seafood
harvested domestically. The port of Dutch Harbor leads the Nation in
landings by volume, and the seafood industry supports over 50,000 jobs
in our State. Underpinning the immense output of sustainably harvested,
high-quality seafood from Alaska is a rigorous science-based management
regime codified in the Magnuson-Stevens Act. Alaska's fisheries, and
U.S. fisheries more broadly, are a global success story in large part
due to strong science. This is why I am very concerned about recent
reductions in planned fishery surveys in Alaska, including in the
Bering Sea, Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska. I understand that
unexpected facility costs have drawn resources away from surveys, but
this is absolutely unacceptable--facilities maintenance should not be
prioritized above a core scientific mission of NMFS, one that supports
the Nation's top seafood-producing region.
6a. How does the agency plan to ensure that a full regime of
surveys will be funded and executed in the Bering Sea, Aleutian
Islands, and Gulf of Alaska?
Answer. NMFS maintains the Alaska Fisheries Science Center
(AFSC)'s research surveys and staffing to support stock
assessments. These surveys are conducted using a mix of days at
sea (DAS) on NOAA ships as allotted by the NOAA Fleet Council,
and vessels chartered by NMFS.
NOAA's Fleet Council continues to work diligently to provide
as many DAS on NOAA ships operated by the Office of Marine and
Aviation Operations (OMAO) as possible for fish surveys in
Alaska, while also balancing other NOAA mission requirements
both within NMFS and across other NOAA Line Offices. The Fleet
Council is forced to make difficult DAS decisions when faced
with resource challenges. However, NMFS continuously tries to
anticipate, plan for, and mitigate these potential impacts to
Alaska fish surveys by continuously evaluating its own internal
resources and requirements to complement those allotments by
the Fleet Council with as many chartered vessels as possible to
achieve core survey requirements. For example, in order to
manage inflationary costs associated with labor, the AFSC has
reduced Federal staffing levels by 20 percent over the past 7
years in part to preserve Alaska fish surveys as much as
possible. Additionally, in fiscal year 2019, NMFS prioritized
existing nation-wide base resources to provide nearly $2.0
million in additional surge funds to AFSC, specifically to fund
one of the five charter vessels needed to conduct the bottom
trawl survey for this year, bringing the total number of
surveys to four in fiscal year 2019. Meeting the survey needs
of the Alaska region is of the utmost importance.
6b. How does the agency plan to capture climate-induced
variability in fish stocks, especially in the Northern Bering
Sea, which is currently surveyed only every other year?
Answer. NMFS funded the northeastern Bering Sea surveys to
address a loss of sea ice and fish movement into the region in
2010, 2017, 2018, and 2019. In fiscal year 2020, NOAA's AFSC is
deploying acoustical sensors along the boundary of the U.S. and
Russian exclusive economic zones in the Bering Sea for 1 year
to estimate movement of commercial fish species from U.S.
waters to the Russian exclusive economic zone. NMFS will
continue to evaluate the best available opportunities to
capture climate-induced variability in fish stocks.
6c. How does the agency plan to ensure that managers are not
over-relying on modeling and projections to perform their stock
assessments in place of field data when survey coverage is
reduced?
Answer. Stock assessments are based on models of fish
populations that require three primary categories of
information: catch, abundance, and biology. To ensure the
highest quality stock assessments, the data used must be
accurate and timely. One of NMFS' highest priorities is to
ensure core survey effort is maintained to collect these data,
which are crucial for effective fisheries management and
response to changes in fish abundance or distribution. Ensuring
there are adequate resources for surveys is the best approach
for minimizing uncertainty and avoiding over-reliance on
modeling in our assessments.
To address the need to efficiently collect and supplement
survey data, NMFS is undertaking several initiatives to
innovate data collection. For example, NMFS is placing an array
of stationary acoustic instruments (fish finders) on the
seafloor, rather than using traditional ship-based sampling to
record the abundance and movement of fish. This allows
monitoring of the resource abundance and movement patterns
relative to environmental conditions that can then be provided
to managers. Another example is increasing cooperative research
with industry to improve fishery-dependent data, specifically
abundance indices collected during a fishery, as well as the
use of opportunistic acoustic data collected by surveys and
fishing vessels. Finally, NMFS is developing new methods to
integrate data from multiple survey operations to estimate
uncertainty in biomass and age structure in years when survey
coverage is low.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 7. Alaska's Arctic waters are severely undercharted, with
estimates of up-to-date charts covering as little as 4 percent of the
Arctic. We've seen the implications of this kind of poor chart coverage
when the vessel Fennica grounded on an uncharted shoal near Dutch
Harbor. NOAA has been tasked with addressing the backlog of
hydrographic survey needs in Alaska and the Arctic, but progress has
been slow despite Congressional direction to utilize contractors to
expedite the process. A GAO report published in June of 2017 concluded
that NOAA needs better cost data for hydrographic surveys and a clear
strategy for expanding private sector involvement in data collection.
GAO also reviewed NOAA's cost comparison reports from fiscal year 2006
through fiscal year 2016 and found that NOAA ``did not in all instances
report complete or accurate cost data'' for its hydrographic survey
program, such as new acquisitions or maintenance costs.
7a. Has NOAA improved its cost comparison reports to fully
track asset and maintenance costs? Dollar-for-dollar, how do
the costs for surveys undertaken using agency assets differ
from costs for surveys undertaken by private industry or
contractors?
Answer. NOAA has improved the cost methodology used to
document hydrographic survey costs to account for the costs of
ships in port for the entire year. NOAA is also in the process
of updating its policy and procedures for capitalizing
improvements to vessels to ensure that we can fully track asset
and maintenance costs. The updated policy and procedures will
result in costs related to major maintenance projects that
extend the life of the vessel or add functionality to the
vessel being recognized over multiple fiscal years instead of
entirely in the year that the costs were incurred. This change
will eliminate a significant difference in the presentation of
survey costs between agency assets and private industry. NOAA
is working to implement the updated policies and procedures in
fiscal year 2020 and is working on a plan to make cost
corrections to previous records as well so that can more
reliably compare the costs for surveys undertaken using agency
assets with surveys undertaken by private industry or
contractors.
7b. How has the agency implemented the directive from this
Committee to increase the use of contractors for the collection
of hydrographic survey data, especially in undercharted areas
in the Arctic? How does the agency plan to implement this
directive in fiscal year 2020?
Answer. NOAA uses private contractors to address annual
requirements to complement its hydrographic services mission in
the Arctic and elsewhere when resources are available and the
private sector has the proven technical competence and provides
the best value to the taxpayer. Some contractors may be well
suited to working in the Arctic if they have proven expertise
and have demonstrated success in conducting operations under
harsh Arctic conditions. We are working with our other Federal
partners to use NOAA's Office of Coast Survey's hydrographic
services contract vehicle to execute matched and/or
collaborative mapping efforts.
In fiscal years 2017-2019, NOAA used a combination of in-
house and contract surveys for several areas in Alaska and will
do the same in fiscal year 2020.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Gil Kaplan, International Trade Administration
Question 8. The current trade situation has highlighted the fact
that seafood does not have a strong champion among the various trade
agencies--a ``man without a country''-- so I have been working with
both ITA and USTR to raise the profile of seafood in trade discussions.
There is a lot more that needs to happen to make sure Alaskan seafood
is competitive in global markets.
Russia's seafood processors enjoy a distinct advantage over
Alaska's seafood processors. First, their seafood can enter China duty-
free, whereas our seafood entering China for domestic consumption faces
tariffs in the range of 32 to 35 percent. Second, pollock from Russia--
which is also called ``Alaska pollock,'' despite being harvested in
Russian waters--reprocessed in China is exempt from the U.S. tariff of
10 percent on seafood from China, whereas certain other seafood
products originating from Alaska waters and reprocessed in China do
face this 10 percent tariff. And finally, Russia has maintained an
embargo on American seafood since 2014 in retaliation for U.S.
sanctions.
8a. For the first time, under the Trade Facilitation and
Trade Enforcement Act (H.R. 644), fisheries will be a principal
negotiating objective for all future trade agreements. Has your
agency discussed the need to designate an official to lead
efforts on seafood trade? Are there plans to do so? If not,
why?
Answer. Within the Executive Branch, the Office of the United
States Trade Representative (USTR) is the lead agency in
efforts to advance U.S. trade negotiating objectives, and it is
the responsibility of the USTR whether to designate an official
to lead efforts on seafood trade. NOAA's National Marine
Fisheries Service, through its Office of International Affairs
and the Seafood Inspection Program, supports the USTR on
negotiations involving seafood trade, and NMFS regularly works
with Commerce's International Trade Administration office of
Trade Agreements Negotiations and Compliance (TANC) on trade
barriers to U.S. seafood exports such as tariffs and Sanitary
and Phytosanitary (SPS) issues.
8b. What exactly is the administration doing to remove these
tariffs on both sides of the U.S.-China trade relationship? If
that cannot be achieved, what steps will your agency take to
remove trade barriers in other foreign markets, including the
competitive advantage that Russia has over Alaskan seafood in
our trade policy with China?
Answer. NOAA is not involved in the tariff process for
seafood trade. Other steps are taken to remove or limit trade
barriers where possible. Often, these include technical
solutions to specific barriers to market access that can be
addressed through the export certification mechanism through
our Seafood Inspection Program (SIP). When a specific issue
emerges, the Seafood Inspection Program will work with the
importing country to address the specific trade concern through
in person meetings, written communication, and often through
specific attestations on the export health certificate. SIP
personnel work as appropriate with USDA's Foreign Agricultural
Service (FAS), the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative
(USTR) and the Department of Commerce's International Trade
Administration (ITA) staff in a concerted and coordinated
effort to address foreign barriers to trade of U.S. seafood and
seafood products.
In addition, ITA has met with several stakeholders from the
seafood industry and has carefully reviewed the public comments
and testimony on this issue. ITA is taking these views into
account in light of a potential fourth list of products subject
to increased tariffs on imports from China. The administration
is engaging with China to address unfair trade practices in
China, and is taking steps to reduce, remove, or prevent trade
barriers in China and other markets.
_______________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR JOHN KENNEDY
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Environmental
Observation and Prediction, Performing the Duties of Under Secretary of
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere
Question 1. I note that the NOAA fleet plan calls for the
construction of two Class A vessels for purposes of ocean monitoring,
research and charting. The estimated capital cost of these vessels,
according to the fleet plan, is $160 million per ship.
1a. To date, how much has been expended on vessel design for
these two vessels?
Answer. The NOAA Fleet Plan does not include estimated costs
for the two Class A vessels. Funding for the Fleet
Recapitalization program as a whole by fiscal year can be seen
in the table below ($ in thousands):
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fiscal
Fiscal
Fiscal
Fiscal
Fiscal
Year 2020
Year 2016
Year 2017
Year 2018
Year 2019
Pres.
Enacted
Enacted
Enacted
Enacted
Request
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fleet Recapitalization...................................
\1\ 75,00
75,000
75,000
75,000
75,000
0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In fiscal year 2016, $5 million was rescinded from the original appropriation, leaving a total of $75
million for Fleet Recapitalization.
For the NOAA ``Class A'' vessel design (oceanographic
monitoring, research, and modeling missions) or NOAA AGOR
Variant (NAV), the Navy issued a request for proposals in April
of 2018 for preliminary design/contract design and received
multiple proposals. On January 22, 2019, the Navy awarded three
competitive firm-fixed-price contracts to: Dakota Creek
Industries in Washington; Thoma-Sea Marine, LLC in Louisiana;
and VT Halter Marine, Inc. in Mississippi. These businesses
will submit proposals for detail design and construction in
January of 2020, from which the Government will down select to
one vendor and award the contract option for detail design and
construction in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020.
NOAA will be best positioned to provide a funding breakout of
the Fleet Recapitalization Plan funds once these proposals have
been reviewed and awards have been made.
Construction of the first vessel is expected to begin in the
second quarter of fiscal year 2021 with completion expected in
2023. Construction of the second vessel is expected to begin in
the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 with completion expected
by approximately 2025.
1b. Is that amount included within the $160 million capital
cost?
Answer. The NOAA Fleet Plan does not include estimated costs
for the two Class A vessels.
1c. What is the estimated annual cost for operation and
maintenance of these vessels? Please include within your answer
an estimate of the borrowing cost for the funds to be expended,
salaries and benefits for all operational crew of the vessel,
and all fuel and maintenance costs.
Answer. NOAA developed a forecast of the annual life cycle
cost for the operations and maintenance of the NOAA AGOR
Variants as part of the Department of Commerce Acquisition
process. Similar to the response above about the cost estimate
for the acquisition of the NOAA AGOR Variant, NOAA will be best
positioned to provide these estimates after the awards for the
detailed design and construction of the vessels are made.
_______________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR JEANNE SHAHEEN
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 1. Dr. Jacobs, as we discussed at the hearing, fishermen
in the Northeast are facing a changing environment. Cod used to be the
backbone of our fishing economy, but we just saw the least valuable
haul in 50 years. This has come as a result of years of severely
reduced allowable catch levels, which have hurt revenues.
1a. In fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019, Congress
provided $2 million for groundfish research. How do you expect
to utilize these funds to best improve our understanding of the
challenges facing this fishery?
Answer. The fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019 funding for
New England climate and groundfish research is being used by
NOAA's Northeast Fisheries Science Center (NEFSC) to: (a)
address the Northeast Regional Action Plan (NERAP) priorities,
(b) work with NOAA, academic, and management partners to better
understand the effects of changing climatic conditions on New
England groundfish fisheries, and (c) use this information to
improve groundfish stock assessments and management. The NERAP
framework identifies specific actions, conducts science
projects with direct management relevance, and builds upon past
and current work funded by NMFS, NOAA Research, and others.
1b. How is the groundfish abundance data collected through
the At-Sea Monitoring program being used to inform fishery
management decisions? Or, if it is not being used, why not?
Answer. At-sea monitors are deployed on NE multispecies
vessels to monitor sector operations and estimate overall
catch. This data is used in-season to track the fishery's
progress toward achieving its annual catch limits. We also use
data collected through the at-sea monitoring program to
supplement the data collected through the Northeast Fisheries
Observer program to estimate discards (a component of total
catch). For each assessment, we evaluate whether the two data
sources can be combined to increase the sample size and thus
improve precision of the discard estimates. This data has been
used in all groundfish stock assessments in recent years.
1c. What role do you see for electronic monitoring and
reporting in the long run for the Northeast Multispecies
fishery? Do you believe the technology currently exists to
replace At-Sea Monitoring? If so, what timeframe do you believe
this can happen? If not, what barriers remain?
Answer. Currently, at-sea monitoring and electronic
monitoring (EM) programs to collect catch data in support of
groundfish quota management are implemented as described in the
operating plans of the Northeast multispecies (i.e. groundfish)
sectors under Amendment 16 to the Northeast Multispecies
Fishery Management Plan and its implementing regulations. The
implementing regulations state that ``Electronic monitoring may
be used in place of actual observers if the technology is
deemed sufficient by NMFS for a specific trip type based on
gear type and area fished''. However, to date, sectors have not
been approved to use EM in lieu of actual observers under this
provision. Instead, we have worked collaboratively with sectors
to pilot the technology via research projects and help develop
an approvable EM program.
The technology to use EM continues to evolve rapidly with
advancements in machine learning, electronic data transfer and
higher resolution cameras. We continue to work on improving the
overall function and scalability of EM in the region and also
to build additional data infrastructure, to establish program
and service provider standards and to develop implementation
plans. The future role of EM in the Northeast will be largely
driven by the outcome of the Amendment 23 process. Amendment 23
to the Northeast Multispecies Fishery Management Plan is
currently in development at the New England Fishery Management
Council. The amendment proposes a variety of modifications to
refine the design of the current monitoring program, including
EM and dockside monitoring. The Council is expected to take
final action on Amendment 23 in December 2019.
1d. What additional actions do you believe can be taken to
ensure the long term viability of this fishery?
Answer. NOAA and the New England Fishery Management Council
(Council) are working to help ensure the long-term viability of
this iconic fishery. For example, we are working to improve
accountability and catch monitoring in the groundfish fishery
because accurate catch data is necessary for the sustainable
management of this quota-based fishery. Working closely with
fishermen and stakeholders, NOAA and the Council continue to
focus on creating additional fishing opportunities for healthy
groundfish stocks, increasing business flexibility, and
maximizing revenues through innovation and increased emphasis
on seafood marketing. In addition, sustaining waterfront
infrastructure is necessary for a viable fishery. Finally, NOAA
also invests significant resources in the science that
underpins management and is placing renewed emphasis on
industry engagement to improve science and increase stakeholder
buy-in and trust.
Question 2. Dr. Jacobs, I'm very concerned that the President's
fiscal year 2020 budget request again seeks to eliminate more than $500
million of NOAA grants to States, regional partners and academic
partners. Many of these programs fund critical coastal science and
community resilience partnerships, including Sea Grant, the Coastal
Zone Management Program, the National Estuarine Research Reserve System
and even the NOAA Office of Education. I believe that having the
knowledge and tools to protect our coastlines is a critical element of
our national security.
2a. How will NOAA and the Department of Commerce work with
States and local communities to safeguard American shores if
these programs are cut?
Answer. State governments are best positioned to determine
their respective needs in terms of coastal zone management, and
the fiscal year 2020 budget strikes an appropriate balance with
respect to fulfilling those aspects of coastal zone management
that require Federal coordination. In addition, Executive Order
13840 (Ocean Policy To Advance the Economic, Security, and
Environmental Interests of the United States) includes a
provision on providing data and decision support tools to
coastal communities that are at risk from numerous coastal
hazards. Tools such as NOAA's Digital Coast help these
communities understand their risks and plan for improved
resilience. NOAA also works with the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and other Federal partners to help coastal
managers mitigate damage and sustain long-term recovery. The
fiscal year 2020 budget also includes an increase of $4.0
million for regional ocean data portals that will provide
ocean-related Federal data and information to the public to
inform regional, coastal, and ocean management decisionmaking
across the United States.
NOAA will continue to use data from its National Water Level
Observing Network (NWLON) stations to determine rates of
relative sea level change and tidal datums around the U.S. and
its territories. Similarly, NOAA's Continuously Operating
Reference Stations provide precise positioning and elevation
information that is vital for inundation modeling and to
measure sea level rise. These observations provide real-time
and historic coastal flooding information for decision support.
NOAA's Coastal Inundation Dashboard uses the data to alert
users to locations where flooding is either happening or is
expected to happen based on known local flood impact
thresholds. Storm Quicklooks has been integrated into the
Dashboard to provide near real-time observations at affected
locations and supports coastal flood advisories during Tropical
Storm Watches and Warnings. To support coastal community
planning, the Sea Level Rise Viewer integrates observational
data and regional sea level trends and trajectories to
demonstrate the impacts of sea level rise through inundation
mapping. NOAA also continues to advance its extreme weather
prediction capabilities and Impact-based Decision Support
Services focused on the emergency management community.
Regarding education, the fiscal year 2020 request includes $1
million for NOAA's Office of Education to coordinate NOAA's
numerous activities in STEM education. These funds support this
office's important role as primary point of contact for the
National Science and Technology Council (NSTC)'s Committee on
STEM Education for NOAA and the Department of Commerce.
2b. We know that the climate is changing, and we know that we
will continue seeing the impacts of this change. The NOAA
climate research program helps communities understand and
prepare for the effects of climate change. This includes
developing cutting-edge models and providing data and tools.
However, this budget cuts climate research by 38 percent. How
will NOAA continue to help communities prepare and lead the
world on climate research with such a drastic cut?
Answer. The fiscal year 2020 budget continues to fund those
aspects of climate science where there is an important Federal
role, including the following: research at the Earth System
Research Laboratory within OAR; the National Integrated Drought
Information System (NIDIS); long-term observations and climate
records; and research and development associated with Seasonal-
to-Subseasonal (S2S) prediction. NOAA will also carry out
legislatively mandated work on the National Climate Assessment.
2c. At last year's budget hearing Secretary Ross told the
Committee that he was concerned about the trade deficit when it
comes to seafood and that you are encouraged by the prospect of
domestic aquaculture. And yet, the fiscal year 2020 budget cuts
funding for aquaculture both as part of the Sea Grant program
and through the National Marine Fisheries Service. Dr. Jacobs,
can you help me understand why this is case?
Answer. The President's fiscal year 2020 budget prioritizes
national security and economic growth. It also identifies the
savings and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a
responsible fiscal path. To meet these goals, some difficult
decisions needed to be made, including terminations and
reductions to external grant programs. The administration
continues to make aquaculture a priority. The fiscal year 2020
funding request for the National Marine Fisheries Service
(NMFS) includes $13 million for aquaculture, which will be used
to continue work to advance the domestic marine aquaculture
industry, create jobs, provide sustainable seafood, and reduce
the U.S. seafood trade deficit. In addition, NOAA is co-
chairing a newly established interagency working group that is
developing a plan to improve regulatory efficiency and
predictability for marine aquaculture permitting and
management.
Question 3. North Atlantic right whales are one of the most
endangered species with only about 411 remaining. In 2017 we lost 17
whales and last year research teams did not observe any new calves. I'm
concerned that any additional loss of whales could endanger the long-
term survival of the species and could have serious detrimental impacts
to our lobster fishery in the Northeast.
3a. Dr. Jacobs what more can be done to protect this species,
especially in light of a warming ocean that could disrupt
traditional feeding and calving areas?
Answer. NMFS and our partners are committed to conserving and
rebuilding the North Atlantic right whale population using a
variety of innovative techniques to study, protect, and rescue
these endangered whales. NMFS has undertaken a number of
important activities to improve right whale recovery under
various possible future environmental and human activity
scenarios, including:
1.
Funding efforts to investigate current and future prey
species aggregations in southern New England.
2.
Working with Fisheries and Oceans Canada to ensure their
participation in a newly formed Right Whale Northeast
Implementation Team, which will coordinate and effect recovery
plan implementation.
3.
Developing a population viability analysis or other
assessment tool to characterize the North Atlantic right whale
extinction risk and take into account current and future
threats.
Additionally, NMFS is coordinating with Fisheries and Oceans
Canada through regular bilateral meetings on right whale
science and management. These meetings provide updates on
science such as prey field research, passive acoustics, and
aerial surveys and on management issues such as ship strike
mitigation measures and whale safe fishing technologies.
In April, we convened the Atlantic Large Whale Take Reduction
Team--a group of stakeholders established under the Marine
Mammal Protection Act charged with reducing right whale deaths
in commercial fishing gear. This team recommended an approach
in New England trap/pot fisheries, including American lobster,
to reduce entanglement mortality risk by 60 percent or more.
The recommended measures would be implemented under State law
with compatible regulations in Federal waters.
3b. I'm concerned that NOAA has approved permits for seismic
testing in the Atlantic as part of the administration's push to
open up new offshore areas for oil and gas exploration, and I
have cosponsored Senate legislation that would prohibit such
oil- and gas-related seismic activities in the Atlantic.
Seismic testing causes extremely loud bursts of noise that
disrupt marine life, especially whales. As part of the permits,
NOAA allows companies to ``incidentally, but not intentionally,
harass marine mammals.'' What is being done to minimize or
mitigate impacts to right whales?
Answer. The incidental harassment authorizations (IHAs)
issued by NOAA require strong protections for North Atlantic
right whales in areas where right whales are expected to be
present, including all designated critical habitat and
additional seasonal management areas throughout the survey
area. Right whales are expected to be present in these areas
Nov 1-Apr 30, and during this time companies may not conduct
surveys within 90 km from shore unless they can provide a plan
that meets stringent criteria. There are also dynamic
management areas that may be temporarily closed whenever whales
are observed in those areas. In addition, if a survey vessel
sights a right whale within 1.5 km at any time, they must shut
down their airguns.
In terms of general requirements, the IHAs require
implementation of mitigation measures to reduce or eliminate
negative impacts (such as disruption of behavioral patterns) on
marine mammals. These include:
-- Protected species observers aboard the vessel will listen and
watch for marine life. If marine mammals or other protected
species come within a designated distance from the ship, the
vessel operator must shut down the airguns (as noted above,
within 1.5 km for right whales).
-- Passive acoustic monitoring to detect vocalizations from
marine mammals beneath the ocean surface.
-- Ramp-ups of the airgun array to alert animals to the activity
to reduce the potential for high-level airgun exposure.
-- Vessel strike avoidance procedures.
3c. I'm also concerned that NOAA is trying to change the
Coastal Zone Management Act Federal consistency regulations to
make it easier for the Federal Government to overrule State and
local opposition to oil and gas projects. What are the
administration's goals here?
Answer. In April 2017, President Trump issued Executive Order
13795, which lays out the framework for the United States to
implement an America-first offshore energy initiative. The
Executive Order encourages energy exploration and production,
including on the outer continental shelf (OCS), while ensuring
that any such activity is safe and environmentally responsible.
In accordance with Executive Order 13795, NOAA issued an
Advance Notice of Public Rulemaking (ANPR) to seek the public
and regulated community's input on what changes could be made
to NOAA's CZMA Federal consistency regulations at 15 CFR part
930 to make the consistency process more efficient across all
stages of OCS oil and gas projects, from leasing to
development, as well as for renewable energy projects. The
public comment period was 45 days and ended on April 25, 2019.
NOAA is currently evaluating all comments submitted on the
ANPR. NOAA will determine whether to issue a proposed rule
after agency deliberations are completed.
Question 4. In February, Secretary Ross sent a letter with NASA
Administrator Bridenstine to Chairman Ajit Pai of the Federal
Communications Commission requesting that the Federal Government better
coordinate on a spectrum issue important to NOAA weather prediction
capabilities.
4a. Can you explain what the issue is here?
Answer. DOC is concerned that the power limits proposed by
the FCC for operation of fifth generation (5G) terrestrial
mobile wireless systems in the recently auctioned 24 GHz band
of radio spectrum may adversely impact the ability of certain
passive microwave sensors on NOAA satellites to acquire
weather-related data. These sensors, known as microwave
sounders, assess the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere
and the data provided by those sensors significantly influence
overall weather forecast skill. NOAA has worked closely with
the FCC through an interagency process to ensure that
appropriate protection levels are adopted that enable operation
of 5G systems while ensuring that NOAA continues to obtain the
sensor data needed for accurate weather forecasting.
4b. How much could this impact NOAA weather prediction
capabilities?
Answer. Certain frequencies of the spectrum are used by NOAA
and the larger global environmental community to ``sense'' the
atmosphere, land, oceans, and cryosphere. Proposed 5G
terrestrial wireless operations could, in the absence of
appropriate protection levels, significantly degrade important
earth observations. NOAA and NASA have conducted impact
assessments using 5G model inputs developed by the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU). NOAA has worked
closely with the FCC through an interagency process to ensure
that appropriate protection levels are adopted that enable
operation of 5G systems while ensuring that NOAA continues to
obtain the sensor data needed for accurate weather forecasting.
4c. What does NOAA believe is the necessary buffer to protect
weather prediction capabilities?
Answer. NOAA is working through the interagency process on
appropriate protection levels. The final protection levels for
a range of radio spectrum bands that are important for NOAA's
weather forecast capabilities will be established by the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) at the World
Radiocommunication Conference (WRC) in November 2019. The ITU
is currently considering a range of protection levels, and NOAA
will work within the U.S. delegation to the WRC to support the
U.S. position and adopt protection levels that enable
deployment of 5G terrestrial wireless systems while preserving
accurate weather data collection.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Walter Copan, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Question 1. One of the pillars of America's international
competitiveness is our leadership in basic and applied scientific
research and development. The Department of Commerce has an important
role in this with the scientific research performed at NIST. However,
the President's fiscal year 2020 budget proposes cutting the research
and development investment at NIST by 16 percent.
1a. Dr. Copan, one argument that I often hear from the
administration for cutting government investment in science, is
that the private sector will make up the difference. Given your
experience, if the cuts included in the President's budget are
enacted, do you believe that private sector will step in?
Answer. Maintaining a robust and globally competitive science
and technology base requires contributions from both the
Government and the private sector. The administration is
committed to advancing technological development and conducting
research and development (R&D) to ensure national security,
grow the economy, create well-paying jobs, and improve the
lives of Americans. The fiscal year 2020 Administration
Research and Development Budget Priorities Memo (M-18-22) notes
that ``Federal R&D dollars focused primarily on basic and
early-stage applied research, paired with targeted
deregulation, and investment in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce
development, will strengthen the Nation's innovation base and
position the United States for unparalleled job growth,
continued prosperity, and national security.'' Federal
investment in science and technology provides foundational
discoveries and capabilities that are broadly leveraged through
private sector R&D and commercial development, as noted in the
recently released NIST Green Paper, ``Unleashing American
Innovation'' (https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1234). The
private-sector investments are significant in many areas of
emerging technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI) and
quantum information science and engineering. As an example, in
March 2019, SAS, Inc., announced its intent to invest $1
billion in AI over the next 3 years, focusing on AI R&D,
education initiatives, etc. Similarly, companies including
Microsoft, Google, and Facebook, are investing significantly in
R&D, and companies participating in the Quantum Economic
Development Consortium (QED-C), convened by NIST under the
National Quantum Initiative Act (Public Law 115-368), will
actively invest in R&D toward the development of products and
services based on quantum information science.
1b. Are you concerned about what will happen to U.S.
competitiveness if we pull back as our global competitors
continue to invest?
Answer. Strategic investment in science and technology is
essential for the health of high-technology economies like the
U.S. With international investments and increased competition
in critical emerging technologies (quantum science, artificial
intelligence, advanced materials, advanced electronics, etc.),
U.S. technological leadership and our ability to derive
economic and national security benefits from such leadership
roles is essential for U.S. commerce and global
competitiveness. It is important to note that U.S.
competitiveness depends not just on investments, but also on
the ability to secure intellectual property protections and for
U.S. industry to rapidly commercialize new and valuable
inventions in domestic and global markets.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. David Redl, National Telecommunications and Information
Administration
Question 1. In February, Secretary Ross sent a letter with NASA
Administrator Bridenstine to Chairman Ajit Pai of the Federal
Communications Commission requesting that the Federal government better
coordinate on a spectrum issue important to NOAA weather prediction
capabilities.
1a. Mr. Redl, NTIA manages spectrum on behalf of Federal
users. What is NTIA doing on behalf of NOAA?
Answer. As the manager of all Federal spectrum use, NTIA is
committed to ensuring that Federal agencies have the spectrum
they need to fulfill their critical mission requirements.
Specifically, NTIA helped coordinate the analysis to determine
the extent to which the power limits proposed by the FCC for
operation of fifth generation (5G) terrestrial mobile wireless
systems in the recently auctioned 24 GHz band of radio spectrum
could adversely impact the ability of certain passive microwave
sensors on NOAA satellites to acquire weather-related data.
These sensors, known as microwave sounders, assess the amount
of water vapor in the atmosphere and the data provided by those
sensors significantly influences overall weather forecast
skill. NTIA has worked closely with NOAA and the FCC through an
interagency process to ensure that appropriate protection
levels are adopted that enable operation of 5G systems while
ensuring that NOAA continues to obtain the sensor data needed
for accurate weather forecasting.
1b. Other countries rely on microwave sounding data as well
for weather prediction. What is your understanding of how the
joint NOAA/NASA study compares to other international agencies?
Answer. The NOAA/NASA study is entirely consistent with
studies performed by the other space agencies that provide
passive weather sensing and forecasting.
1c. Given that the FCC auction of the 24 Gigahertz band is
ongoing, what do you see as the path forward here?
Answer. The Department of Commerce has engaged with the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the White House, and
other stakeholders to reach a compromise on the U.S.
international position for interference protection limits for
the 24 GHz band. While it is important to reach agreement on a
U.S. position on protection limits, the ultimate decision will
be made at the World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC), where
the 24 GHz band is one of many bands slated for discussion. As
a next step, the U.S. will submit a value to the Inter-American
Telecommunications Commission (CITEL), which is our regional
preparatory meeting for the World Radiocommunication Conference
(WRC). CITEL allows us to work with other countries in our
region toward agreement on an appropriate protection limit that
ensures protection of our vital weather sensing and forecasting
capabilities, which would lead a regional submission to the
WRC. At the WRC, there will be technical and operational
discussions to ensure that the WRC develops the right value to
maximize protection of passive sensing while enabling 5G use.
The FCC included in its rulemaking proceeding a process for
modifying its domestic out-of-band limits for 24 GHz once
interference protection standards are agreed upon
internationally. In addition, after the WRC, the Department and
NOAA will work with its interagency partners to determine
impacts to polar orbiting satellites and develop mitigation
strategies to ensure NOAA is able to meet its mission of
protecting lives and property. The Department looks forward to
working with Congress as this process continues.
Question 2. For the past 2 years Congress has provided $7.5 million
annually for the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration to develop a comprehensive broadband map.
2a. How are these funds being spent?
Answer. In February 2019, NTIA executed a $7.499 million
contract with Esri to acquire the Esri Managed Cloud Services
(EMCS) platform, to support the broadband availability map from
2019 to 2023. That acquisition includes (i) software licenses
for various Geographic Information Systems (GIS) applications
required to create and deliver the map; (ii) cloud hosting of
the mapping solution and requisite GIS data; and (iii)
professional services to support GIS data processing and
implementation of the map itself.
In addition, NTIA has staffed the program, committing two
existing staff to the project as well making term hires of two
additional staff to support the implementation of the map and
analysis of broadband data. NTIA is planning additional
acquisitions in fiscal years 2019 and 2020 that will: (i)
secure additional commercial data sets to expand the utility
and scope of the map, across topics like broadband speed and
performance and wireless and wireline infrastructure; (ii)
deliver customer service, training, and support for users of
the map; (iii) secure additional professional services for
geospatial data collection and analysis; and (iv) integrate the
map with its broadband Technical Assistance program. This will
improve the efficiency and capabilities of that program, which
has served more than 350 broadband programs in 43 States, the
District of Columbia, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, since 2015.
2b. Is there a plan to expand the mapping pilot beyond the
initial States?
Answer. Yes. In February of 2019, NTIA announced its
collaboration with eight states for the first release of the
broadband availability map, including California, Maine,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, North Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, and
West Virginia. Since that time, NTIA has executed agreements
with all eight of these States. Data from these States is
expected to be integrated into the map when NTIA launches the
tool in September 2019.
NTIA has also begun planning its collaboration with
additional States. Because of the time required to consult with
each State, understand and inventory its data, consolidate the
information, execute an agreement, and integrate the data into
the map, NTIA expects that it will collaborate with another 10-
14 States by the end of fiscal year 2020. To balance the
workload, NTIA expects to group those states into two releases.
NTIA anticipates that it will begin outreach to the next
proposed group of States in July 2019.
Please note that NTIA plans to incorporate broadband
availability information on all 50 States, the District of
Columbia, and the territories in the first release of the map.
However, State- and Territory-specific data will not be
integrated into the program until NTIA is able to expand its
collaboration to include each jurisdiction.
2c. What more can interested States do to position themselves
in case NTIA expands the pilot?
Answer. NTIA has met with representatives of more than 25
States to discuss their various broadband mapping, data
collection, and funding programs. It is important to note,
however, that not every State and Territory is collecting or
mapping broadband availability data or is in a position to
share such data, given State law and other factors. NTIA
believes that it has the opportunity to partner with
approximately 30 States that have compiled broadband
availability data and are in a position to contribute that
information to NTIA's program. Other States have recently begun
programs; while they may not have data to contribute today,
they may be in a position to do so over the coming year(s).
NTIA has leveraged its State Broadband Leaders Network (SBLN)
as the starting point for most of its mapping interactions with
the States. The SBLN is a community of practitioners who work
on State broadband initiatives. SBLN participants share
priorities and best practices and discuss emerging
telecommunications policy issues. The Network also provides a
forum to strengthen policy and program connections among
States, local jurisdictions and Federal agencies. In the most
successful cases, the States have empowered or identified an
individual or office that is responsible for broadband data
collection and mapping that is able to marshal resources across
the State.
To best position itself to participate in the program, NTIA
recommends that States: (i) identify a single point of contact
responsible for broadband data and mapping, to address
difficulties that arise when those responsibilities are
distributed among multiple State offices or teams with unclear
lines of authority and communications; (ii) participate in
SBLN; (iii) maintain an up-to-date, comprehensive State
broadband plan that considers other State legislation and
programs such as grants or loan programs for broadband
infrastructure, subsidies to increase adoption, etc.; and (iv)
continue to support State broadband data collection and mapping
programs, to the extent feasible, to ensure that each State has
information on broadband availability to contribute to the
program.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Steven Dillingham, Census Bureau
Question 1. The 2020 Census is going to the first decennial that is
going to be conducted predominately online. This is marks a major
advancement, but also presents a serious cybersecurity risk. Given the
unprecedented attacks we've seen on our elections by the Russian
government and others, I believe we need to be ready for similar
attempts to disrupt the census. Especially given role the census plays
in reapportionment of Congressional seats.
1a. Dr. Dillingham, what is the Census Bureau doing to
prepare for these threats?
Answer. Cybersecurity is a top priority for the Census
Bureau. The Census Bureau has instituted a number of
cybersecurity measures that will both protect and monitor the
technology and data for the 2020 Census. The Department of
Homeland Security, the Federal Intelligence Community, and
industry partners have committed to provide the Census Bureau
with specific support for the 2020 Census operations. This
support will enhance the Bureau's ability to be proactive and
contain or stop a threat. Throughout 2019, the Census Bureau
will work closely with these Federal and industry partners to
develop and deploy the specific support capabilities needed for
2020 Census operations.
1b. The Government Accountability Office includes the 2020
Census on its ``high risk list'' because of than 1,000 security
weakness in the IT systems. What is being done to remedy these
concerns and ensure that the systems are ready for next year?
Answer. Since GAO issued its report, the Census Bureau has
addressed and closed most of the findings. The Census Bureau
continuously monitors its security posture to stay ahead of
cyber threats. Each month the security team scans systems for
more than 100,000 potential vulnerabilities, with new items
added each month. The Census Bureau prioritizes remediation of
any high risk findings within strict timelines to most
effectively reduce threats and improve the security of the
systems. Unlike most Federal organizations, the Census Bureau
intentionally tracks more findings at a detailed level to
better show progress and increase visibility for our own
operational purposes and our oversight bodies.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Gil Kaplan, International Trade Administration
Question 1. I'm disappointed to see that the President's fiscal
year 2020 budget proposal again includes a 13 percent cut to the
International Trade Administration's Global Markets division--which
includes the U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service that provides critical
support for U.S. exporters and manufacturers who don't have access to
other resources. The Commercial Service helps small- and medium-sized
businesses get access to international markets and works to bring down
trade barriers.
1a. Given the administration's stated priority of reducing
trade deficits, I would think that promoting U.S. exports would
be a top priority. If that is the case, why is the President's
budget closing at least 32 international offices and 18
domestic offices?
Answer. The President's budget request prioritizes and
protects investments in core Government functions across
Commerce that benefit small businesses, including enforcing
laws that promote fair and secure trade, while realigning
export promotion and market access work.
ITA will strengthen trade enforcement and compliance
activities to ensure American businesses get fair opportunities
in the global marketplace while enhancing the efficiency of the
bureau's export promotion and trade analysis activities. To
complement these efforts, ITA is developing and implementing
plans to transform operations to strengthen outcomes, improve
efficiency, and meet trade and investment priorities. ITA's
transformational actions will be rooted in maximizing the
delivery of the organization's value to clients, providing
timely and actionable information and service to U.S. business
(especially SMEs), eliminating or reducing lower-priority
functions and activities, strengthening higher priority
activities, and modernizing information management.
1b. The number of vacant positions within the Global Markets
division brings cause for concern. The fiscal year 2019 omnibus
includes a request for quarterly reports about staffing levels.
When can the Committee expect the first report?
Answer. The first report, reflecting data as of March 31,
2019, was transmitted to the Committee on June 17. We are
currently working on the second report, reflecting data as of
June 30.
Question 2. Foreign investment, especially from China, is a large
source of venture capital funding that is driving U.S. advances in
science and technology. Does the Federal Government need to do more to
ensure that U.S. investments are protected from the transfer of
intellectual property or trade secrets to China?
Answer. The Federal Government is engaged in unprecedented level of
activity to free U.S. investments from being impacted by forced
technology and IP transfer policies and practices of the Chinese
government, and the Department of Commerce serves many vital functions
with respect to these processes.
You may recall that this administration--led by USTR and aided
substantially through our Department's industry and analytical
expertise--conducted a detailed Section 301 investigation into Chinese
forced tech transfer practices, concluding (in March 2018) that:
--China uses foreign ownership restrictions and joint venture
requirements to pressure technology transfer from U.S.
companies;
--China's technology regulations force U.S. companies to license
technologies on non-market terms;
--China directs investment in and acquisition of U.S. companies and
assets to obtain technologies and IP; and,
--China supports intrusion and theft from computer networks of U.S.
companies to gain commercial information and trade secrets.
Since then, the administration has taken numerous steps to address
these issues directly and indirectly with the Chinese government
including through successive rounds of tariffs (with annual trade
values of $34 billion, $16 billion, and $200 billion, respectively),
the May 10, 2019 increase in tariff rates applying to the $200 billion
list (from 10 percent to 25 percent), and the President directed that
tariffs be imposed on an additional $300 billion of Chinese imports.
Addressing U.S. Government and industry concerns over these
practices are very much a part of ongoing talks with the Chinese.
Moreover, last August the President signed into law the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018, or FIRRMA--a law
which strengthens the government's ability to protect national security
while preserving the longstanding open investment policy of the United
States. The Department is ramping up capacity to bring Commerce
expertise to bear in these interagency proceedings.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. John Fleming, Economic Development Administration
Question 1. I am disappointed that for the third straight year, the
administration has proposed eliminating the Economic Development
Administration (EDA), which plays a critical role investing in
infrastructure projects around the country, especially in rural
communities. For example, EDA is working with the Northern Forest
Center in New Hampshire to help develop new markets for wood products.
1a. Dr. Fleming, I know you just joined EDA, but you served
in Congress and understand the importance of rural economic
development, so how do you justify eliminating the agency?
Answer. The administration's 2020 budget prioritizes
rebuilding the military and making critical investments in the
Nation's security. It also identifies the savings and
efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible fiscal
path. The administration has made the necessary tradeoffs and
choices inherent in pursuing these goals. This means changing
the role and size of the Federal Government and prioritizing
the programs that provide a good return for the taxpayer, as
well as those that serve the most critical functions, while
consolidating or eliminating duplicative, ineffective or less
critical programs. Many difficult decisions were necessary to
reach the funding level provided in this budget, and the
elimination of EDA is one of them.
1b. How many broadband projects did EDA fund last year? Do
you see these as worthy projects to continue supporting?
Answer. Broadband is acknowledged to be a potential engine
for economic opportunities and is frequently cited as a
necessary condition for economic growth and prosperity in
currently under/unserved areas. As such, EDA views its ability
to fund broadband projects as an integral tool for helping
communities and regions build the capacity for economic
development. EDA made ``Critical Infrastructure,'' including
broadband projects, one of its five investment priorities.
EDA's investment priorities are designed to provide an
overarching framework to guide the agency's investment
portfolio to ensure its investments contribute the strongest
positive impact on sustainable regional economic growth and
diversification.
EDA funds a variety of different types of projects designed
to support broadband deployment based on the individual needs
of communities and regions, including studies, planning
activities, technical assistance on the deployment of
technologies based on broadband, and the funding of actual
broadband infrastructure. In fiscal year 2018, EDA funded 12
projects in support of these goals, totaling $2,096,820 in
Federal funds. Of these projects:
-- Three projects were funded via EDA's Planning program and were
in support of planning activities which have a nexus to
broadband and/or the need to develop broadband;
-- One was an EDA Public Works project providing broadband
infrastructure;
-- Two were University Center (UC) projects which are funded via
EDA's Technical Assistance program and support the use/
expansion of broadband for the communities served by the UCs
including the development and deployment of technologies based
on the availability of broadband;
-- One was a Technical Assistance project to a school district;
and
-- The remaining five projects were broadband-related studies
funded through EDA's Economic Adjustment Assistance program.
Question 2. I understand that there is a hold up in release of EDA
grants. Is there a role for the Office of Legislative and
Intergovernmental Affairs in approving EDA grants?
Answer. Without a Senate-confirmed Assistant Secretary for Economic
Development (A/S), EDA needed additional assistance from the Office of
Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs to coordinate the release of
EDA grants. With confirmation of A/S Fleming, this additional support
is no longer necessary.
_______________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Michael Platt, Assistant Secretary for Legislative and
Intergovernmental Affairs
Question 1. One year ago, when Secretary Ross appeared before this
subcommittee, I asked him the origins of the attempt to add the
controversial citizenship question to the 2020 Census. Secretary Ross
responded that ``the Justice Department is the one who made the
request'' of the Commerce Department. He made similar claims when he
testified before the House, claiming that ``the Department of Justice
made the request for the inclusion of the citizenship question'' and
the Commerce Department was ``responding solely'' to the Justice
Department's request. However, 1 year before I asked Secretary Ross
about this issue, he had written in an email that he was ``mystified
why nothing has been done in response to my months old request that we
include the citizenship question.'' Other emails, released pursuant to
FOIA litigation, made it clear that it was Secretary Ross who pressured
a reluctant Justice Department to support the inclusion of the
citizenship question. The emails also suggest that the inclusion of the
question was motivated by political views held by Secretary Ross and
not the Justice Department's interest in enforcing the Voting Rights
Act.
Mr. Platt, does the Commerce Department stand by Secretary Ross's
prior 2018 testimony to both me and the House of Representatives on
issues related to the inclusion of the citizenship question?
Answer. Secretary Ross has always been truthful and forthright in
his testimony before Congress.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Steven Dillingham, Director Census Bureau
Question 1. Dr. Dillingham, released emails show that the Census
Bureau had concerns about adding a citizenship question to the 2020
Census. In an email from December 2017, your colleague, Associate
Director Ron Jarmin, wrote in response to the citizenship question
request that the Census Bureau recommended instead using administrative
and survey data that the Census Bureau already possessed.
Question 2. Why was the Census Bureau hesitant to include a
citizenship question on the 2020 Census?
Answer. In response to the Department of Justice's December 2017
request, the Secretary directed the Census Bureau to determine options
to provide the requested citizen voting age population data. Secretary
Ross considered the options proposed and analyzed by the Census Bureau
and explained his decision in his March 26, 2018 memorandum.
Question 3. What risks does the question present to conducting an
accurate count?
Answer. The 2020 Census will not include a citizenship question.
However, during litigation over the Secretary's 2018 decision, Dr. John
Abowd of the Census Bureau stated under oath, ``Therefore, there's no
credible quantitative evidence that the addition of a citizenship
question will affect the accuracy of the count.''
Question 4. How did the Census Bureau share its perspective on the
inclusion of the citizenship question within the Commerce Department
and what was the response, if any, of Secretary Ross or Commerce
Department leadership?
Answer. Secretary Ross consulted extensively with the Census Bureau
and reached out to many different stakeholders during his review of the
request for block level citizen age voting population data from the
Department of Justice. In addition to meetings with Census Bureau
leadership, he had conversations about the citizenship question with
over 24 diverse, well informed, and interested parties representing a
broad range of views. He and his staff reviewed over 50 incoming
letters from stakeholders, interest groups, Members of Congress, and
State and local officials regarding the reinstatement of a citizenship
question on the 2020 Census. After a thorough review of the legal,
program, and policy considerations, as well as numerous discussions
with the Census Bureau leadership and interested stakeholders, he
determined that reinstatement of a citizenship question on the 2020
Census was necessary to provide complete and accurate data in response
to the request from the Department of Justice.
Question 5. What specific steps must the Census Bureau take to add
a question to the Census? How long does the process typically take?
Answer. Because no new questions have been added to the Decennial
Census for nearly 20 years, the Census Bureau is not bound by a past
precedent. Rather, the Census Bureau works with all relevant
stakeholders to ensure that legal and regulatory requirements are
satisfied and that questions will produce quality, useful information
for the Nation.
Question 6. How has the process for the attempt to add the
citizenship question differed from the process for adding a typical new
question, if at all?
Answer. The Census Bureau's goal of testing a question and options
for responses is to ensure that all populations can cognitively
understand the concepts associated with the question and can accurately
respond within the options provided. This goal of cognitive
understanding and accurate response to the citizenship question has
been met through the millions of households that have responded to the
exact same question for more than a decade on the Census Bureau's
annual American Community Survey.
Previous Department of Commerce cost estimates far outpace the
administration's budget request for the Census Bureau and the 2020
Census, and Secretary Ross has previously recommended a 10 percent
contingency fund for fiscal year 2020.
Question 7. Why did the President's budget fail to request adequate
funding by Secretary Ross' October 2017 estimate? Why did the
administration omit a 10 percent contingency fund for the 2020 Census?
Answer. The prior Administration significantly underestimated the
cost of successfully conducting the 2020 Census. Upon taking office
Secretary Ross learned of a significant cost over-run and immediately
undertook a thorough analysis with Census Bureau and Department of
Commerce staff to determine an accurate budget for conducting a
complete and accurate 2020 Census. That deep dive analysis led
Secretary Ross to support the $15.6 billion 2020 Census Life Cycle Cost
Estimate (LCE), which was presented to Congress in 2017. The
President's fiscal year 2020 budget request is consistent with the 2020
Census LCE, with the exception that it does not include the unknown-
unknown contingency funding related to a sensitivity analysis around a
few major assumptions that are in the $15.6 billion estimate. The
fiscal year 2020 budget request does, however, support the $14.1
billion estimated cost of the operations of the 2020 Census in the LCE,
which itself includes approximately $1.1 billion in contingency funding
for known risks. The Census Bureau is confident the $14.1 billion
estimate will support a complete and accurate 2020 Census, and
Secretary Ross has previously stated that should any unknown unknowns
become known then he would work with the administration and Congress to
seek any additional funds needed at that time.
_______________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR JACK REED
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Steven Dillingham, Census Bureau
Question 1. As you know, it is the Census Bureau's constitutional
requirement to count every person in the United States. A critical
component of these efforts are in-person Questionnaire Assistance
Centers. An excellent location for in-person Questionnaire Assistance
Centers are public libraries as they are cornerstones of our
communities and trusted sources of assistance. Please provide more
information regarding the Census Bureau's plans for in-person
Questionnaire Assistance Centers.
1a. Does the Census Bureau have a plan for in-person
Questionnaire Assistance Centers?
i. How many in-person Questionnaire Assistance
Centers will there be?
Answer. The Census Bureau has no plans to operate in-
person Questionnaire Assistance Centers (QAC) for the
2020 Census. The QACs in the 2010 Census operated
primarily as locations for the distribution and
collection of Be Counted forms that allowed respondents
without a Census ID to submit a response. With the
advent of Internet self-response (which allows
responses without an ID), the QACs are no longer
necessary. The Census Bureau plans to use its national
and local partners (including the American Library
Association), partnership specialists, and telephone
assistance via the Census Questionnaire Assistance
(CQA) operation to assist respondents in completing the
2020 Census. The Census Questionnaire Assistance
operation provides flexible and adaptive language
support and questionnaire assistance for respondents by
answering questions about specific items on the census
form or other frequently asked questions about the 2020
Census and provides an option for respondents to
complete a census interview over the telephone. Ranging
in size from approximately 300 to 1,200 staff, the 10
call centers will collectively utilize 8,300 staff
during the peak of operations. CQA staff will be
available to answer calls from March 9, 2020 through
July 31, 2020. The operational hours are Sunday through
Saturday from 7:00 am to 2:00 am Eastern Time.
In March 2019, the Census Bureau provided a report to
the House and Senate Appropriations Committees
indicating that the Census Bureau could institute a
Mobile Response Initiative designed to increase
visibility in locations likely to have low response
rates. Relying on the user-friendly online response
option, and the ability to process ``non-ID''
responses, the Census Bureau would be able to provide
the public with a way to directly answer the census at
these highly visible locations. The Census Bureau would
have staff with tablet computers at markets, festivals,
events and other high-traffic venues, available to help
people answer the census. This staff would be highly
mobile--they could go to multiple areas in a day to
generate the greatest awareness and participation. As
noted in the report, however, funds to execute that
operation are not included in the current life cycle
cost estimate or the fiscal year 2020 Budget.
ii. How many staff hours will be devoted to operating
in-person Questionnaire Assistance Centers?
Answer. See prior answer.
iii. Where do you plan to locate in-person
Questionnaire Assistance Centers?
Answer. See prior answer.
iv. Will libraries be included as host sites for in-
person Questionnaire Assistance Centers?
Answer. The American Library Association is a key
2020 Census partner. Public libraries are some of the
most valued and trusted census partners, and they play
a key role in helping people respond to the census
every decade.
Libraries provide Internet connectivity and the
Census Bureau anticipates that people will use library
computers equipment for completing Internet self-
response forms, as well as for job applications for the
2020 Census and Census worker training. There is a
public library within five miles of every hard-to-count
tract in the Nation, and librarians are critical
trusted voices to ensure the success of the 2020
Census.
v. If the Census Bureau does not plan to locate in-
person Questionnaire Assistance Centers in libraries,
why not?
Answer. See prior answer.
1b. If the Census Bureau does not have a plan for in-person
Questionnaire Assistance Centers: When should we expect to
receive that plan?
Answer. Please see the response to 1(a)(i).
_______________________________________________________________________
QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY SENATOR JOE MANCHIN, III
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. David Redl, National Telecommunications and Information
Administration
Question 1. Specifically, how are you working with the FCC on your
agency's broadband mapping initiative?
Answer. Senior officials and staff from both NTIA and the FCC have
held numerous discussions about NTIA's broadband map and broadband
availability and subscription datasets managed by the FCC.
Initially, NTIA and the FCC discussed potential technology
collaboration, but it became clear that conflicting information
technology plans and significantly different mapping requirements would
lead NTIA to implement its own mapping solution for the program.
However, collaboration on data is ongoing between the agencies. NTIA is
incorporating Form 477 broadband deployment data, collected bi-annually
from broadband service providers by the FCC, as a core dataset for its
map. Other broadband availability and usage data from Federal, State,
and commercial sources will be compared with the FCC data to develop a
better understanding of broadband availability. NTIA hopes to expand
its collaboration with the FCC in the future, as the FCC works to
modernize the Form 477 process and make changes to other programs, such
as the Mobility Fund and High Cost Program.
Question 2. In general, there is a lot of confusion about which
Federal agency is in charge of improving our Federal broadband coverage
maps. Should NTIA be in charge? FCC? Another agency?
Answer. NTIA is the Executive Branch agency that serves as the
President's principal adviser on telecommunications policies pertaining
to the Nation's economic and technological advancement and to the
regulation of the telecommunications industry. NTIA's programs and
policymaking focus largely on expanding broadband Internet access and
adoption in America, expanding the use of spectrum by all users, and
ensuring that the Internet remains an engine for continued innovation
and economic growth.
NTIA is deploying a secure cloud-based GIS platform for data
collection, visualization and analysis to be used by Federal and State
partners to better inform policy making and funding decisions. NTIA is
implementing tools and procedures for the geographic visualization and
comparison of Federal and non-Federal data sets. The objectives are to
identify regions with insufficient service, compare multiple data-sets
to identify discrepancies in broadband availability (e.g., served vs.
underserved or unserved), and produce reports and analyses that could
be used for investment and decisionmaking purposes.
Question 3. Do you believe the use of a public feedback mechanism
is a viable tool to help improve broadband availability data? Do you
have the authority you need to use crowd-sourced data or do you need
new authority from us to do that?
Answer. NTIA believes that public feedback can be an important tool
to improve the understanding of broadband availability and utilization.
Many States are already taking this approach, as is industry.
NTIA solicited input on broadband data and mapping through its July
2018 Request for Comment (RFC), Improving the Quality and Accuracy of
Broadband Availability Data, 83 FR 24747 (May 30, 2018). More than 50
organizations across government, the broadband industry and not-for-
profit sectors submitted comments in response to the RFC. See https://
www.ntia.doc.gov/Federal-register-notice/2018/
comments-improving-quality-and-accuracy-broadband-availability-data.
One common theme that emerged was that NTIA should consider leveraging
crowd-sourced, speed test, quality and location data. NCTA--The
Internet & Television Association indicated, ``[i]n many cases, the
people with the best information about unserved areas may be the
residents of those areas. Self-reporting by individuals or businesses
that claim to be unable to obtain broadband service could provide an
important addition to the broadband map, with the caveat that such
information cannot be treated as definitive evidence that a location is
not served in the absence of any verification or certification process.
NTIA's extensive experience gathering broadband availability and
subscription data could be extremely helpful in developing this type of
crowdsourcing capability.'' See NCTA Comments, available at: https://
www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/071618_ncta_comments.pdf.
Crowdsourc-
ing is also compatible with other important insights identified from
the RFC. The RFC confirmed the need to acquire broadband data that is
more granular than the Census-block level, evaluate multiple data
sources and layer them comparatively with FCC Form 477 data. It also
showed the need to gather information about the connection, such as:
service provider, connection type and up/down connection speeds which
all apply to crowd-sourced data.
Question 4. Since the issue we have with these coverage maps are
where there is and isn't coverage, has your agency considered
coordinating and sharing data with the Census Bureau to get more
granular data?
Answer. Similar to the FCC Form 477 deployment data, most of
Census' shareable data is also at the Census block or block group
level. NTIA, industry, and others have expressed interest in leveraging
the Census Bureau's address data for various forms of geospatial
analysis. However, the Census Bureau is bound by Title 13 of the United
States Code, which precludes them from sharing most of their data
(including addresses and GPS coordinates).
Feedback to NTIA's July 2018 Request for Comment (RFC), Improving
the Quality and Accuracy of Broadband Availability Data, also suggested
that NTIA should target broadband data that is more granular than the
Census-block level. NTIA intends to utilize Census' American Community
Survey data as a layer to provide economic and demographic information
that can be utilized to inform broadband investment.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Neil Jacobs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Question 1. I am very concerned that the President's fiscal year
2020 budget request for NOAA once again calls for the reduction of R&D
supercomputing capacity and use in Fairmont, West Virginia. I worry
that the budget is not reflecting the mission of this agency. Why was
this decision made and how do you plan to utilize this facility in a
reduced capacity?
Answer. NOAA plans to continue using the Fairmont, West Virginia
facility for R&D supercomputing. The President's fiscal year 2020
budget prioritizes national security and economic growth and identifies
the savings and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible
fiscal path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be
made, including a reduction to the funding available to support the
operation and maintenance of the supercomputing capability in Fairmont,
West Virginia. The current and previous NOAA R&D supercomputers in
Fairmont were purchased using American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 and Disaster Relief Appropriations Act of 2013 funding. The base
NOAA appropriation for this activity currently funds the on-going
operation and maintenance for the supercomputer as well as the
associated contract labor, networking, and facility to successfully
execute the complete computing capability. As with the previous two
supercomputing upgrades in Fairmont, the Supplemental Appropriations
for Disaster Relief Requirements Act of 2017 was used to purchase
supercomputing updates and enhancements.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. John Fleming, Economic Development Administration
Question 1. Do you agree with the President that your agency should
be eliminated in fiscal year 2020?
Answer. The administration's 2020 budget prioritizes rebuilding the
military and making critical investments in the Nation's security. It
also identifies the savings and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation
on a responsible fiscal path. The Administration has made the necessary
tradeoffs and choices inherent in pursuing these goals. This means
changing the role and size of the Federal Government and prioritizing
the programs that provide a good return for the taxpayer, as well as
those that serve the most critical functions, while consolidating or
eliminating duplicative, ineffective or less critical programs. Many
difficult decisions were necessary to reach the funding level provided
in this budget, and the elimination of EDA is one of them.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Gil Kaplan, International Trade Administration
Question 1. What are some of the national security concerns
surrounding the importation of cars, trucks or automobile parts?
Answer. National security concerns are outlined in the Secretary's
Section 232 report that was submitted to the President on February 17,
2019. It is at the President's discretion as to when the report will be
released.
Question 2. What recommendations did the International Trade
Administration make to the President concerning possible actions
related to the importation of cars, trucks or automobile parts?
Answer. The Secretary's Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of
1962 (Public Law 87-794) report was submitted to the President on
February 17, 2019. It is at the President's discretion as to when the
report will be released.
Question 3. Do you have any insight as to when the President will
release the report about the imports to Congress?
Answer. The Secretary's Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of
1962 (Public Law 87-794) report was submitted to the President on
February 17, 2019. It is at the President's discretion as to when the
report will be released.
Question 4. What is the criteria by which Commerce evaluates
whether a protestor to an exemption has standing?
Answer. For objections to submitted exclusion requests, any
individual or organization that manufactures steel or aluminum articles
in the United States may file objections to steel or aluminum exclusion
requests, but the U.S. Department of Commerce will only consider
information directly related to the submitted exclusion request that is
the subject of the objection.
In accordance with the Department's interim final rule published on
September 11, 2018, which established a rebuttal and surrebuttal
process, only individuals and organizations that have a posted
objection to a submitted exclusion request may submit a surrebuttal to
a rebuttal posted to their objection to an exclusion request.
Additional details on the Department's steel and aluminum exclusion
request process are contained within 15 CFR Part 705 Supplements No. 1
and 2.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Steven Dillingham, Director of U.S. Census Bureau
Question 1. Have you considered having the enumerators on the
ground during the 2020 Census perform broadband speed tests or drive
tests while they are being deployed and share their results with NTIA
and the FCC?
Answer. No. The Census Bureau has no plans to implement such tests.
Question 2. What metrics is the Bureau using to decide which areas
are eligible for paper questionnaires and will a list of areas be made
available to the public?
Answer. In the 2020 Census, the Census Bureau plans to send a paper
questionnaire in the first mailing (the ``Internet choice'' mail
strategy) to the roughly 20 percent of households nationwide that are
in ``mailout areas.'' Extensive data-driven research was undertaken to
identify mailout areas, which are those areas expected to have lower
Internet usage, which would be more likely to benefit from an earlier
paper questionnaire. The primary factor in the delineation of mailout
areas is census tracts that have lower self-response rates, including
lower Internet response, to the American Community Survey. Secondary
factors are tracts that have relatively higher concentrations of people
age 65 or more, and tracts with low Internet subscribership. However,
all households in mailout areas that have not responded to the 2020
Census after a few weeks, whether they were originally part of the 20
percent of households discussed above or not, will receive a paper
questionnaire in the mail.
The Update Leave operation is designed to occur in areas where the
majority of housing units either do not have mail delivered to the
physical location of the housing unit, or the mail delivery information
for the housing unit cannot be verified. In these areas, enumerators
will leave an ``Internet choice'' package, which includes both the
paper questionnaire and information on how to respond online. The
Census Bureau is in the process of discussing how and when this
information can be released publicly so that local governments,
partners, and other stakeholders can plan accordingly.
Question 3. Given that we are still struggling to figure out where
there is and isn't Internet coverage, is the Bureau willing to create a
petition for State and local governments to request paper
questionnaires for their communities?
Answer. The Census Bureau has no plans to implement such an
operation. As noted in the answer to Question 2, all households in
mailout areas will have the opportunity to respond by mail if they so
choose.
Question 4. Since the issue we have with broadband coverage maps
are where there is and isn't coverage, has your agency considered
coordinating and sharing data with NTIA to help to improve these
broadband coverage maps?
Answer. We have appreciated opportunities in the past to consult
with NTIA and will do so again as opportunities arise.
______
Questions Submitted to Hon. Wilbur Ross, Department of Commerce, and
Hon. Gil Kaplan, International Trade Administration
Question 1. Where should small businesses focus their efforts on
exporting to in the future?
Answer. Two factors come into play: the product or service that is
being offered for export, and the receptivity of markets to that
product or service. Small businesses that export with the assistance of
Global Markets have been successful in markets around the world, and
most export to more than one market as a result of using GM services
and assistance. SME exporters should target growth markets for their
products or services in Europe, the Asia-Pacific, and the Western
Hemisphere.
Question 2. What barriers impede exporting more American energy
products, such as coal, to foreign markets?
Answer. U.S. coal exporters have communicated to ITA that
improvements to U.S. coal export infrastructure, particularly the
construction of coal export terminals on the Pacific coast, are
impediments to increasing U.S. coal exports. Industry stakeholders have
also expressed that foreign regulations, such as import duties and
import regulations on sulfur content, serve as barriers to increasing
U.S. coal exports. Lastly, the nature of the global coal market makes
it difficult for U.S. coal exports to be price-competitive in certain
parts of the world, in large part due to transportation costs. However,
strong international demand has led to export prices increasing in
recent years; coal export prices have increased in each of the past 2
years to average $59 per ton for steam coal and $138 per ton for
metallurgical coal in 2018.
Question 3. What can Congress do to safeguard Americans from unfair
competition and dumped imports?
Answer. Within Commerce, the International Trade Administration's
Enforcement & Compliance (E&C) business unit is responsible for
enforcing the U.S. antidumping (AD) and countervailing duty (CVD) laws.
These laws help level the playing field for American manufacturers,
farmers, and workers that have been harmed by unfairly traded foreign
goods. We are grateful to Congress for its past support of E&C's
enforcement efforts and its recognition of the importance of our AD/CVD
laws to growth of our domestic industries.
One of this administration's top priorities is to ensure the
vigorous enforcement of our trade laws to help stop unfairly dumped or
subsidized imports. In the first year of the Trump administration,
Commerce initiated 164 AD and CVD investigations--more investigations
than in the first year of any prior administration. These
investigations dealt with over $7.0 billion of unfairly traded foreign
goods. To further support these efforts, we encourage Members to refer
to E&C any constituents whose businesses may be harmed by dumped or
subsidized imports. E&C's Petition Counseling and Analysis Unit works
directly with American businesses, advising them on how to file an AD
or CVD petition to seek relief from any unfair trade practices by
foreign exporters or their governments.
SUBCOMMITTEE RECESS
Senator Moran. The subcommittee stands in recess.
Thank you all.
[Whereupon, at 4:03 p.m., Tuesday, April 2, the
subcommittee was recessed, to reconvene subject to the call of
the Chair.]
[all]