- FISCAL YEAR 2019 NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION BUDGET
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
FISCAL YEAR 2019 NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION BUDGET
=======================================================================
JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY
AND THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
MARCH 20, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-111
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
energycommerce.house.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-623 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
GREG WALDEN, Oregon
Chairman
JOE BARTON, Texas
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
FRED UPTON, Michigan
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
ANNA G. ESHOO, California
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
GENE GREEN, Texas
STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
LEONARD LANCE, New Jersey
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
PETE OLSON, Texas
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JERRY McNERNEY, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
PETER WELCH, Vermont
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
BEN RAY LUJAN, New Mexico
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
SUSAN W. BROOKS, Indiana
Massachusetts
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
RAUL RUIZ, California
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
MIMI WALTERS, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
(ii)
Subcommittee on Energy
FRED UPTON, Michigan
Chairman
PETE OLSON, Texas
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas
JERRY McNERNEY, California
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
GENE GREEN, Texas
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
MICHAEL F. DOYLE, Pennsylvania
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
KATHY CASTOR, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
PAUL TONKO, New York
BILLY LONG, Missouri
DAVID LOEBSACK, Iowa
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
BILL FLORES, Texas
JOSEPH P. KENNEDY, III,
MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
Massachusetts
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
G.K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
officio)
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
------
Subcommittee on Environment
JOHN SHIMKUS, Illinois
Chairman
DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
PAUL TONKO, New York
Vice Chairman
Ranking Member
JOE BARTON, Texas
RAUL RUIZ, California
MARSHA BLACKBURN, Tennessee
SCOTT H. PETERS, California
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi
GENE GREEN, Texas
PETE OLSON, Texas
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
JERRY McNERNEY, California
BILL FLORES, Texas
TONY CARDENAS, California
RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan
KEVIN CRAMER, North Dakota
DORIS O. MATSUI, California
TIM WALBERG, Michigan
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
officio)
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
GREG WALDEN, Oregon (ex officio)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hon. John Shimkus, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, opening statement....................................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
3
Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress from the State of
New York, opening statement....................................
4
Hon. Fred Upton, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Michigan, opening statement....................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................
8
Prepared statement...........................................
10
Hon. Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oregon, prepared statement.....................................
64
Witnesses
Kristine Svinicki, Chairman, Nuclear Regulatory Commission.......
11
Prepared statement \1\.......................................
13
Answers to submitted questions \2\...........................
65
Jeff Baran, Commissioner, Nuclear Regulatory Commission \1\......
27
Stephen Burns, Commissioner, Nuclear Regulatory Commission \1\...
28
Answers to submitted questions \2\...........................
65
----------
\1\ Ms. Svinicki submitted a written statement on behalf of the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Mr. Baran and Mr. Burns did not
submitted separate written statements.
\2\ The Nuclear Regulatory Commission submitted one set of
responses to questions for the record that were sent to Ms.
Svinicki and Mr. Burns.
FISCAL YEAR 2019 NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION BUDGET
----------
TUESDAY, MARCH 20, 2018
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy
joint with the
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Energy and Commerce,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:17 a.m., in
room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. John Shimkus
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Environment) presiding.
Members present: Representatives Upton, McKinley, Olson,
Barton, Blackburn, Latta, Kinzinger, Johnson, Long, Bucshon,
Flores, Mullin, Hudson, Walberg, Carter, Duncan, Walden (ex
officio), Tonko, Green, Doyle, Matsui, McNerney, Welch,
Loebsack, Schrader, Kennedy, Cardenas, Peters, and Pallone (ex
officio).
Staff present: Samantha Bopp, Staff Assistant; Daniel
Butler, Staff Assistant; Kelly Collins, Legislative Clerk,
Energy/Environment; Wyatt Ellertson, Professional Staff Member,
Energy/Environment; Jordan Haverly, Policy Coordinator,
Environment; Ben Lieberman, Senior Counsel, Energy; Mary
Martin, Chief Counsel, Energy/Environment; Brandon Mooney,
Deputy Chief Counsel, Energy; Mark Ratner, Policy Coordinator;
Annelise Rickert, Counsel, Energy; Dan Schneider, Press
Secretary; Peter Spencer, Senior Professional Staff Member,
Energy; Jason Stanek, Senior Counsel, Energy; Austin
Stonebraker, Press Assistant; Madeline Vey, Policy Coordinator,
Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection; Hamlin Wade, Special
Advisor for External Affairs; Everett Winnick, Director of
Information Technology; Andy Zach, Senior Professional Staff
Member, Environment; Priscilla Barbour, Minority Energy Fellow;
Jean Fruci, Minority Policy Advisor, Energy and Environment;
Tiffany Guarascio, Minority Deputy Staff Director and Chief
Health Advisor; Caitlin Haberman, Minority Professional Staff
Member; Rick Kessler, Minority Senior Advisor and Staff
Director, Energy and Environment; John Marshall, Minority
Policy Coordinator; Alexander Ratner, Minority Policy Analyst;
and C.J. Young, Minority Press Secretary.
Mr. Shimkus. Let's call this hearing to order, and I will
recognize myself 5 minutes, when I find it. It's hidden in the
back. Recognize myself 5 minutes for an opening statement.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN SHIMKUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS
Welcome to our hearing this morning as we examine the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission's fiscal year 2019 budget
proposal. The NRC's essential role in licensing and regulating
nuclear facilities is of great importance to my Illinois
constituents.
Illinois produces the largest share of nuclear-generated
electricity in the country. Throughout the State, the
commercial nuclear energy industry supports thousands of high-
paying jobs, funds local school districts, and provides
reliable, clean, baseload electricity around the clock.
In fact, a little over 75 years ago, Illinois was the site,
at a lab under the University of Chicago's football field,
where physicists and engineers first generated a self-
sustaining nuclear chain reaction. We are proud to be the
birthplace of nuclear technology.
While I do not have any commercial nuclear power plants in
my southern Illinois district, I do represent the Nation's only
uranium conversion facility, located in Metropolis, Illinois.
In October, the plant's owner announced it was suspending
operations at the site due to market conditions for uranium. We
have a glut of uranium on the market and lingering low demand,
in part due to the suspension of the Japanese fleet of nuclear
power plants in the wake of the Fukushima earthquake, or
tsunami, 7 years ago.
While there may not be an immediate fix to the uranium
market, the most important policy to help my constituents
return to work is a strong, positive outlook for our Nation's
domestic nuclear industry.
To maintain a robust nuclear industry, Congress must
consider the many different opportunities to provide a pathway
to keep existing plants operational, while establishing the
foundation for new nuclear energy deployment in the next
decade.
While mining, converting, enriching, and manufacturing
nuclear fuel is a necessity to support the front end of the
fuel cycle, we are long past due to manage the back end of the
fuel cycle.
As we do this, we have to recognize the uncertainty about
our used fuel commitments will continue to be a political
albatross around nuclear energy development until the
Department of Energy starts sending clear signals and
reconstitutes its nuclear waste management organization.
I very much appreciate that last year the Commission, for
the first time since 2010, requested funding to resume its
review of the pending Yucca Mountain license application, as
required by law.
While it is still incumbent on Congress to provide the
funding, it is refreshing to see an administration that is
committed to following the law.
As I have noted on many occasions, the NRC's independent
review of the license will answer the safety and environmental
impact questions the State of Nevada has raised.
To gain the public's confidence in nuclear energy, we must
have a functioning nuclear waste management program. The
Commission's strong legacy of effective and efficient
regulation is another key component of public confidence.
However, the many pressures on the nuclear industry provide
an opportunity for the NRC to reassess its regulatory process
and flexibility.
The Commission's fiscal year 2019 budget sets the
parameters for how the organization will steward its resources
in a changing environment.
Last month, we heard a clear message of urgency. As your
former colleague, Bill Ostendorff, succinctly pointed out, our
civilian nuclear energy industry infrastructure is the
underpinning of our strategic nuclear defense capabilities.
In fact, I went down and visited with Admiral Caldwell just
last week, and it was a great visit and I would encourage a lot
of my colleagues to do that.
In turn, an agile regulatory regime that oversees the
breadth of the nuclear supply capacity supports our national
interests.
Mr. Ostendorff's testimony highlighted the critical need to
advance a suite of nuclear policies to define our nuclear
future and establish a durable program to sustain the industry
for the next generation of nuclear leaders.
This morning we will seek some of those answers, and I look
forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle to address this critical issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shimkus follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. John Shimkus
Welcome to our hearing this morning as we will examine the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission's Fiscal Year 2019 budget
proposal. The NRC's essential role in licensing and regulating
nuclear facilities is of great importance to my Illinois
constituents.
Illinois produces the largest share of nuclear-generated
electricity in the country. Throughout the State, the
commercial nuclear energy industry supports thousands of high-
paying jobs, funds local school districts, and provides
reliable, clean, baseload electricity around the clock. In
fact, a little over 75 years ago, Illinois was the site, at a
lab under the University of Chicago's football field, where
physicists and engineers first generated a self-sustaining
nuclear chain reaction. We are proud to be the birthplace of
nuclear technology.
While I do not have any commercial nuclear power plants in
my Southern Illinois district, I do represent the Nation's only
uranium conversion facility located in Metropolis, Illinois. In
October, the plant's owner announced it was suspending
operations at the site due to market conditions for uranium. We
have a glut of uranium on the market, and lingering low demand,
in part due to the suspension of the Japanese fleet of nuclear
power plants in the wake of the Fukushima earthquake 7 years
ago.
While there may not be an immediate fix to the uranium
market, the most important policy to help my constituents
return to work is a strong positive outlook for our Nation's
domestic nuclear industry. To maintain a robust nuclear
industry, Congress must consider the many different
opportunities to provide a pathway to keep existing plants
operational, while establishing the foundation for new nuclear
energy deployment in the next decade.
While mining, converting, enriching and manufacturing
nuclear fuel is a necessity to support the front end of the
fuel cycle, we are long past due to manage the back end of the
fuel cycle. As we do this, we have to recognize that
uncertainty about our used fuel commitments will continue to be
a political albatross around nuclear energy development until
the Department of Energy starts sending clear signals and
reconstitutes its nuclear waste management organization.
I very much appreciate that last year the Commission, for
the first time since 2010, requested funding to resume its
review of the pending Yucca Mountain license application, as
required by law. While it is still incumbent on Congress to
provide the funding, it is refreshing to see an administration
that is committed to following the law.
As I have noted on many occasions, the NRC's independent
review of the license will answer the safety and environmental
impact questions the State of Nevada has raised. To gain the
public's confidence in nuclear energy, we must have a
functioning nuclear waste management program.
The Commission's strong legacy of effective and efficient
regulation is another key component of public confidence.
However, the many pressures on the nuclear industry provide an
opportunity for the NRC to reassess its regulatory process and
flexibility. The Commission's FY 2019 budget sets the
parameters for how the organization will steward its resources
in a changing environment.
Last month, we heard a clear message of urgency. As your
former colleague, Bill Ostendorff, succinctly pointed out, our
civilian nuclear energy industry infrastructure is the
underpinning of our strategic nuclear defense capabilities. In
turn, an agile regulatory regime that oversees the breadth of
the nuclear supply capacity supports our national interests.
Mr. Ostendorff's testimony highlighted the critical need to
advance a suite of nuclear policies to define our nuclear
future and establish a durable program to sustain the industry
for the next generation of nuclear leaders.
This morning we will seek some of those answers, and I look
forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle to address this critical issue.
Mr. Shimkus. And with that, I have a minute remaining. Does
anyone seek time?
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Tennessee for a
minute.
Mrs. Blackburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In my home State of Tennessee, TVA is leading the way with
three nuclear plants and seven units capable of generating an
average of 7,800 megawatts of electricity each day.
Watts Bar, and I know you all are familiar with Watts Bar--
that's near the northern end of Chickamauga Reservoir in east
Tennessee--is the first new nuclear reactor built in the 21st
century and supplies enough electricity for about 1.2 million
households in the Tennessee Valley.
Watts Bar experienced its fair share of challenges and
setbacks in the process to becoming operational. Unfortunately,
we are seeing those challenges across the country, and without
a reasonable, modern, flexible regulatory system, the U.S. will
continue to struggle to maintain existing plants, leaving
little opportunity for new plants to come online.
So it is essential that the NRC develop a more agile and
responsive regulatory model equipped for today's changing
energy industry and security needs.
And I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentlelady yields back the time.
Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Tonko, for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TONKO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and good morning.
Thank you to both Chair Shimkus and Chair Upton for holding
this hearing, and welcome back and thank you to our Chair
Svinicki and Commissioner Burns for appearing before the
subcommittees today.
And let me extend a special welcome back to Commissioner
Baran, who served with distinction as a professional staff
member of this committee for a great number of years.
So welcome to all of you.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission's mission is to license
and regulate the Nation's civilian use of radioactive materials
to ensure adequate protection of public health and safety, to
promote the common defense and security, and to protect the
environment.
This deed is no easy task, and I want to put an additional
emphasis on protecting health and safety.
Members on this committee have a range of views on existing
and new nuclear power, but I believe there is unanimous
agreement that we need high standards for nuclear safety.
So thank you to the Commission staff that have this awesome
responsibility. We are here today to discuss the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission's fiscal year 2019 budget request of
$970.7 million.
This represents an increase of about $60 million compared
to the fiscal year '18 annualized continuing resolution level.
Much of this increase is being driven by the $47.7 million
for activities related to the disposal of spent nuclear fuel
and high-level radioactive waste.
Licensing activities related to the proposed Yucca Mountain
Repository, which I am sure my colleague, Mr. Shimkus, was
happy to see, are included in the request.
I would also note the budget request represents a decrease
of 149 FTEs compared to the fiscal year 2018 annualized
continuing resolution, with 123 of those FTEs coming from the
Nuclear Reactor Safety Program.
Over the past few years, Commissioners have appeared before
this committee and provided updates on Project Aim, the
Commission's effort to right size the agency in light of
changes and trends occurring in the nuclear industry.
Without a doubt, the Commission has been streamlined. The
budget has been reduced by about 13 percent and staff by over
500 FTEs since 2014. This has been a steady trend.
While I understand and appreciate the goals of making the
Commission more efficient, continuing cuts at this pace is not
a good way for such an important and technical agency to run.
At some point, you are no longer capable of doing more with
less. You just end up doing less, and safety is one place where
doing less is nonnegotiable.
So I would caution against continuing to push reduction
targets if we are approaching a point where critical Commission
functions such as safety inspection hours begin to suffer
because, if the Commission is unable to maintain essential
personnel or replenish its aging workforce or hire additional
staff with expertise in new technologies, it could be the
public that does suffer.
And the industry will certainly suffer too with delays in
licensing and review processes. The Commission must be staffed
and resourced at levels appropriate for carrying out its
critical oversight and safety missions.
I also wanted to mention that we have spent quite a bit of
time this past year discussing grid resilience, and Secretary
Perry's notice of proposed rulemaking to FERC, which would have
compensated power generators with 90 days of fuel on site, was
rightly rejected, in my opinion.
I know there are many Members that believe the nuclear
industry is at a competitive disadvantage and nuclear energy
production should be fairly compensated for its positive
attributes.
We may disagree which of those attributes are most
important. But, in my view, the best way to ensure the existing
nuclear fleet is on a level playing field is putting a national
price on greenhouse gas pollution.
I would encourage the industry supporters in Congress to
consider having that conversation.
Finally, I must mention that in just a few months, without
Senate action the Commission will lack a quorum. I hope we can
all urge our Senate colleagues to take up the nominations
before then.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
what is next for the Commission and, again, I thank you all for
being here and I yield back, Mr. Chair, the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Upton, the chairman of the Energy Subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRED UPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
Mr. Upton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to everybody. My district, as you all know--
many of you know--hosts three nuclear power reactors, and I
certainly represent a very highly skilled, hardworking nuclear
workforce that I visit often.
All the men and women at the Cook and Palisades sites,
including engineers, electricians, professional security
workforce, indeed help provide clean electricity for thousands,
tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of Michigan households
and I appreciate their dedication, and I am proud of their
positive impact on our community.
This Congress, the Energy Subcommittee has been examining
the various economic pressures in our wholesale power markets.
It has become clear that our Nation's fleet of commercial
nuclear power plants is at a critical juncture due to the
increased competition among generation resources.
Complex electricity pricing rules, abundant natural gas
supplies, and relatively stable energy demand have created
unprecedented market challenges for nuclear power generation
and, consequently, some power plants are ceasing operation
prior to the end of their licensed service period.
So as we consider the future of nuclear power generation,
we should not forget the industry's invaluable benefits to our
Nation's national security interest.
The technological infrastructure of our nuclear industry
supports the nuclear security posture of our nuclear navy,
nonproliferation programs, and nuclear leadership over the
safe, secure operations of nuclear facilities around the globe.
And as we heard at a subcommittee hearing just last month,
that position should not be taken for granted. A weakening
domestic nuclear industry threatens our international
credibility and our leadership.
The NRC plays a key role in shaping our nuclear future. The
mission assures that our commercial industry operates safely.
However, much of the NRC's regulatory framework was developed
based on technologies and industry structures that were set up
some 40 years ago.
In some cases, NRC's authority and process extends even
further back to President Eisenhower's Atoms for Peace program,
an enactment of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
Just as this subcommittee is examining how the Department
of Energy's activities can be aligned with a 21st century
energy outlook, so should the NRC consider how it can most
effectively operate in a forward-looking manner.
Today's hearing offers the opportunity to hear how the NRC
can adopt in changing industry dynamics and technologies in
use. A more nimble energy agency can address these challenges
and ensure its procedures do not become impediments to a robust
industry and our national security interests.
I note that next week will mark the tenth anniversary of
the service of Chairman Svinicki. She recently passed former
NRC Chair Nils Diaz and now is the second longest-serving
Commissioner in history, only trailing Commissioner
McGaffigan's 14 years.
I should also note that nearly 40 years ago Commissioner
Burns began his career at the NRC and rose through the ranks to
become its general counsel prior to departing the nuclear
energy agency. He returned to the U.S. when he was nominated
and confirmed as Commissioner in 2014, so while he may not have
the same tenure length, he certainly surpassed the Chairman in
overall service with this organization. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Burns, for your dedication during your 2
years as Chair. Among other improvements in the regulatory
process the NRC implemented its Project Aim initiative by
prioritizing and rebaselining its activities.
This allows reduced organizational costs, which ultimately
saves tons of money for Michigan ratepayers. Thank you again.
Also welcome back Commissioner Jeff Baran back to the
committee. He was a counsel here, as mentioned earlier, and
confirmed by the Commission.
Clean and safe and reliable nuclear energy has got to
remain part of our Nation's electricity portfolio. I look
forward to exploring the policies and, without objection, yield
back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Upton follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Fred Upton
Good morning and thank you for being with us today to
discuss the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's Fiscal Year 2019
budget request.
My district hosts three nuclear power reactors and I
represent a highly skilled, hard-working nuclear workforce. All
the men and women at the Cook and Palisades sites, including
engineers, electricians, and the professional security
workforce, help provide clean electricity for thousands of
Michigan households. I appreciate their dedication and am proud
of their impact on those communities.
This Congress, the Energy Subcommittee has been examining
the various economic pressures in our wholesale power markets.
It has become clear our Nation's fleet of commercial nuclear
power plants is at a critical juncture due to increased
competition among generation resources.
Complex electricity pricing rules, abundant natural gas
supplies, and relatively stable energy demand have created
unprecedented market challenges for nuclear power generation.
Consequently, some power plants are ceasing operation prior to
the end of their licensed service period.
As we consider the future of nuclear power generation, we
should not forget the industry's invaluable benefits to our
Nation's national security interests. The technological
infrastructure of our nuclear industry supports the nuclear
security posture of our nuclear navy, nonproliferation
programs, and nuclear leadership over the safe, secure
operations of nuclear facilities around the world.
As we heard at a subcommittee hearing last month, that
position should not be taken for granted; a weakening domestic
nuclear industry threatens our international credibility and
leadership.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission plays a key role in
shaping our nuclear future. The NRC's mission assures that our
commercial industry operates safely.
However, much of the NRC's regulatory framework was
developed based on technologies and industry structure set up
40 years ago. In some cases, NRC's authority and processes
extend even further back to President Eisenhower's Atoms for
Peace program and enactment of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
Just as this subcommittee is examining how the Department
of Energy's activities can be aligned with a 21stcentury energy
outlook, so should the NRC consider how it can most effectively
operate in a forward-looking manner.
Today's hearing offers the opportunity to hear how the NRC
can adapt to changing industry dynamics and technologies in
use. A more nimble agency can address these challenges and
ensure its procedures do not become impediments to a robust
industry, and our national security interests.
I'd note that next week will mark the tenth anniversary of
service for Chairman Svinicki with the NRC. She recently passed
former NRC Chairman Nils Diaz and now is the second longest-
serving Commissioner in history, only trailing Commissioner
McGaffigan's 14 years of service.
I should also note that nearly 40 years ago Commissioner
Burns began his career at the NRC and rose through the ranks to
become its General Counsel prior to departing for the Nuclear
Energy Agency. He returned to the United States when he was
nominated and confirmed as a Commissioner in 2014. So, while he
may not have the same tenure as Commissioner, he surpasses the
Chairman in overall service with the organization.
Thank you, Mr. Burns, for your dedication to the NRC.
During your 2 years as Chairman, among other improvements in
the regulatory process, the NRC implemented its Project Aim
initiative by prioritizing and re-baselining its activities.
This allows reduced organizational costs, which ultimately
saves money for my Michigan ratepayers.
I also welcome Commissioner Jeff Baran back to the
committee. Commissioner Baran is in familiar territory as he
was a counsel for this committee prior to his nomination and
confirmation to the Commission.
Clean and reliable nuclear energy must remain a part of our
Nation's electricity portfolio. I look forward to exploring
what policies can be implemented to assure this is achieved.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time. Sounds like
purgatory.
But having said that, the Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from New Jersey, the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. Pallone, for 5 minutes.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, JR., A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you and our subcommittee ranker for holding
this Nuclear Regulatory Commission oversight hearing on the
President's budget proposal, and I welcome Chairman Svinicki
and Commissioner Burns.
Mr. Shimkus. Svinicki.
Mr. Pallone. And I got to watch it with you, huh? Svinicki.
All right.
And Commissioner Burns, and I am particularly pleased to
welcome back to the committee a distinguished former member of
the Democratic staff, Commissioner Jeff Baran.
Last year, I opposed Secretary Perry's notice of proposed
rulemaking to FERC that would have undermined functioning
electricity markets by tipping it in favor of nuclear and coal,
and despite that opposition I continue to believe that a safe,
efficient, and modern nuclear fleet should be an important part
of our Nation's effort to combat climate change.
However, nuclear power and technology still have challenges
to overcome. For existing units, it's critical that they be
able to meet the safety needs of a post-Fukushima world, the
security challenges of a post-9/11 world, and the financial
requirements of a market with some of the lowest natural gas
and renewable prices in history.
These price pressures are contributing to the early closure
of units across the country such as the accelerated shutdown of
the Oyster Creek facility in New Jersey, and while Oyster Creek
is very old and was due to close soon anyway, there are also
newer plants capable of many more years of production that are
threatened for closure because of these economic pressures.
And as a result, many States are taking action or formally
considering action to preserve the operation of the nuclear
plants.
The fate of these plants is up to the companies who own
them, the Governors, and the legislatures of those States and
others, and the courts, and those are the proper venues and
players to make these decisions, not FERC.
Meanwhile, advancements in nuclear technology, particularly
in the area of small modular reactors, hold the possibility of
a newer, safer generation of nuclear power, and I support the
work that companies like New Jersey's Holtec are doing in this
area.
The test for the industry is to show that such units can be
brought online in a timely and cost-effective manner, a
question that continues to remain unanswered.
We also still need to address the storage and disposal of
nuclear waste and the rapidly accelerating phenomenon of
decommissioned units.
The legislation authored by Chairman Shimkus that was
overwhelmingly reported out of this committee last year is an
important step towards dealing with that issue, and I hope to
see it on the House floor in the near future.
I believe there is an important role for nuclear energy to
play in addressing global climate change, but I want to make
perfectly clear that safety must come first.
This is a critical moment in time for the nuclear industry
and its regulators, and I commend the Commission for its
ongoing efforts to adopt the size and structure of the NRC to
today's regulatory realities.
However, it's critical we ensure that the Commission has
the staff and resources it needs not just to carry out its
mission but to carry out it well.
The job of the Commission is to regulate nuclear power for
the benefit of all Americans, not just one industry or sector.
So we must work together to find a way forward for nuclear
energy without sacrificing safeguards.
So, again, I want to thank the Commissioners for coming. I
look forward to the testimony, and I yield the balance of my
time to Ms. Matsui.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.
I want to thank the subcommittee chairmen and ranking
members for holding this Nuclear Regulatory Commission
oversight hearing on the President's budget proposal. I welcome
Chairman Svinicki and Commissioner Burns, and I am particularly
pleased to welcome back to the committee a distinguished former
member of the Democratic staff, Commissioner Jeff Baran.
Last year, I opposed Secretary Perry's notice of proposed
rulemaking to FERC that would have undermined functioning
electricity markets by tipping them in favor of nuclear and
coal. Despite that opposition, I continue to believe that a
safe, efficient and modern nuclear fleet should be an important
part of our Nation's effort to combat climate change.
However, nuclear power and technology still have challenges
to overcome. For existing units, it's critical that they be
able to meet the safety needs of a post-Fukushima world, the
security challenges of a post-9/11 world, and the financial
requirements of a market with some of the lowest natural gas
and renewable prices in history. These price pressures are
contributing to the early closure of units across the country,
such as the accelerated shutdown of the Oyster Creek facility
in New Jersey. While Oyster Creek is very old and was due to
close soon anyway, there are also newer plants capable of many
more years of production that are threatened for closure
because of these economic pressures.
As a result, many States are taking action or formally
considering action to preserve the operation of their nuclear
plants. The fate of these plants is up to the companies who own
them, the Governors and legislatures of those States, and the
courts. Those are the proper venues and players to make those
decisions, not FERC.
Meanwhile, advancements in nuclear technology, particularly
in the area of small modular reactors, hold the possibility of
a newer, safer generation of nuclear power, and I support the
work that companies like New Jersey's Holtec are doing in this
area. The test for the industry is to show that such units can
be brought online in a timely and cost effective manner--a
question that continues to remain unanswered.
We also still need to address the storage and disposal of
nuclear waste and the rapidly accelerating phenomenon of
decommissioned units. The legislation authored by Chairman
Shimkus that was overwhelmingly reported out of this committee
last year is an important step toward dealing with that issue.
I hope to see it on the House floor in the near future.
I believe there is an important role for nuclear energy to
play in addressing global climate change, but I want to make
perfectly clear that safety must come first. This is a critical
moment in time for the nuclear industry and its regulators. I
commend the Commission for its ongoing efforts to adapt the
size and structure of the NRC to today's regulatory realities.
However, it is critical we ensure that the Commission has the
staff and resources it needs, not just to carry out its
mission, but to carry it out well. The job of the Commission is
to regulate nuclear power for the benefit of all Americans, not
just one industry or sector, so we must work together to find a
way forward for nuclear energy without sacrificing safeguards.
Again, I want to thank the Commissioners for coming today,
and I look forward to hearing the testimony. I yield the
remainder of my time.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Pallone,
and I'd also like to welcome the Commissioners for being here
today.
I'd like to echo the ranking member's support for efforts
to license an interim storage facility for spent nuclear fuel.
As this committee is aware, it's absolutely critical that
we allow communities to redevelop shut-down reactor sites by
moving forward with a process to consolidate spent fuel.
The current storage reality is wasteful of taxpayer
resources and detrimental to communities. We have all seen the
efforts to build a permanent repository repeatedly stall.
But right now, we have a path forward to license a
consolidated storage facility, meaning there is an opportunity
to move the Nation's spent fuel to one location.
I am pleased that the NRC has docketed two applications for
interim facilities and that the Commission is requesting the
funding necessary to evaluate both concurrently.
I look forward to hearing more from my Commissioners about
the NRC's work on the spent fuel storage licensing process.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentlelady and gentleman yield back their
time? The answer is yes.
We now conclude with Members' opening statements. The Chair
would like to remind Members, that pursuant to committee rules,
all Members' opening statements will be made part of the
record.
We want to thank all our witnesses for being here today and
taking the time to testify before the subcommittee. Today's
witnesses will have the opportunity to give opening statements
followed by a round of questions from Members.
Our witness panel for today's hearing will include the
Honorable Kristine Svinicki, Chairman of the United States
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Honorable Jeff Baran,
Commissioner, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and the
Honorable Stephen Burns, Commissioner with the U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission.
We appreciate you all being here today. We will begin the
panel with the Honorable Kristine Svinicki, and you are now
recognized for 5 minutes to give an opening statement.
Welcome to you all. We are glad to have you here.
STATEMENTS OF KRISTINE SVINICKI, CHAIRMAN, AND JEFF BARAN AND
STEPHEN BURNS, COMMISSIONERS, NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
STATEMENT OF KRISTINE SVINICKI
Ms. Svinicki. Good morning, Chairmen Upton and Shimkus,
Ranking Members Pallone and Tonko, and distinguished members of
the subcommittees.
My colleagues and I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss the U.S. NRC's fiscal year 2019
budget request and related matters.
The funding we are requesting for FY 2019 provides the
resources necessary to accomplish our mission, which is to
license and regulate the civilian use of radioactive materials
to ensure adequate protection of public health and safety and
to promote the common defense and security.
The NRC's fiscal year 2019 budget request, including
resources for our Office of the Inspector General, is $970.7
million, which represents and overall increase of $59.8 million
compared with the fiscal year 2018 as continuing resolution.
This requested increase in resources is largely tied to the
proposed activities related to the licensed application
authority at the Yucca Mountain geologic repository for spent
nuclear fuel and other high-level radioactive waste. Additional
funding is also requested for further development of the
regulatory infrastructure needed to review advanced reactor
technologies and for additional work on accident-tolerant fuel.
The NRC proposes to recover $815.4 million of the requested
budget from fees assessed to NRC's licensees. This would result
in a net appropriation of $155.3 million, with $47.7 million to
be derived from the nuclear waste fund.
The 2019 request for our largest single budget line, the
nuclear reactor safety program, reflects an overall funding
increase of $25.8 million but a decrease of 125 full-time
equivalent employees when compared to the 2018 annualized CR
budget.
The 2019 budget request for the agency's other principal
budget line, nuclear materials and waste safety programs, is
$183.7 million, and that reflects an increase of $46.8 million.
Again, this is principally attributed to the resources
requested for the high-level waste program, as previously
mentioned.
In summary, the NRC's budget request reflects our
continuing efforts to achieve additional efficiencies while
carrying out our core safety and security mission but also
preparing for future responses to current realities.
On behalf of the Commission, I thank you for this
opportunity to appear before you and for your continuing
support of our important public health and safety mission.
We will be pleased to answer your questions at the
appropriate time.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Svinicki follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Commission Baran for
5 minutes.
I am sorry. We are fighting over spelling back here so----
STATEMENT OF JEFF BARAN
Mr. Baran. Chairman Upton, Chairman Shimkus, Ranking Member
Tonko, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today.
It's great to be back with my colleagues to discuss NRC's
fiscal year 2019 budget request and the work of the Commission.
Chairman Svinicki provided an overview of NRC's budget
request. I want to briefly highlight a few related efforts
underway at NRC.
I will start with Project Aim, our multiyear effort to take
a hard look at what work the agency is doing and how we are
doing that work.
The goals have been to become more efficient and agile and
to prepare for the future. The results of Project Aim in our
very limited external hiring have been dramatic.
In just 2 years, NRC's workforce has declined by more than
12 percent. The agency started the current fiscal year with
around 3,200 employees. That's about the same staffing level as
in 2006, before NRC started to ramp up for the anticipated wave
of new reactor applications.
When Project Aim got underway in 2015, the NRC staff
envisioned that it would take until 2020 to match the agency's
resources to its workload. But NRC was able to make progress
much more quickly on getting to the right staffing level for
our current and expected workload.
Going forward, we need to internalize an enduring focus on
efficiency. For the agency's long-term health, we also need a
stable pipeline of new talent through external hiring and an
emphasis on maintaining the NRC staff's core technical
capabilities and safety inspection activities.
As Chairman Svinicki noted, the NRC has launched a
transformation initiative to identify any steps the agency
should take to improve its approach to reviewing new and novel
technologies such as advanced reactors, accident-tolerant fuel,
and digital instrumentation and controls.
I think that's a good focus for the transformation team and
appreciate that the team is doing a lot of outreach to
stakeholders. I look forward to hearing their thoughts and
recommendations.
There are many other important efforts underway at NRC
including the implementation of post-Fukushima safety
enhancements, the power reactor decommissioning rulemaking, the
review of the first small modular reactor design application,
and oversight of construction at the Vogtle site.
We are happy to discuss these and any other issues of
interest. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Shimkus. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Commissioner Burns for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF STEPHEN BURNS
Mr. Burns. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus. I also appreciate
being here, Chairman Upton, Ranking Members Pallone and Tonko,
and distinguished members of the committee, appreciate the
opportunity to testify before you today.
I also appreciate Chairman Upton's kind words. I can tell
you, 40 years ago at this point in time, I had a big weight off
my shoulders because I knew in my last semester of law school I
had a job coming up in August. So that was saying----
I didn't actually expect I would stay in this field for 40
years, but it's been an interesting one. I've always enjoyed
not only the legal issues but working with technical staff and
others, both in our country and internationally.
I support the Chairman's testimony this morning and agree
that the funding we are requesting provides the resources
needed to accomplish our safety and security mission while
continuing to improve our efficiency and effectiveness as an
agency.
As a number of you have noted, the NRC has undertaken some
significant efforts over the last few years to improve that
efficiency and effectiveness.
Project Aim was a major part of those efforts. But
additional improvements have included implementation of
improvements to the NRC's rulemaking processes, to its budget
formulation, to its fee calculations and billing, and also to
agency staffing and workforce planning, although the vast
majority of the specific tasks under Project Aim were completed
and its spirit still endures and we are still working to
continue to be an effective agency.
It's important not to lose sight, however, of the
fundamental safety and security mission of the agency. We can
always strive to perform better in that mission and to better
risk inform our decisions, but that safety and security of the
public must always be the central focus.
Having spent 37 years of my professional career with the
NRC, I know there are times that when we have had to learn from
our experience--learn to do better and to improve our
performances irregular.
But on the whole, I can say that I think we hit the mark
the vast majority of the time in achieving a high standard of
performance, and if anything, over those nearly 40 years, I've
come to the conclusion it's never good to say, ``We've always
done it that way, let's do it more that way.''
There's always ways--and I can think of times across my
career where we've had to reset, think about how we are doing
things, think about how we can do them better, and I think
that's what we are doing under the Chairman's leadership.
Over the past year, we've continued to hold the industry
accountable through regulation and oversight, ensure the
effective implementation of the lessons learned from the
Fukushima Daiichi accident.
We focused on cybersecurity, worked effectively with our
partners and the States to ensure the safety of our radioactive
materials program and brought, and sought improved performance
by fuel cycle facilities.
At the same time, we've undertaken reviews of the first
small modular reactors submitted for design certification. We
are implementing strategies to be better prepared for the
review of advanced reactor, or Generation IV designs.
Credit belongs largely on a day-to-day basis to the work of
our dedicated staff in achieving these accomplishments, and I
appreciate their day-to-day focus on ensuring adequate
protection of the public.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you,
and I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
Mr. Shimkus. We thank you.
I will now begin with questions, and I will start with
recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
So the first one will go to Chairman Svinicki and
Commissioner Burns. First, let me thank you for your vote last
summer to take the next steps to determine what is necessary
for the resumption of the Yucca Mountain licensing process.
A few weeks ago, NRC staff had a public hearing to discuss
what steps are needed to reconstitute the licensing support
network, or LSN. The LSN is a database of licensing documents
associated with the Yucca Mountain license application.
The NRC requested $30 million in fiscal year 2018 to
continue its statutorily required review of the license
application and $47.7 million for 2019.
Will you please describe what Commission-level decisions
and guidance will be necessary when Congress appropriates
funding to resume the NRC's adjudication of the license?
Chairman.
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you, Chairman Shimkus.
In broad terms, if funding is provided, we need to begin to
rapidly put in place the infrastructure to resume the
adjudication that was suspended some years ago.
As you have mentioned, in preparation for that and under
the court's remand to expend previously appropriated nuclear
waste fund money--which we have at this point, I think, based
on the monthly report we sent to you yesterday, a little bit
under half a million left--we have looked at alternatives to
reconstituting the document library that would support the
evidentiary process in the licensing hearing, and also we are
undertaking a high-level real estate survey of facilities that
might be available in Nevada to support conducting the hearings
near to the facility, which is our policy.
Mr. Shimkus. Commissioner Burns.
Mr. Burns. I would agree with what the Chairman said. I
think the point she makes is essentially where we are at this
is that--at the point where the adjudicatory proceeding was
suspended several years ago and that's the point where we would
begin again, because the staff has done the safety evaluation
reviews and the environmental reviews that they need to do up
to date.
Mr. Shimkus. And let me go both to the same questionnaires.
What are we doing to preserve the workforce expertise that may
be necessary to adjudicate the license?
Chairman.
Ms. Svinicki. That adjudication having been suspended so
many years ago, candidly, the staff were, upon completion of
the safety evaluation report and environmental work, reassigned
to other duties, which was a way to keep them within the
agency's span should funding be provided.
However, over the course of time, we have had some
significant retirements, by my observation, of people that had
long history on and knowledge of the project.
The good news is that, with the safety evaluation report
being concluded, I have asked if an expert was assigned and was
fresh to the project, if they had the relevant scientific
expertise, could they just acquaint themselves with the record,
with the conclusions of their predecessors, and I am told that
some experts view that they could possibly become conversant in
as little as 6 months.
Mr. Shimkus. Great.
Commissioner Burns.
Mr. Burns. I would align myself with the Chairman's answer.
Mr. Shimkus. That's fine. Thank you.
Let me ask this question: Chairman, can you just state--
because we have new members of this subcommittee, new members
of Energy and Commerce--so what was the basic conclusion from
the safety and evaluation report, which you issued a couple
years ago?
Ms. Svinicki. The NRC's expert staff documented their
conclusion that there were no safety or environmental
impediments to the issuance of a license.
However, they did note--and this is a construction permit
license, because this is two-step licensing--they did note,
however, that the applicant, the Department of Energy, lacks
the water rights and they don't have clear ownership or title
to the land, which is a requirement of our regulations. But
those were the two impediments to issuing the license, and they
were not safety or environmental.
Mr. Shimkus. And those were some of the things we tried to
address in our legislation, just for some of my colleagues.
There's also a--correct me if I am wrong--there was also a
statement that, if constructed and the facility, long-term
geological repository, was in place, based upon current
information or current knowledge, that storage would be safe
for a million years. Wasn't that a conclusion of the safety and
evaluation report?
Ms. Svinicki. That was the conclusion of the expert staff.
Mr. Shimkus. Anyone disagree with that--the rest of the
panel?
Thank you.
With that, I think I will just yield back my time and
recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and again, thank you to
our witnesses for being here.
The mission of the agency is very critical. So it is
important that we understand your resource requirements.
Some Members may believe that the Commission has too heavy
of a hand, that burdensome regulations on the industry are
hurting its competitiveness.
So to our Chair Svinicki, can you give us a sense of the
types of major new rules the Commission has approved in recent
years?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, to take ``recent`` fairly broadly,
post-9/11 there was a suite of new security requirements that
were imposed and after Fukushima, although the regulations were
not significantly modified, new measures were required for what
we call severe low probability hazards, very severe earthquakes
and floods and other things that were additional protections
that were mandated at nuclear power plants.
Also in response to the cybersecurity threat against the
United States in recent years, the NRC has instituted new
cybersecurity regulations. So those are the major areas that
come to mind in the last 10 years.
Mr. Tonko. And as it relates to licensees, have there been
many major rules for new requirements on those licensees?
Ms. Svinicki. The areas I described did involve new rules.
You know, major, minor--I would say that the post-9/11, that
was a major impact in new requirements.
Fukushima I would not describe as being a major impact, and
the cybersecurity regulations are sincerely new regulations.
Mr. Tonko. Commission Baran, what's your sense? Is the
Commission imposing many new and burdensome requirements on
industry?
Mr. Baran. Well, I can give you a shorter-term perspective.
Commissioner Burns and I have been on the Commission now about
3\1/2\ years.
In that time, I can think of only three final rules that
went into effect that involve any kind of new regulatory
requirements.
Only one of those three rules relates to power reactors.
That was a rule that involved a requirement for a licensee of a
power reactor to let us know--notify us in the event of a cyber
event. That was a low-cost rule, and one that I think is pretty
clearly needed.
The other two didn't involve reactors at all. One had to do
with medical uses, and was something that, by and large, the
medical community was very interested in having done, and then
the final one affected only a handful of materials licensees in
the Caribbean. It had to do with meeting treaty requirements.
So since late 2014, three rules--that's it. I would
actually argue there are a couple of rules we should finalize
that we haven't yet.
One relates to post-Fukushima safety enhancements. It's the
rule on mitigating strategies that's been before the Commission
for a while. That's a rule that's really the culmination of
years of work to enhance safety after Fukushima.
There's another rule that would assist in better preparing
the agency for accident-tolerant fuel applications by having
technology-neutral performance-based standards in place as
opposed to the standards we have now, which are actually
technology-specific.
We have particular technologies that are established into
regulations. If you want to do something new and innovative,
you're looking at an exemption to do that.
So it's been very limited over the last 3\1/2\ years, and I
think there are actually a couple we should do.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And it seems to me that Project Aim
has achieved its goals. I fully understand the need for the
Commission to right size but, as I mentioned earlier, I am
concerned about the consequences of continuing staffing
reductions at this rate moving forward.
Could anyone explain the potential impacts of further
significant FTE reductions?
Ms. Svinicki. I would just respond, Mr. Tonko, that right
now the budget we've submitted for FY '19 we are confident does
not have or cause a diminishment of our ability to carry out
our safety mission.
In my time on the Commission, we were once at a peak of
slightly over 4,000 employees. Onboard strength--the number
reported to me yesterday was just a few over 3,000.
So we have come down quite a bit since the days of the
nuclear renaissance, and I think the one thing that we are
looking at is high fidelity in terms of our workforce planning.
This is something we pay a lot of attention to, to make
sure that as we have attrition we are not losing the core
competencies that we need.
We are also very focused on training and development of
staff so that they can fulfill future needs as staff retire.
Mr. Tonko. Right, and I appreciate that. That still seems
like a huge cut.
I heard earlier, as Chair Shimkus talked about that
expertise for Yucca Mountain, I know the Commission has an
aging workforce and, similar to hiring the next generation of
NRC staff, we are seeing new technologies including advanced
reactors being developed and an increasing need for
cybersecurity.
So within those disciplines we have, you know, a concern
also. I am guessing these changes require new expertise among
the Commission staff. If hiring freezes continue and the next
generation of Commission staff cannot be recruited, what is the
potential loss of institutional knowledge?
Ms. Svinicki. We do not have--although we have strict
hiring controls in place, we do not have a hiring freeze in
place. What we do is we look very closely at the core
competencies of retiring staff and work to make sure we either
have redundancy and/or are training people for the future. So
we do monitor that closely.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
Chair now recognizes the chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Walden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome our
panel today. I was upstairs, and we got an opioids
investigative hearing going on. So I kind of have to bounce
back and forth, as do some of my colleagues.
There's enormous potential with the development of small-
scale modular reactors including from my home State of Oregon
in NuScale, and I know NRC staff has met a significant
milestone earlier this year when they determined that SMR
design would not be required to meet certain offsite power
requirements, which avoided unnecessary and unneeded regulatory
planning.
So Chairman Svinicki, will you please provide an update on
the status of NRC's review of the SMR design application, and
to your knowledge is NRC staff on track to meet its targeted
42-month review window, including meeting the various
milestones within the overall review period?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you, Chairman Walden.
As you note, the NuScale design was docketed for review,
and although we are in early days and early months of that
review, the staff is proceeding on schedule with what we call
interim milestones of the review.
I've also had an opportunity to engage the applicant,
NuScale. They provided positive feedback that the NRC staff is
proactive on the other item you mentioned, which is the
resolution of the unique and novel elements of this design and
resolving anything that arises in terms of aligning our
regulatory framework and regulations with the new and enhanced
features of this design. So my observation is that the review
is proceeding according to schedule so far.
Mr. Walden. And are there outstanding policy issues that
must be addressed to successfully complete this licensing
process, that you're aware of?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, but I--so there are policy issues being
resolved regarding both NuScale and small modular reactors,
broadly.
But those have high visibility within the agency. I would
assess that the NRC staff has scoped the universe of those
issues and there are policy resolution plans for each of them.
Mr. Walden. All right. And what is the NRC's forecasted
total cost to complete the NuScale design review, and are you
aware if NRC is currently performing with respect to the
forecasted budget?
Ms. Svinicki. My previous answer had to do more with the
schedule. I would need to take that question for the record. I
am not sure of what our estimates are as far as cost or man-
hours expended.
Mr. Walden. Recently, the NRC staff implemented a new
procedure to manage what are known as requests for additional
information, or RAIs.
Are you aware if NRC staff applied this new RAI process to
NuScale's SMR application? If so, can you speak to the number
of RAIs relative to any comparable licensing action?
Ms. Svinicki. The new discipline around requests for
additional information has been applied to the NuScale review
and has been applied broadly throughout the agency.
A brief description would be that, prior to requesting
additional information from an applicant, the NRC expert must
identify the safety or environmental conclusion that is
supported by that data, and what that does is it ties the
request to the agency's underlying findings that we need to
make.
NRC managers report that that discipline has really
improved the efficiency and effectiveness of the request for
additional information process and it is in place for NuScale,
although I don't have a specific report on how it's affected
the numbers of requests.
Mr. Walden. Yes?
Mr. Baran. Mr. Chairman, I would just add I had a meeting
last week with NuScale, and this issue came up and what they
reported to me was that they had kind of going into this
process an estimate of how many of these requests for
additional information they would likely have. But the numbers
have been lower than what they anticipated. So it's going well
now.
Mr. Walden. Oh. All right. Very good. Very good.
I had the opportunity to go to Idaho Falls with Chairman
Mike Simpson and tour the INL lab there, too, and I know some
of this may get built out there eventually. But the lab is
doing amazing work in space nuclear fuel and their other
missions. I was very, very impressed.
Chairman, one other question. It's more rhetorical than
anything else, but not hard to answer. You have served on the
Commission with a full complement of five Commissioners as well
as four, and now three.
While the current setup allows the NRC to fulfill its
mission, would you agree that a full slate of five
Commissioners as established in law allows for a more robust
organization and diverse viewpoint and decision making?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, and may I add my full-throated support
for my optimism and hope that the Senate will act on the three
qualified nominees, including my colleague for reappointment. I
hope that that happens before June 30th.
Mr. Walden. That would be a hint-hint from this body to the
other that we'd like to see these Commissions all fully--I will
call it staffed, but fully filled with very competent people,
and we've dealt with this out of this committee with other
Commissions that are still waiting for nominees upstairs.
In fact, the DEA, it's an acting administrator. We don't
even have anybody nominated to be the administrator of the Drug
Enforcement Administration. And so it's something that I think
we share--that robust, full-fledged Commissions are good
things.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership
on these nuclear issues and other energy environment issues,
and I would yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
the chairman and ranking member for holding today's hearing on
the NRC budget.
The NRC does important work, and it's essential we have a
body adequately funded for their mission. While the budget is
the focus of today's hearing, there's a few other policy I
would like to focus on as well.
It's been 33 years since Congress passed a nuclear waste
policy act, and we still haven't a permanent or interim storage
facility, cheating ratepayers out of billions of dollars in
collecting fees and leaving utilities holding the bag for
thousands of gallons of nuclear waste.
This Congress needs to pass--enact legislation authorizing
the creation of more than one interim storage facility while we
work with States and agencies toward opening a permanent
geological repository.
My questions--Chairman Svinicki and Commissioners, thank
you for being here today. Approximately 90 percent of your
budget comes from annual fees assessed to the NRC licenses. Is
that correct?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Green. As some of the older nuclear sites continue to
shut down, do you expect a strain on the Commission's budget
for the loss of revenues from these fees?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes. As the mathematics work, as the number
of operating reactors declines, the fixed costs of the
regulatory program are spread amongst fewer licensees.
Therefore, it does have an effect of increasing the burden on
each remaining operating reactor.
At some point, mathematically that reaches a point that it
would be very difficult to support.
Mr. Green. I know the Chair and the Commissioners are in a
different issue, but--or concern. Do you support opening of an
interim storage facility?
Ms. Svinicki. Our Commission, because we are the safety and
security regulator, would be policy neutral on whether or not
the Nation should move forward with an interim storage
facility.
We would be the independent arbiters of the safety of that
facility through issuance of a license.
Mr. Green. OK. With the Yucca Mountain permanent storage
issue being what it is, what would be the benefit of opening an
interim storage?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, again, not as a policy view of our
Commission but as a practical matter, it would take sites that
have permanently shut down and other locations that are storing
a lot of spent nuclear fuel, and it would move it into one safe
and secure location.
But that's not a policy view of our Commission. It's simply
an observation.
Mr. Green. Do you believe the private industry could be
capable of safely and responsibly operating an interim storage
facility under supervision?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, we will reach that determination if
either of the two contemplated storage locations should move
forward with the licensing again.
The Holtec site in New Mexico is under our review right
now, and the Waste Control Specialists location in Texas has
been suspended at the applicant's request. However, there is
some signal that that may move forward under new ownership.
Mr. Green. Currently, those two applications you mentioned
for consolidated member storage facilities have been submitted.
I have to admit both of those storage facilities
geographically are fairly close to each other--I think maybe
even share the same strata in west Texas and southern New
Mexico.
NRC--one is in Andrews County and one is in Lee County in
New Mexico. Where are these applications currently at process?
I know you said the one in Texas temporarily suspended,
although there's been a huge amount of investment, I think, in
both of them.
Ms. Svinicki. Yes. The Holtec facility in New Mexico has
been submitted. We have docketed that application, which means
that we've assessed that it is complete for purposes of review.
So we've begun the review of that application.
We were at the stage of reviewing the WCS Texas location.
However, the applicant asked us to suspend. There is an
acquisition of that company now ongoing. The new owners have
indicated that they will be giving us some communication in the
near future about the potential resumption of that.
We don't know if that would be asking us to resume what we
had in house or if they're going to modify or somehow have a
revised approach.
Mr. Green. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I have no other questions, but I know you and
I and a number of people share the frustration that decisions
were made in the '80s that have been put off now until a new
century and, hopefully, this Congress can actually move that
ball down the road, so to speak, or either that, change the
field. But Congress needs to do something, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
Mr. Shimkus. Chairman thanks the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes Chairman Upton from Michigan for 5
minutes.
Mr. Upton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would start off
by saying in Friday's New York Times on the front page there's
a story that's headlined ``U.S. Says Hacks Left Russia Able to
Shut Utilities.''
The first sentence of that story reads, ``The Trump
administration accused Russia on Thursday of engineering a
series of cyberattacks that targeted American and nuclear power
plants and water and electric systems, and could have sabotaged
or shut power plants off at will.''
So my question is, What can you tell us in a nonclassified
answer that relates to the story specifically? Can you tell us
if they were penetrated in a safety-significant consequence?
I would note that the story continues to say that Russian
hackers had not leapt from the company's business networks into
the nuclear plant controls. Is that still accurate? Can you
give us that assurance?
And what role does the NRC have with these--in hearing
about these situations? What technical expertise concerning
power reactors is relevant that you might be able to share with
us this morning?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you, Chairman Upton, and respecting the
open setting, I would state that the NRC's role is that we are
fully integrated with the FBI, the Justice Department, and the
other agencies that made the announcement last week.
These were matters known to us prior to them being publicly
released on Friday. Our role is not the security of the
electricity grid as a whole. We leave that to our colleagues at
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
In terms of the penetrations, of course, as the committee
is well aware through its work on cybersecurity, the
cyberattacks against the United States are persistent and
serious, and the U.S. Government Interagency, including the
U.S. NRC, are involved in constant monitoring of the
sophistication of these attacks--of the success, but even the
attempts. There's a lot of monitoring of the unsuccessful
attempts.
It is true that corporate networks at U.S. nuclear
utilities were probed, as was described in the announcements.
However, safety systems at operating nuclear power plants were
not penetrated.
This is principally due to the fact that these systems are
isolated from the corporate systems, and that provides a
measure of, if you will, air gapping of that, and you'd have to
leap over that, which is technologically, at least to date, not
possible to do.
Mr. Upton. Thank you.
The NRC sends the Senate Environment and Public Works
Committee a monthly status on NRC's licensing activities,
staffing, and related information. Would you be able to send
that report to us as well?
Ms. Svinicki. I see no reason why----
Mr. Upton. Yes. That's an easy one.
Ms. Svinicki [continuing]. We would not provide that. I am
surprised that we are not. But yes.
Mr. Upton. And in January, NRC's executive director of
operations initiated a transformation effort with a focus on
identifying transformative changes to NRC's regulatory
framework, culture, and infrastructure.
And, as you know, Chairmen Walden, Shimkus, and I wrote
recently to express our interest in this initiative, and we
appreciated your timely response to the letter, which was
received yesterday. This NRC effort appears centered on new and
novel technologies, including in the areas of digital
instrumentation and controls, accident-tolerant fuel, advanced
reactors, big data, et cetera.
Yet, the benefits of these new technologies require a
change in how NRC executes its mission and ultimately regulates
the nuclear industry.
I understand that the NRC staff will be providing
recommendations and strategies for implementation to the
Commission in May.
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, although I am aware that they've
received in excess of, I think, 500 or 600 proposed
transformation initiatives.
So if the staff were to need additional time to synthesize
and prepare a set of recommendations for the Commission, just
for myself I would be supportive of that. I think they've been
kind of deluged with good ideas.
Mr. Upton. Thank you. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
committee, Congressman Pallone from New Jersey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My questions are of Mr. Baran. In her written testimony,
the Chairman notes that, while the fiscal year 2019 budget
request represents a proposed increase in funding for the
Commission overall, most of that increase would go towards
activities related to the Yucca Mountain project and reviewing
advanced nuclear technologies.
While I am not looking to quarrel with the increased focus
on these articular programs per se, I am concerned about what
those choices mean for other activities that I believe must be
priorities for the Commission.
So Commissioner Baran, I understand that NRC recovers the
majority of its budget through fees, and I have some questions
about the proposed fees and what it means for staffing at the
NRC.
First, I am concerned by the sharp drop in full-time
employees at the Commission and what this means for safety. Do
you believe that the Commission has the amount of employees it
needs to do its job well, not just adequately?
Mr. Baran. I think most of the cost-cutting measures we've
implemented to date over the last few years make sense.
But I would echo Mr. Tonko's point. I don't think any
further steep reductions would be sustainable. Going forward, I
would like to see our funding and FTE levels stabilize.
I think we need to be careful that we are not so focused on
cutting costs that we do erode the technical capabilities of
the agency or our inspection activities.
Mr. Pallone. All right.
And a second question is, Is the current 90 percent fee
structure putting undue pressure on the Commission's budget
because of the shrinking number of nuclear plants and the
economic pressure the industry is facing due to competition?
Mr. Baran. Well, as Chairman Svinicki noted earlier, you
know, in theory, if you have fewer operating plants, that that
increases the amount each remaining operating plant would have
to cover.
Mr. Pallone. And she actually said that at some point it
would be unsustainable.
Mr. Baran. Yes. We haven't gotten to that point yet and, in
large part because of Project Aim, we have seen our costs come
down over the last few years. So fees have not gone up over the
last few years for power plants. They've gone down, actually.
But at an extreme, if there were a large number of plants
that shut down, you could have an effect there where it would
be a challenge.
Mr. Pallone. But you're saying, as she did, that that's,
you know, something that could happen but you don't see it
happening in the immediate future?
Mr. Baran. It has not happened to date, and I don't see it
as something that, you know, we are worried about right now.
Mr. Pallone. All right. Thanks so much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman emeritus, Joe Barton
from Texas.
Mr. Barton. Well, thank you. More importantly, I am the
current vice chairman, such as that is.
Mr. Shimkus. I stand corrected.
Mr. Barton. Well, I will take both. I think they're both
complimentary.
My question is a basic question. I am looking at the
briefing book, and it says that you get $804 million in fees.
What portion of that is supposedly going into the high-level
waste fund to help dispose of high-level nuclear waste?
Ms. Svinicki. None of that amount. Again, the Yucca
Mountain-related activities are all funded from the
appropriations from the nuclear waste fund, and we have to
execute and keep that money in budgetary purposes. It is
executed and outlaid separately from the fee collection.
Mr. Barton. So the $804 million are operating fees from the
existing reactors. Is that correct?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes. Those are invoiced directly from the NRC
to the utilities, and then we receive the payments from them.
Mr. Barton. And the fee that the utilities pay to help
dispose of high-level waste, if we were ever to license one
that's a separate fund and a separate amount of money in
addition to these other fees?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes. It was separately enacted in the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act of 1982. The Department of Energy established
one mil, which is a thousandth of a cent, I think, for per
kilowatt hour charge that ratepayers paid in their utility
bills, and I think that that was then collected by utilities
provided to the U.S. Treasury.
Mr. Barton. And how much of that, Madam Chairwoman, has
been collected over the history of its collection? Do you know?
Ms. Svinicki. Many tens of billions. But I would have to
respond with a precise figure. Of course, the fee is in
suspension now because the U.S. utilities went to court and
said, in the absence of progress on the disposal site, they
asked for relief, and the collection of that fee has been
suspended for some years now.
Mr. Barton. So it's accrued as a contingent liability, but
it's not actually been collected from the utilities. Is that
right?
Ms. Svinicki. You know, I am not sure of the court's
treatment of that in their decision. I know that they offered
the relief of the suspension of the collection of the fee.
I don't know if the liability continues to accrue and upon
resumption of activity on Yucca Mountain if that would be then
reimposed on the utilities. I am not sure.
Mr. Barton. Now, you're aware that we passed a bill that's
languishing, I believe, in the Senate that would change the law
and it would allow for licensing of a high-level waste
permanent repository, but also it would allow temporary storage
to also go forward?
Mr. Shimkus. If the gentleman would sustain, it's
languishing in leadership, not the Senate.
Mr. Barton. Oh, I thought we had passed it in the House.
Mr. Shimkus. Not on the floor.
Mr. Barton. I stand corrected. I can't blame that on the
Senate, then.
Mr. Shimkus. You can blame it on leadership.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Barton. I will.
But Subcommittee Chairman Shimkus has been laboring, you
know, very heroically to get some money appropriated so we
could actually begin the review and hopefully the license of a
permanent waste repository.
I believe that's about $130 million. John, is that right?
Mr. Shimkus. I am sorry?
Mr. Barton. How much are we asking for to actually let
high-level waste be reviewed: $150 million, $130 million?
Mr. Shimkus. Well, in the fiscal year '18 it was $120
million to DOE and $30 million to NRC, and then in fiscal year
2019 it's $47.7 million for the NRC and another $120 million
for DOE, I believe.
Mr. Barton. It's fun to ask questions of the subcommittee
while you guys are out there. Shows what a good subcommittee we
have.
In any event, my question to you, Madam Chairwoman: Does
the NRC support Chairman Shimkus in his effort to actually get
some real money appropriated so we can proceed with the review
of a high-level waste permanent repository?
Ms. Svinicki. The NRC has requested funding in our budget
for fiscal years 2018 and 2019 to resume these activities.
Mr. Barton. So that's a yes.
Ms. Svinicki. But as an independent safety regulator, we
have not taken a policy position on the pending legislation.
Mr. Barton. Well, I take that as a yes.
I am going to yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes his gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Doyle, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Doyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you and
the ranking members of the committee for holding this hearing
today.
As many on this committee know, I am a strong supporter of
nuclear energy. I am greatly concerned by the dramatic increase
in plant retirements or announced retirements in the last few
years.
Prior to three plants retiring in 2013, no reactors had
retired since 1998. We then faced another round of retirements
and are now staring down eight more announced retirements
starting in October 2018 and through the summer of 2025.
These retirements represent a loss of reliable and
affordable electricity and family-supporting jobs, and it's not
like the demand for thousands and thousands of megawatts these
plants provide disappears.
As the Energy Information Administration explains, the vast
majority of this lost generation has been replaced with either
coal or natural gas, and it seems very likely that that trend
will continue into the future.
As I said at our nuclear infrastructure hearing in
February, it's imperative that we maintain or even bolster our
nuclear fleet here to adequately address climate change, and I
hope our committee pursues greater action on the issue in the
future.
Madam Chairman, let me ask you, and I want to follow up on
one of the responses that you provided on an important question
from Representative Green regarding the NRC's fee structure.
There are bipartisan legislative proposals in both the
House and Senate that provide a backstop for fees that NRC
could collect from each plant.
I would think that with increased appropriations, if
necessary, this would provide greater certainty to your agency
as well.
Otherwise, I fear the NRC may face the situation where the
dramatic drop in plants from which you can collect fees
jeopardizes your agency's ability to generate a sufficient
operating budget without being overly draconian.
I think many could see this as becoming a downward spiral.
Chairman, let me ask you: Do you think our committee should
pursue or consider changing the NRC's fee structure to make it
more sustainable both for the NRC and the individual plants?
Ms. Svinicki. Our Commission hasn't established a position
on this. But speaking as a 10-year member of the Commission and
answering for myself, I would note that the potential wave of
retirements is noticeable and appreciable, and although I don't
know at what point the number of operating reactors has
diminished so far that the 90 percent fee recovery is not
sustainable, I think that the predicted number of potential
shutdowns does make this a timely issue for the Commission and
the Congress to engage on a dialogue on this matter.
Again, the 90 percent recovery is a provision of law. So,
if it is something that looks like it is having an unintended
consequence or an unsupportable effect, it would be, in my
view, appropriate for the Commission and your committee to
examine the question.
Mr. Doyle. OK. Thank you.
Let me ask you some efficiency questions, too. Your
testimony highlighted the NRC's recent announcement
establishing of a transformation team that would, in your
words, seek to identify potential transformative changes to the
NRC's regulatory framework, culture, and infrastructure.
Do you have a time line as to when we could expect those
proposals, and what type of changes can we anticipate?
Ms. Svinicki. Transformation is meant to encompass not just
a small, easily implementable change, which we are terming more
an innovation than a transformation.
The team that's been chartered to look at the proposals I
believe has in excess of 500 or 600 proposals now pending.
Those come from both inside the agency, but they've also
engaged broadly on transformative and innovative organizations.
So the Commission is scheduled to receive a set of
recommendations in May. But I think that the amount of
proposals that have been generated may make the staff want to
have a little more time to evaluate those, and then we would
take the proposals and recommendations they make to us out of
that process and consider those after we receive them in May.
But, again, I am trying maybe to signal a little bit of
opening for relief with the staff. I think it would be
difficult for them to look at 500 or 600 ideas in the amount of
time that they have.
Mr. Doyle. Yes, I can appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I am going to yield back my time.
Mr. Shimkus. Would the gentleman yield his last 26 seconds?
Mr. Doyle. Yes, sure.
Mr. Shimkus. When the payments are made to utilities based
upon the nonperformance of the Government, where does that
money come from? Do we know?
Ms. Svinicki. This is perilous, because this is my memory
of the court's decision. I thought they suspended the
collection from the ratepayers----
Mr. Shimkus. They did.
Ms. Svinicki [continuing]. So that the utilities are not
receiving any revenues, because their request of the court was
to be allowed to suspend the recovery of it from consumers.
Mr. Shimkus. Anyone else can answer that.
Mr. Baran. You're talking about the litigation piece?
Ms. Svinicki. Oh. Oh.
Mr. Shimkus. Right.
Mr. Baran. That comes from the judgment fund.
Mr. Shimkus. And the judgment fund----
Mr. Baran. Is taxpayer funds.
Mr. Shimkus. OK. Thank you. With that, I thank my
colleague.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Olson,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Olson. I thank the Chair, and welcome to our three
witnesses.
This first question is for you, Chairman Svinicki, and you,
Commissioner Burns.
Last August, the NRC issued a press release announcing it
was going to conduct a review of, quote, ``past administrative
regulations,'' unquote, to find any that are outdated or
duplicative.
That was supposed to start in the fall of 2017. However, I
haven't heard anything about that since then. So my question
is, Will either of you talk about, first, why reviewing these
regulations is important for an industry that is struggling,
and number two, is there an update on time we can inspect this
report and move forward?
Chairman, you first, ma'am.
Ms. Svinicki. I will begin. Thank you.
I think that the voting has moved along on that proposal,
and I believe that mine may be the lagging vote to complete the
Commission's deliberation on the matter.
It is still under review by the Commission in terms of the
Federal Register notice and other underlying things that would
kick off that review. So it is still contemplated, and I
suspect it would move forward in the coming months.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Burns, do you want to add something to that,
too?
Mr. Burns. Yes. What I would add, one of the things that--
this was an issue that came to my attention when I was a
Chairman, and how it came up is, you know, drop-in visits from
utilities, interactions I had at conferences and things like
that, and it's--the question of there may well be in terms of
some of the administrative reporting requirements going of the
structure of them, for example, that might be more efficient,
and I think that's what we are intending to look at.
The example would be--and I can't pull, unfortunately, out
of my head right now maybe a good example--but the idea was we
are asking particular reporting requirements in an age--like,
when I began at the agency, we didn't work through the
internet.
We worked through--fax machines was the technology of the,
you know, of the day. So some of those types of things--how you
can report--you know, what you need to report.
It's not that reporting is bad or doesn't need to be done
but can you do it more efficiently, you know, through
electronic communication--are there duplications and things
like that? That's the type of thing I think I would like to get
at.
Mr. Olson. Thank you.
The final question is for all three of you. There have been
some situations where disagreements between headquarters and
the NRC region have resulted in NRC being unable to make timely
decisions to provide necessary certainty to licensees.
In one case, a licensee chose to shut down the reactor
because headquarters in the regions were at an impasse. What's
the process for resolving these disagreements between
headquarters and the regions to ensure that timely decisions
are made and the licensees are provided regulatory certainty?
Ms. Svinicki. The NRC is obligated to provide clarity and
give timely decisions. We are also obligated to implement a
cohesive and coherent program across the United States so that
a regulatory outcome in one region would be the same outcome in
another region.
Like any large organization, this requires very effective
and continuous communications between the agency's very senior
executives, the Commission, and a faithful execution of our
regulatory framework across the country.
Are we perfect? No, although I don't recognize the specific
incident you allude to.
This is something that both our inspector general and the
Government Accountability Office occasionally audit for us, and
we do look at the consistency of the findings and regulatory
outcomes across the country.
But there are a lot of inspectors and a lot of individuals
in the loop. Again, the basic process is escalation through
management, through executives and the agency, and then coming
to one unified decision.
Mr. Olson. Mr. Baran, very quickly, I have 48 seconds left
to add something to the Chairwoman's comments.
Mr. Baran. No, I think she covered it very well.
Mr. Burns. I agree.
Mr. Olson. OK. And one final point of observation.
Chairwoman, congratulations. Your Michigan beat my
University of Houston Cougars in the NCAA finals--going to the
Final Four. But they'll play another Texas team, and pretty
quick you will hear from Mr. Flores about his Aggies. So I
yield back.
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you. I wondered if I might hear
something while Chairman Upton was in the room but----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shimkus. Oh, I hope the gentleman's yielding back his
time.
Mr. Olson. I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California I
would like to personally thank for all her work on this issue,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Matsui. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
As I outlined earlier, I am extremely supportive of efforts
to transfer our country's civilian-spent nuclear fuel to a
consolidated storage facility. Communities across the country,
including those near the former Rancho Seco Nuclear Generating
Station in Sacramento County, have been waiting decades for a
spent fuel storage solution.
And I have to also thank Chairman Shimkus' willingness to
work together on these spent fuel issues. We were able to make
real progress as his Nuclear Waste Policy Amendments Act moved
through this committee, and I continue to support our
compromise that was included in the bill.
Chairwoman Svinicki--is that right?--can you please tell us
more about the consolidated interim storage facility licensing
process generally? What do you look for in an application? How
is it evaluated?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you for that question, Representative
Matsui.
As you noted in your earlier remarks, the agency--the NRC--
has one current and one suspended review in front of us for the
development of consolidated interim storage facilities.
There is a facility contemplated in New Mexico, and the
contractor is Holtec. We have docketed that application for
review, and the review is ongoing.
In general, it's our estimate that it would take
approximately 3 years to conduct this type of review. We have
some experience. In the 1990s, there was a similar proposal of
private fuel storage in Utah.
However, we issued the license as an agency, but the
facility was never developed. But, again, to return to the two
active contemplated facilities, the first is the Holtec
facility in New Mexico.
The other is in Texas and it is Waste Control Specialists.
That review was suspended at request of waste control
specialists. Their company is undergoing a merger or
acquisition.
I am not--so it may be an acquisition. The new owner,
although that process is ongoing, has indicated that they will
be making a communication to the NRC regarding that suspended
review.
We don't know exactly what form that would take. They, of
course, have the option of modifying or withdrawing that and
submitting something different.
So, if they were to just ask us to reactivate the review
that is suspended, that is something that could be more readily
done.
If they want to modify or significantly alter the proposal,
then we would just have to wait to see what our estimate of the
time to review it would be.
Ms. Matsui. OK. If you take the first step there, what are
your next steps in the licensing process if you restart this?
Ms. Svinicki. The general process involves both a
comprehensive safety review, and a separate team of
environmental experts will conduct a review of any
environmental impacts of the facility or the proposed action.
Those proceed in parallel tracks and so there is some
synergy and expertise between those two teams, and we develop a
safety evaluation report and then an environmental review and
those are the basic products that come out of our review.
We are looking for no negative impacts on public health and
safety and in accordance with storage and transportation
regulations that we have that are very well established.
Ms. Matsui. Can you outline some of the differences between
the facilities envisioned by the two applications?
Ms. Svinicki. I think, in general, they are very similar,
much more similar than they are different, and there may be
some differences in the way that they've structured how they
intend to operate or the fuel that they would take. But I would
need to respond with those details, for the record.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Certainly.
And as I said earlier, I am pleased to see that you
requested adequate funding to be able to consider both the WCS
and the Holtec license request in fiscal year 2019.
It's critical that we move forward with both licensing
process at the same time in order to maximize our chances of
really reaching a viable interim storage solution that reduces
the burden on taxpayers.
What constraints on licensing are you facing at your
current funding level?
Ms. Svinicki. You're correct that we have requested funding
in fiscal year 2019 for two reviews. I would also note that,
although we do not have an enacted level for fiscal year 2018,
yet we do have funding in there for two, as well.
Even though the one is suspended, we provided a budget
flexibility so that, if it were resumed, we would be able to
begin that in the current fiscal year.
So we are not aware that we have any shortfalls in those
requested amounts.
Ms. Matsui. OK. Fine, and thank you very much, and I
appreciate--I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentlelady yields back her time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Latta, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Latta. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thanks to our Commissioners for being with us today.
The NRC's fiscal year 2019 budget request includes about
$10 million to develop the regulatory framework for advanced
nuclear technologies.
While the NRC is required to recover about 90 percent of
its budget from fees charged to licensees, the Commission is
allowed to request certain funding to be appropriated by
Congress outside of the fee base.
Though I would note the Advanced Nuclear Technology
Development Act, which I sponsored and was unanimously passed
by the House in January of this year, provides--or last year,
excuse me--provides for this funding to be exempt from the fee
recovery base.
Similar to that provision, in my legislation, NRC's budget
request for this funding in previous years provided for a
direct congressional appropriation.
Would any of you like to address why the source of this
funding from off the fee base that's subject to fee recovery
has changed from the previous years?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you for that question, and I realize
that Congress has indicated a willingness to provide direct
appropriated funds instead of recovering this from the fee
base.
I would observe, perhaps commensurate with the continued
work that we are doing on advanced reactors, it is our
projection that in fiscal year 2019 we may have actual
submittals of designs for review.
And so some of the thinking about having it be in the fee
base is that we do try to allocate and recover costs from a
company if the costs are directly attributable to that company.
So in fiscal year 2019 is the earliest date at which we
think we may have a company come in with an actual design
submittals.
Mr. Latta. OK. Just to clarify--just to make sure of that--
so that you would support my legislation which would amend the
underlying statute to clarify the source of the funding to
develop a regulatory framework for that advanced nuclear
technology?
Ms. Svinicki. Our Commission has no policy view, but as a
member of the Commission, not as Chairman, I would indicate
that the funding that is provided off fee base has been, I
think, advantageous because developers will come in and engage
the NRC if they know that they're not going to receive an
invoice every time they want to come in and learn more about
the regulatory framework or perhaps float a concept of a design
attribute that they're worried that we would never license.
And so Congress' support of money off the fee base, I
think, is generating a regulatory efficiency because the
technology developers are more likely to come in and get early
regulatory engagement, and I think it's also helping us that,
when we get a design, we'll know a lot more about it.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Use of the digital instrumentation and control, or digital
I&C technology, is of growing importance for the current
nuclear fleet and the next generation of reactors.
This technology can enhance safety, reliability, and
efficiency while replacing obsolete analog components. Many
licensees are not pursuing modifications that implement digital
technology due to uncertain regulatory approaches and
associated challenges.
For new plants, the uncertainty risks the promise of
advanced digital I&C systems will not be accomplished.
To address these issues, industry has formed a digital I&C
working group to engage industry experts with the NRC staff to
resolve high-priority technical issues, improve the regulatory
infrastructure, and facilitate efficient implementation of DI&C
projects.
Madam Chairman, in reality, as a number of our nuclear
reactor facilities have passed 4 years of operations, much of
the technology still being used in these facilities can be
dated back to World War II.
Do you believe that updating these systems and components
to digital technology is important to sustaining these
facilities?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes. The obsolescence issues in the supply
chain are very real, and it is not only important, I think it
will be essential for the NRC to develop a working framework
for the adoption of digital I&C technologies.
Mr. Latta. Thank you.
Commissioner Burns, do you believe there is an obligation
to acknowledge potential safety benefits with increased usage
of digital controls, and how do you view these benefits can be
represented in NRC's regulatory regime?
Mr. Burns. Yes, I would agree that the newer digital
controls have benefits. I've seen that from when I've gone to
power plants, in terms of areas where they have been able to
implement it.
What we have to do, which I think--what our Chairman was
alluding to is, we need to keep on our staff in terms of
working with the industry in terms of getting over some of the
humps, if you will, that become some barriers toward better
integration on some of these systems.
I think we are seeing it in the new technologies. It's been
a lot in terms of, as you noted, the retrofitting onto what
were originally analog systems and getting more digital systems
in there.
But it's something I am certainly in favor of us continuing
to work on.
Mr. Latta. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back the time.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the chairman, and I thank the
Commissioners for your work.
Last year, Secretary Perry issued a proposed rule that
power plants that have long-term fuel storage have a financial
advantage over those that don't. That was overturned by the
FERC.
Do you think that was a good idea, each one of you, given
the financial crunch that nuclear plants are facing? Starting
with the Chairman.
Ms. Svinicki. Our Commission was not involved in that, and
we are not economic regulators like our colleagues at the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
Candidly, even as a personal matter, this is outside my
realm of expertise.
Mr. McNerney. Secretary?
Mr. Baran. This is pretty far outside NRC's mission here.
We leave this to FERC.
Mr. Burns. Right.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, the next question was, Do you think
the traditional nuclear power plant is viable, moving into the
future, you know, in terms of economics? Do you think they're
going to be viable?
Ms. Svinicki. My understanding, again--and I don't have
access to any proprietary business information, I read the same
reporting as others do--but some of the units in the regions
where they operate are operating at kind of breathtaking losses
and are not economic.
Others operate in other markets in the country and have
other regulatory rate recovery mechanisms--that they are
profitable. So it appears to be a very geographic situation.
Mr. McNerney. OK. That's interesting.
Do you think the new technology is going to be more
economic than the older technology like the small modular
reactors? Any----
Ms. Svinicki. It's difficult to say by their design
attributes. They appear to preliminarily offer certain
efficiencies, but I think the competitiveness of this
technology in the market is dependent on natural gas prices and
other things into the future that I am not really even expert
on.
Mr. McNerney. All right. I will change the subject.
You know, local buy-in is critical, in my opinion, for a
nuclear waste repository.
How much chance is there for a local buy-in in Yucca
Mountain? Whoever wants to answer that.
Mr. Shimkus. The gentleman needs to define ``local.''
Mr. McNerney. Well, I would say the State of Nevada. Is
that State of Nevada going to tolerate moving forward with the
Yucca Mountain storage facility?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, again, we are the independent licensing
body that would make the ultimate determinations on issuance of
a license.
So the State of Nevada, many Nevada counties and also
California counties are parties to that licensing proceeding,
and we are the quasi-judicial body over that. So I think it's
perilous for us to opine on that.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, in my opinion, again, complete
transparency is absolutely necessary for a long-term storage
repository to be accepted.
What is the NRC doing to make sure that there's
transparency in these sorts of deliberations?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, I would note that the adjudicatory
proceeding has, gosh, I think maybe two dozen admitted
parties--that those proceedings are all conducted publicly.
There are over 300 specific challenges issued that will be
adjudicated if that is funded and that adjudication occurs.
So, again, that is a public licensing proceeding where all
of these matters in contention or challenged would be litigated
in a very public forum.
Mr. Baran. I would just add, if the adjudication resumes, I
think it's essential for NRC to hold the hearings in Nevada
close to where many interested stakeholders are located.
That's been NRC's longstanding policy, that if you have a
contested adjudication that it be held, you know, as close as
to the vicinity of the proposed facility.
There's, obviously, very high public interest in this
proceeding if it were to resume. So my view is it's very
important that those hearings be held in Nevada.
Mr. McNerney. Are there any other sites around the country
that are being considered, and if there are, are you reaching
out, you know, in advance to get local interest and buy-in?
Mr. Burns. No, because the law requires us to consider the
Yucca Mountain application. That was the consequence of the
1987 Amendments Act, which focuses on Yucca. So we are not
authorized to go look at other sites, at this point.
Mr. McNerney. But wasn't the Nevada site also held up--I
mean, if you're not allowed to do it by law elsewhere and
you're not allowed to do it in Nevada, what choices are there?
Mr. Burns. No, the Waste Policy Amendments Act 1987
directed the NRC and I think also DOE to focus on the Yucca
Mountain site.
So that's why the efforts that have gone on that eventually
led to an application in the mid-2000s focused on Yucca.
Mr. McNerney. I yield my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. They are correct. The gentleman yields back
his time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Kinzinger for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
all of you for being here. Thanks for being at our hearing.
You know, I think it's unbelievable that we are still
talking about Yucca Mountain years and years later, and
people's opposition to it is based on witch science, you know,
and concerns and it's the law and it's the right thing to do
and anyway--but my district is home to four nuclear power
plants, in Byron, Braidwood, Dresden, and LaSalle. It's the
most of any district in the country.
Meaning that the work you all do is vital not only to the
safety of these communities but also to my constituents who
work in these plants, pay their utility bills, and especially
in Illinois rely on nuclear power to power their homes and
businesses no matter the weather. Fifty percent of power is, in
fact, nuclear in Illinois.
H.R. 1320, which I sponsored with Representative Doyle,
includes language to control corporate overhead costs and keep
them in line with other Federal agencies.
I am concerned about a lack of transparency and
accountability in the corporate support budget proposal,
because these costs are passed along to ratepayers, including
my constituents, through charges that the NRC charges to the
NRC licensees.
Specifically, the fiscal year 2019 budget requests an
increase of $1.5 million for corporate support, even though
staff is decreasing by 108.
The justification states the increase is a result of salary
and benefit growth, increases for ITS at management,
operations, maintenance, and security of core IT systems, and
targeted investment and development and modernization efforts.
However, there's no details or support in the budget. To
the Chairman, can you explain in more detail why there's an
increase in corporate support costs?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you, Representative Kinzinger.
In general, you have described the areas that are causing
the increase, and if we have not provided a detail, perhaps we
can work with your staff after the hearing to provide some
fuller supplementing detail on this.
I would note that the cost of living--the percentage
increases that have been funded in general agencies have been
asked to find those within existing budgets.
Also, as our workforce gets smaller, it tends to be older
employees do stay with the agency and they received certain
higher levels of seniority.
Also, the benefits part of salary and benefits for every
Federal employee with increases in healthcare costs, there is
some escalation in that figure year to year due to rising
healthcare costs.
Also, the NRC does have, as part of Governmentwide IT
modernization, we have some unsupported platforms for various
agency IT systems.
I know we report to other committees of the House regarding
our overall IT modernization and also the securing of those
systems against cyber threats, and there are increasing costs
throughout the Government related to those matters.
I think in general those are the nature of the expenses
that caused the increase in the fiscal year 2019 budget.
Mr. Kinzinger. I see. I just think--you know, the important
point I want to make is, obviously, continue to take tangible
steps to maintain discipline on that, as you know.
It's Congress' responsibility to regularly review statutory
authority and, when appropriate, to make updates reflecting our
changing world.
For example, the outlook for global nuclear power is
fundamentally different from when Congress first allowed the
use of peaceful atomic energy in 1954 or established the NRC in
1974. Congress hasn't completed a comprehensive reauthorization
of the NRC in over 30 years.
To the Chairman, are there legacy provisions, including the
foreign ownership control or domination restrictions or the
required advisory committee or reactor safeguards, that warrant
revisiting by Congress?
Ms. Svinicki. As a general matter, it is useful to revisit
a statute, although I would note that I continue to be
impressed with the wisdom that is enshrined in the Atomic
Energy Act.
I think, for a statute as old as it is, there was a lot of
foresight on having, you know, technology, flexibility, and
things like that.
But there are the many intervening decades of experience in
the United State nuclear power program in general. The
technology is understood at a vastly deeper level now, and
there are also many, many operating reactor years and decades
worth of experience.
So I think that relooking at what the smart individuals in
the 1950s thought is probably a worthwhile endeavor.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
I think it's important to note, you know, I think the
United States is losing or has lost its edge in nuclear power
and we've given it to other countries, and that's a big problem
and something that I think we need to address wholeheartedly.
And lastly, to Commissioner Burns: Are there other areas
Congress should examine, given the state of nuclear energy
today, in your mind?
Mr. Burns. Going back to your question on the Atomic Energy
Act, I appreciate in your bill you noted a couple areas where I
thought were worth looking at, in terms of foreign ownership in
a mandatory hearing.
I agree with Chairman Svinicki. One of the, I think, the
beauties of the Atomic Energy Act is the flexibility that
allows the Commission to adapt over time.
So there's some of these that are legacy provisions--
mandatory hearing provisions, for example just because I was
doing some research earlier this year on it. It was really
actually a punishment of the Atomic Energy Commission for a
lack of transparency.
It actually imposed it both at the construction permit and
operating license level, and it was because the AEC wasn't
transparent about its licensing. I think we've come a long way
since 1957 and then 1962 on that.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, and I yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Shimkus. Gentleman yields back his time.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, and I thank the
Commissioners.
My concern that I want to address is decommissioning. In
Vermont, Vermont Yankee, located in southern Vermont right on
the Massachusetts and New Hampshire border, was one of the
first--I think the first merchant plant to be decommissioned.
So we are sort of at the tip of this spear addressing the
combination of issues between the industry that has to shut
that down and the local and State communities that want to have
a say in the process.
And over the course of the last couple of years, Senator
Sanders and Senator Leahy and I, on behalf of Vermonters, have
been raising some questions that we want included in
rulemaking:
One, the lack of State and local stakeholder involvement in
the decommissioning process is a concern.
Two, the questionable uses of the decommissioning trust
fund, such as for spent fuel management, is a recurring issue
at the Vernon plant.
Three, the reality that the use of safe stored
decommissioning procedure will effectively delay the cleanup in
the redevelopment of the nuclear site for decades is a big
issue for us. We'd like to put that place back into operation,
sooner rather than later.
And then four, the reduction of emergency planning
functions during periods when spent fuel remains are in spent
fuel pools. That's an ongoing concern.
That's an issue for us in Vermont. But as more and more
plants are going offline, that's going to be an issue for them,
as well.
And the questions that I wanted to start asking about were
on the rulemaking process, and in the initial phases of this it
appeared that the NRC in fact was paying attention to many of
those concerns that I just cited, but there's been a tug of war
in the process, and the industry concerns appear to me, and I
think to Senator Leahy and Senator Sanders, to be paramount.
They want flexibility on some of the safety issues, but
they really are resistant to the four issues that I mentioned.
So that's of real concern to us, and not just to us,
because this, as I mentioned, is going to be relevant for all
these other plants that are going to get decommissioned.
So I will start, Madam Chair, with you, if you would. Do
you believe that State and local stakeholder concerns should be
considered on equal footing with those of the industry and
believe that a final decommissioning rule that codifies
regulatory and safety exemptions that industry has requested
but don't address concerns over the use of the decommissioning
trust fund, the local input in the postshutdown rules, would be
problematic? We'd like both included.
Ms. Svinicki. Congressman, thank you for this question, and
you and the people you represent have been very, very active in
the rulemaking process.
The stage we are at right now is that the NRC staff has
developed a regulatory basis, and they will begin the process
of developing a proposed rule to come before our Commission.
My approach as a member of the Commission is to look at the
totality of the public comment record, and I don't look at who
sent the comment.
I look at the underlying matter that the comment is
raising, and I look to make sure that the agency is responsive
to that comment.
So I don't want to prejudge where I would be on a proposed
rule that hasn't come before me yet. But as part of my review,
I will certainly look at that.
Mr. Welch. No, I understand you can't prejudge it. But we'd
really want some assurance that the local concerns have a seat
at the table. That's really the bottom line of what we want,
and there's a tug of war because the industry concerns are
sometimes different.
They want to get out sooner rather than later, and the
local community wants that property back in service and,
obviously, concerned about the decommissioning fund.
Mr. Baran, can you tell me what opportunity State and local
stakeholders will have over the coming year to weigh in on the
decommissioning rulemaking?
Mr. Baran. Sure. Well, the main opportunity--there have
been two periods of public comment to date, and as the Chairman
mentioned, we got a couple hundred comments.
I looked at them all, and you're right--States and local
governments are very engaged on this issue. They want to be
heard. The next big opportunity will be when the proposed rule
is prepared.
The Commission will vote on a proposed rule and that'll go
out for public comment, and that'll be the first time that
stakeholders will have an opportunity to look at what is it
that the agency is proposing to do and what is their reaction
to that.
Mr. Welch. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Burns, thanks for your work over the years. This basic
request that our communities have to be at the table as a full
and equal partner?
Mr. Burns. I would agree with what my colleagues have said.
I think, as the proposed rulemaking comes before us, one of the
things I am going to look at is some of those process issues as
well as the substantive issues about, you know, what does
safety demand, and assuring that we have clarity on things like
the decommissioning trust funds.
You know, it's interesting. We had a good meeting I think
about a year or two ago. We had--one of the representatives
from the Citizens Advisory Committee from Vermont was there,
and heard her there.
Some of these things, I think, will be regulatory
solutions. Some of them are going to be the interactions within
the States themselves. But I do think it's important that the
voices are all heard.
Mr. Flores [presiding]. Gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
Commissioners for being with us today.
The last time that you were here before this committee 2
years ago, I expressed concern then about the regulatory creep
associated with what is known as application of the back-fit
rule.
This authority is one of the most powerful regulatory tools
at NRC's disposal, which is why it is critically important, in
my view, that the Commission is vigilant about the staff's use
of the back-fit rule.
So in regards to the committee to review generic
requirements, since your last appearance here, NRC was in the
process of providing new guidance to what is known as the
CRGR--the Committee to Review Generic Requirements.
This committee, composed of senior NRC staff, is intended
to review these back-fit requirements, which are regulatory
requirements imposed on all nuclear power reactors.
So Commissioner Burns, under your leadership as Chairman,
CRGR was directed to update its charter and revise its review
procedures. Has CRGR issued its revised charter and, if so,
what are the principal updates to the document?
Mr. Burns. Yes. I believe that they have. I am not
familiar with all the details of it but, clearly, at the time
one of the things that I was looking for--and I had the support
of my Commission colleagues at the time--was to reinfuse some
vigor in the CRGR process, also to provide some more
consistency across the agency, particularly in the staff,
because on a day-to-day basis that's where things are going to
happen about consistency in the back-fitting process.
Mr. Johnson. And you are still----
Mr. Burns. But we can probably provide for the record, you
know, the specific things that would help answer you.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Yes, please do. You are still the leader--
I mean, the chairman of the CRGR, right?
Mr. Burns. No, no. I am not the--actually never been the
chair. The head of the CRGR is a senior staff executive.
Mr. Johnson. How often do they meet?
Mr. Burns. I don't know how often. Ed Hackett, who is
deputy director for research, is the current chair of the CRGR.
Mr. Johnson. How do they report to you guys on what their
status is, as the Commissioners?
Ms. Svinicki. They report to the executive director for
operations, but they also provide routine reporting on a number
of their activities.
They may meet as needed to review a proposed regulatory
measure. But, again, we can provide greater clarity for the
record.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you.
Chairman Svinicki, what are the next steps for CRGR to
enhance its role to review and approve, or disapprove, staff's
proposed back-fits?
Ms. Svinicki. Since the Commission last appeared before
you, Congressman, and engaged on this issue, the agency's
return to greater adherence and fidelity on back-fit moved far
beyond the CRGR.
Although we have undertaken the measures that you
described, it became apparent in the reviews ordered by the
executive director for operations that comprehensive retraining
was needed of agency staff.
That has been conducted and, again, we are not changing the
back-fit rule. We realized that with the amount of staff growth
and staff turnover we had had that we needed regular training
on adherence to the back-fit rule, and there will even be, I
believe, a wave of follow-on training that is going to occur.
So there certainly has been a higher spotlight on adherence
to back-fits since we last appeared before you.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
Recent guidance from Office of General Counsel which has
been endorsed by the Commission states that, when the NRC staff
identifies back-fitting, it should first consider whether one
of the adequate protection exemptions apply to the back-fit in
question.
So, Chairman Svinicki and Commissioner Burns, given the
maturity of the NRC's regulatory framework, would you agree
that situations requiring imposition of back-fits should be
relatively rare and would typically require significant new
information indicating that a safety issue is not adequately
addressed by the Commission's current regulations?
Ms. Svinicki. As a member of the Commission, I am in
agreement with that statement. That would be, I think, a
reasonable description of the maturity of adequate protection
determinations that have been previously made.
However, there can't always be new knowledge, as you note,
and so I would say, as a member of the Commission, any time the
staff is contemplating an adequate protection exemption to the
back-fit rule, that gets my attention very closely for the
reasons you state.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Flores. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Cardenas, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you very much. Appreciate the
opportunity to have this discourse, Commissioners.
My question is to whichever Commissioner wants to answer
the question regarding the potential elimination of 149 full-
time equivalent employee positions.
If that were to take place by the design of the Commission,
if that's a fact, would there be more or less scientists
involved, going forward, than are today, overall?
Are we talking about positions that are in the science
arena or the technical folk? Are we talking about tertiary
positions?
Where would the crux of those 149 or so positions come
from?
Ms. Svinicki. Let me begin by stating there is no
contemplated involuntary separation or reduction of employees
that we contemplate now.
The figures may have to do with--if they arise from the
fiscal 2019 budget. We have areas of work that are completing
this year, and so it really isn't individual employees that are
on board right now.
The figures vary up and down, depending on the licensing
work that we project to have before us in the 2019 budget. So
it is not that we've identified positions for elimination.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. So we are talking about positions that
are basically having to do with the work structure in the past
and present and going forward, and a better structure for the
department?
Ms. Svinicki. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Thank you.
Aside from that, how is the department doing when it comes
to recruiting today's technical folks that the department needs
to fill the positions that would be ongoing? How is that
environment today?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, I will say that you identify, I think,
one of the greatest challenges for Federal agencies, and that
is making certain that we are preparing ourselves for the
future by bringing in the promising new entrants, recent
college graduates.
Again, under a declining workload for our agency, we are
not as active out with colleges and universities and
recruitment. We do that only on a very, very targeted basis as
we have attrition of people from positions.
So we are, over time, becoming an organization that has
more senior people at higher pay grades, and we do pay
attention to making sure that we are at least bringing some
newer employees into the pipeline.
But, again, our work in general has been declining, and the
opportunity to do that has been less.
Mr. Baran. I would just add, you know, in a 2-year period
the number of employees we had at the agency dropped by around
12 percent, which is a really dramatic decline----
Mr. Cardenas. That is.
Mr. Baran [continuing]. For just a couple years. That was
largely the result of attrition. So we have a certain number of
people who are retiring each year, moving on, and pairing that
with very, very limited external hiring during those years.
Going forward, for the health of the agency we are going to
have to have some extra hiring.
Mr. Cardenas. OK.
Mr. Baran. We are going to need to bring new talent to the
agency. That's true for any organization. It's fine to have a
period of a couple years where we just through attrition shrink
pretty significantly. But for our long-term health, we are
going to have to make sure we bring in new talent so that we
have the capabilities we need 5, 10, 15, 20 years in the
future.
Mr. Cardenas. There is no question that there's probably
not an industry in America that isn't affected by the baby
boomer retirement bubble that we are going through right now.
But at the same time, when I was in college, I was an
engineering student. By the time I got my degree, I had done
some internships with various great, great organizations that
actually went out there and recruited students like myself.
Are you able to focus on that kind of recruitment or,
unfortunately, is it kind of like a hodgepodge of trying to
pull together a little bit of resources to do so? Or is it a
concerted effort to recruit some of that great talent out
there, that new talent?
Ms. Svinicki. I will note that we do continue to have a
summer intern program. We get engineers and scientists and I
believe maybe even have some legal interns or law clerks
opportunities to prepare for the future.
Again, it is commensurate with the projections that we will
continue to have a declining workload. But I think, as
Commissioner Baran notes, we continue to recognize the
importance of having younger employees come into the pipeline.
Mr. Cardenas. OK. Well, to the benefit of all of us who
represent literally different parts of the country with
different makeups, Mrs. Chairman, if we could get a report from
the Commission on the program and how local communities can
enlist and making sure that young people--young talented
folks--can actually apply to these kinds of programs or, for
example, the campuses that you are already involved in or the
campuses that you'd like to be involved in--if there's some
kind of blueprint or something that the--again, every single
Member here represents a different part of America, and I am
sure that we would like to make sure that the young talent from
our communities certainly have an opportunity to enlist their
talent with your organization.
Ms. Svinicki. I think we can certainly provide more
specifics for the record.
Mr. Cardenas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Flores. The gentleman yields back. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
I thank the panel for joining us today and, to follow up on
Mr. Olson's initial comments regarding the men's and women's
Sweet Sixteens, I am proud to report my district has more teams
than the others, with four.
Anyway, let's get down to business. New technologies
provide great promise to increase safety and performance from
nuclear reactors while also affording increased efficiency and
improving economic competitiveness.
One of the critical path resources to get from here to
there, though, is the NRC's qualification of advanced fuels,
and I am concerned that our advanced nuclear community will be
stifled at the outset if there's not clarity and predictability
with respect to time lines for innovators and investors to have
certainty that the NRC will allow new fuel compensation and
design.
So, Chairman Svinicki, what is the NRC doing to consider
fundamental issues associated with qualifying advanced fuels?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you for the question, and this is a
growing area of work for the industry and for our agency as a
result.
To begin with, in order to qualify a new fuel type,
developers have to be able to have access to performance data,
meaning if you have got new materials, new alloys, and new
configurations, you need to be able to put what are called lead
test assemblies in nuclear power reactors so that you can then
harvest those as kind of samples and you can take performance
data.
We do have a number of utilities right now that either have
inserted lead test assemblies for new fuel types or are in the
process of documenting the safety of doing so. So that
exploration of these lead test assemblies and development of
the underlying data for new fuels is currently underway.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you.
Commissioner Burns, given your long experience with NRC and
your having had a front-row seat for seeing technological
advances, would you please describe your expectations with
respect to having a predictable path for advanced fuel
development?
Mr. Burns. I would echo much of what the Chairman said.
I think part of it for us, too, is assuring that the
regulatory process is in a state that allows that to go
forward.
I will give a recent example. I think the staff, with
respect to the ability of utilities to start testing advance or
accident-tolerant fuels in terms of just the process of getting
some lead test assemblies in there, has clarified its guidance
and that's gelled, and those are the types of things. And in
addition to the technology aspect, which is extraordinarily
important, of course, that will help the process along.
Mr. Flores. So you have talked about the real-world testing
and existing reactors. What sort of advanced modeling and
simulation and computational tools do you have to predict the
behavior of these advanced fuels?
Mr. Burns. I would have to defer to the staff and maybe
forward the thing, unless the Chairman wanted to add.
Ms. Svinicki. The NRC does not have as many tools as the
U.S. Department of Energy. So, as a result, our experts in
these areas have begun discussion with the Department of Energy
regarding what tools they have and to what extent they could be
made available for us to use in making safety determinations
going forward.
Now, as an independent safety regulator, we will want to
have some measure of independent or confirmatory analysis that
we will do. But it may be that the tools can be utilized by us
to do that confirmatory work.
I would say that those discussions are somewhat at the
beginning stage.
Mr. Flores. OK. Thank you.
My district includes College Station, which is the home of
Texas A&M University. The Aggies have an outstanding nuclear
engineering program, and it partners with both the NRC and the
Department of Energy to help train the next generation of
nuclear engineers through congressionally funded education
programs, principally through the Integrated University
Program, or IUP.
Unfortunately, once again, the NRC budget zeroes out this
critical program. If that's the budget that ultimately comes to
fruition--I don't think it will be, but if it does--where do we
train the workforce of the future without the IUP?
Chairman Svinicki.
Ms. Svinicki. I will respond by stating that the
Commission's failure to include that in the budget is so that
our budget will adhere to administration policies regarding
programs such as this.
Having said that, I will state that we have derived great
value from when Congress has provided funding. We have executed
that program I think with a lot of energy behind it and made
good use of the funding that Congress has provided previously.
So it is not any indication on the value of it by this
Commission.
Mr. Flores. OK. That's helpful.
My expectation is that Congress will continue to fund that
program because, as you have stated, we've had good results in
terms of an advanced nuclear workforce.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Duncan, you're recognized for--oh, I am sorry. OK.
Mr. Hudson, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hudson. I thank the chairman and thank the witnesses
for being here today. Thank you for the good work you do.
I represent Fort Bragg, the largest military installation
in the world. I understand the importance of making sure that
our troops have the necessary resources they need for the
battlefield.
A 2016 report from the Department of Defense's Defense
Science Board concluded that, quote, ``There is an opportunity
for expiration of the use of nuclear energy applications at
forward and remote operating bases and expeditionary forces,''
end quote.
These applications would result in first-of-a-kind
deployment opportunities similar to how the Navy's deployment
of nuclear reactors helped drive the construction and
commercialization of existing fleet of nuclear power plants.
However, for these advanced technologies to be successfully
deployed, the NRC's regulatory regime and approved processes
must be predictable and disciplined.
One example of how the NRC manages what are known as
requests for additional information, or RAIs: NRC staff uses
RAIs frequently during its regulatory review, and GAO has noted
the process can be time-consuming and costly.
GAO reported the NRC staff and licensees identified two
weaknesses in the RAI process: first, a gap between NRC's
expectations and licensees' understanding of license
application content, and second, staff departure from RAI
guidance, which may result in redundant or unrelated questions
and lead to additional time and resources required for
licensees to address RAIs.
Following GAO's review, NRC has updated its guidance,
including increased management review and, as with the Office
of Nuclear Regulatory Regulation efforts, to conduct onsite
audits or a public meeting to reduce the number of RAIs.
Chairwoman, I would like to ask you a few questions with
respect to RAIs. How is NRC ensuring that staff are following
the guidance? For example, is NRC tracking data on RAIs and, if
so, has the new guidance reduced the number of RAIs?
Ms. Svinicki. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
There has been a focus on the discipline of the RAI
process. In addition to the measure you noted, which is perhaps
meeting with an applicant and getting greater clarity so that
we could just completely reduce the need for certain questions
to be asked, we also have instituted what are called job aids,
and they are kind of checklists that are used by reviewers.
And when it come to RAIs, that job aid mandates that they
have to identify the regulatory determination that is supported
by the request for additional information, meaning, if you're
going to ask this question, what of the necessary findings does
it feed into?
And in some ways, there is enhanced management review. But
a job aid such as that basically forces someone to take that
into consideration. So it builds the discipline into the
process, and the staff has thought of these measures which,
again, I think are really helpful to both the analysts that are
adhering to the new discipline on RAIs and they kind of keep
the system in check.
So it's those. But there is, as you said, enhanced
management review, as well.
Mr. Hudson. Makes a lot of sense.
Can you provide updated RAI tracking information to the
committee?
Ms. Svinicki. I know we have been working to begin to
collect that, and I am not sure how many months of data we have
now. Could I provide to the record either data or a status
update on getting those tracking systems in place?
Mr. Hudson. That would be much appreciated.
Do managers in the Offices of the Nuclear Reactor
Regulation and New Reactors review additional rounds of RAIs,
as GAO reported was the agency's intent?
Ms. Svinicki. I believe that that is still occurring. I
don't know to what extent. As we get the job aids and other
measures in place, it may be that there isn't as much need for
the direct review because, again, the checklists and process
are basically forcing the new accountability and discipline.
But we can provide that for the record.
In early stages, there was management review of all
subsequent rounds.
Mr. Hudson. I appreciate that, and I would be very
interested in knowing what you found during these reviews in
both offices.
So thank you very much for that.
Mr. Chairman, unless any other witnesses would like to
chime in--great. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. Flores. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Duncan, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
panelists for being here as long as you have.
One thing about being a junior on this, you get to go last.
All the groovy questions have been asked already, so we are
going to reach into our tool chest here.
First off, I want to encourage my friends over in the
United States Senate to confirm a great South Carolinian to the
NRC, and that's David Wright, and would be a great addition to
the NRC.
I want to lend my voice to--Mr. Shimkus and others have
talked about Yucca Mountain and a need for a long-term, stable
storage facility for nuclear waste.
They have 40 years' worth of nuclear waste sitting at the
Oconee nuclear station on the beautiful shores of Lake Kilwee,
and that's just one nuclear reactor or nuclear power plant in
the country that has nuclear waste stored onsite either in dry
cask or wet cask storage.
And we could throw in Savannah River site, Hanford, Idaho
Flats, Oak Ridge, and all these things where we have waste
coming out of the environmental management efforts there.
They need to go somewhere, too. Vitrify it, put it
somewhere for long-term, stable storage.
I want to talk about V.C. Summer a little bit. One-half of
all the new reactors under construction in the United States
happen to be happening in South Carolina at V.C. Summer, and 7,
8 years into the project, the rug gets pulled out from under
and the construction stops.
And, you know, I wonder how we as a nation will be able to
go forward with nuclear power generation and new nuclear
reactor construction after V.C. Summer.
How are you going to incentivize investors to put that kind
of money up and the tens of years that takes and the tens of
billions of dollars in investment just for the permitting and
licensing before you even get into the construction?
How are you going to encourage investors to go that length,
knowing that 7, 8 years into the investment, the rug could get
pulled out from under them and they lose that investment?
Now, they couldn't foresee the bankruptcy of Westinghouse
and, you know, there were a lot of unforeseen things that kind
of led into it, I guess.
But I am concerned about the future of nuclear energy, and
I will assume since you're all in NRC, you all support nuclear
power production. Would that be a safe assumption?
It's a yes-or-no question. Do you support nuclear power
generation?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, we have to maintain objectivity in our
independent safety and security licensing determinations. But I
would note, as a degreed nuclear engineer, I didn't choose to
go into the field because I thought poorly of the technology.
But that's not as a member of the Commission where, again,
I have to step back from a view on advancing the nuclear power
program or not. We have to be policy neutral on that.
Mr. Duncan. So, Madam Chair, last year at V.C. Summer you
all had a number of NRC staff assigned to that project. Do you
remember how many were assigned?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, the onsite presence was five inspectors
who were at V.C. Summer full time. They were supported by both
in our Atlanta Region 2 office by supplemental inspections.
Our theory or our approach to having Georgia and South
Carolina where the two projects were located is that out of our
Atlanta base we could surge the deployment of the inspectors
for the different expertise.
So they kind of supported out of a common pool. I am told,
though, that the resourcing overall was 40 full-time equivalent
positions.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
Ms. Svinicki. So that would be kind of people on a
fractional basis out of Atlanta and headquarters and the five
at the site.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
So you have asked for an increase in the budget and the New
Reactors office has significantly reduced workload, claims a 13
percent reduction in staffing, and yet you ask for an increase
of $4 million in funding.
How do you explain that contradiction?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, we could provide, I think, additional
details for the record. But it would do with--as you note,
there is a decline, such as the termination of the Summer
project. But we do forecast that we will have increasing work
on advanced reactors.
We are very engaged with that community, and in FY '19 we
may have first submittals for designs to review of advanced
reactor concepts.
Mr. Duncan. I guess for my constituents they look at half
the reactors that were under construction in this country, the
V.C. Summer and that project shut down. You had 40 people
there, and they've got to be reassigned somewhere, maybe with
NRC. I get that. But you're asking for an increase, going
forward.
I understand what you're saying about looking at future
technologies. That leads into my next question.
I am a strong advocate for small modular reactors. I've
done a lot of research into molten salt reactors, and I hope
those are the technologies that you're looking at because
there's energy poverty in the world.
U.S. could be a leader in this. Right now, we are getting
our butts kicked by Russia in the construction of nuclear
reactors around the globe.
So I hope that new technologies do come online and you guys
expedite the approval process of that, and we can get more
nuclear production online.
Ms. Svinicki. What I will just mention on molten salt
technology is recognizing that we don't have a lot of experts
conversant with some of these different reactor types.
We recently worked with Oak Ridge to develop a training
course that we brought in house at NRC. We sent 90 of our folks
through that training on molten salt reactor technology, and I
was pleased that the staff included not just scientists and
engineers but also lawyers and others that will have to have
some kind of conversant knowledge of these new technologies. So
we are working very much on the capability.
Mr. Duncan. OK. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Flores. Gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Carter, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize, bouncing
back and forth. We had another subcommittee meeting at the same
time.
Madam Chair, if you don't mind, instead of butchering your
name, can I just call you Madam Chair? Is that OK?
Ms. Svinicki. That's fine, but I do have a mnemonic. I
happen to be a vegetarian, and I did live in Idaho and my Idaho
friends are OK with it. But if you think of the terms finicky,
like a finicky eater----
Mr. Carter. Finicky.
Ms. Svinicki [continuing]. If you say Svinicki, and so
that's kind of----
Mr. Carter. Swinicki.
Ms. Svinicki [continuing]. That's the best mnemonic I can
think of.
Mr. Carter. Swinicki?
Ms. Svinicki. Svinicki, with----
Mr. Carter. Finiski. I am from south Georgia. We talk in
Geechee, so I'm--you know, I am just sorry. I----
Ms. Svinicki. I don't think I am making it any better.
Mr. Carter. I don't think so.
Madam Chair, I want to talk about accident-tolerant nuclear
reactor fuels. From what I understand, this is a game changer.
Potentially, it could be, and it's something that I guess came
out of the accident in Japan and through research they've come
up with this.
You know, I represent southeast Georgia near Plant Vogtle,
where we are currently building the two reactors, and I am glad
that they're following up on that and they've decided to
complete that project instead of abandoning it.
But at the same time, Southern Company just recently
announced that at Plant Hatch, another nuclear facility near
there, that they are actually going to be loading the lead test
assemblies for what is known as the accident-tolerant fuels, or
ATF, if you will, and that this was a first for the industry.
So my question is, What do you think about them? Is this a
potential game changer, the ATFs?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, as you know, the loading of the lead
test assemblies at Hatch is among the first in the Nation.
We have some other proposals that we know utilities will be
inserting assemblies, and accident-tolerant fuel is a generic
term. There are various fuel vendors that are developing
potential new fuels that fall under that heading. And this is
the first step, is to collect the performance data from the
lead test assemblies at Plant Hatch and other locations.
If the concepts prove out and the materials perform as
predicted, which, again, needs to be demonstrated, these fuels
will have the ability to retain what we call source term and
behave better in certain severe accident conditions.
So you would have the potential for a diminished
consequence off the reactor site should a low-probability
accident occur. So that's the----
Mr. Carter. So, potentially, it could be a game changer,
potentially?
Ms. Svinicki. It can be safety improvement.
Mr. Carter. So let me ask you, is the NRC changing any of
their licensing approach to be ready for this--for the use of
this--for these fuels?
Ms. Svinicki. Well, again, our regulations accommodate
things such as lead test assemblies. Fuels have been developed
and qualified in the past.
So I think that we expect that that same framework can be
utilized for the qualification of accident-tolerant fuels.
It'll just be something that, if new issues emerge or there are
materials that have unexpected behavior, we'll have to work
closely with the applicants to understand their plans for
resolving that.
Mr. Carter. So you believe you could use existing DOE
codes? You wouldn't have to come up with new codes?
Ms. Svinicki. We are engaged with discussion in DOE to
learn the codes and tools that they have and to see if those
could be utilized for our confirmatory analysis.
Mr. Carter. OK.
Mr. Burns, Mr. Baran, thank you for having pronounceable
names. But I wanted to ask you about Plant Vogtle.
As you know, there's been a lot of problems down there,
particularly in the permitting. And it's been such a drawn-out
process that, you know, we've actually had--Toshiba and
Westinghouse, you know, went bankrupt, went out of business as
a result of this.
And I just want to know what the NRC can do to speed up the
permitting process. I mean, obviously, we all want safety, but
at the same time, not all of the blame goes on NRC for the
permitting process. But some of what they were concerned about
was the permitting process and all the hoops that they had to
jump through in order to get things permitted.
Mr. Burns. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
The interesting thing is to reflect back on the licensing
process used, which is essentially adopted as a reform proposal
in the late 1980s, the Part 52 process.
The advantages were enhanced standardization, so greater
certainty. But the issue was in terms of some design changes
and things as you went on, I think that's a lesson learned from
it.
I think one of the things we are working through with
Southern now is on the conformatory items called ITAAC. These
are those last, in effect, a checklist when you're getting
ready for--toward operation, and in terms of how they can be
consolidated.
So, if anything, I think there are lessons learned there. I
think we are trying to take those to heart. One of the things I
would say too is going back, as you look at--you had a design
that wasn't fully certified. While the applicant was coming in
with the application for the license, they had to wait for
Westinghouse to get through it.
That's a little bit different than, I think, the
expectation of how the process would work. But, again, where I
think we have some learning on some of these things in terms of
changed processes once the license is issued, and I think we
are seeing some of that applied, particularly as we go into the
advanced reactor technology because I would say----
Mr. Carter. Well, I hope they're--as you say, I hope there
were lessons that were learned because we don't want this
happening again. We need nuclear energy.
I am a proponent. I am an all-of-the-above and I believe
this is clean fuel that we need, and we just need to learn our
lessons from what was, obviously, you know, some serious
mistakes that were made along the way.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Flores. Gentleman's time has expired.
Seeing that there are no further Members wishing to ask
questions of the first panel, I wish to thank all of our
witnesses for being here today.
Before we conclude, I would like to ask unanimous consent
to submit the following documents for the record. There are
none.
Pursuant to committee rules, I remind Members that they
have 10 business days to submit additional questions for the
record, and I ask the witnesses to submit their response within
10 business days following the receipt of the questions.
Without objection, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Prepared statement of Hon. Greg Walden
Good morning and welcome to our hearing as we receive
testimony from the three current NRC Commissioners. I thank you
for taking the time to appear before the committee to discuss
critical issues facing our Nation's nuclear industry.
Located on the Columbia River upstream from my Oregon
district sits the Columbia Nuclear Generating Station. In 2017,
the Columbia power plant's exceptional high-performance was
recognized with a prestigious ``Top Plant'' award from a
leading industry publication.
Recently, the plant performed continuously for nearly 2
years from one refueling outage to the next and set a new
monthly generation record in December by operating at a 104
percent capacity factor--this means the plant generated more
electricity than its expected output, because of how precise
and efficient the system performed.
In addition to the Columbia nuclear station, six nuclear
technology startups are in the Pacific Northwest. This includes
Oregon-based NuScale Power, which is leading the way in Small
Modular Reactor technology, and Terrapower, a Bill Gates-owned
nuclear technology company. Both of those companies are
partnering with the Department of Energy's Idaho National
Laboratory, which I toured last week.
My visit to INL illustrated the vision and opportunity for
America's nuclear innovators. The laboratory's nuclear
scientists, in coordination with industry and academic
partners, are developing new, safer nuclear fuels and the site
is expected to host NuScale's first-of-a-kind SMR project.
To fully capture the potential benefits of nuclear
innovation, the NRC must be prepared to review, license and
regulate these new technologies in a timely and efficient
manner. The NRC plays a vital role in assuring our Nation's
fleet of commercial nuclear power plants operate safely,
overseeing the civilian use of nuclear materials in medicine
and industrial applications, and managing the safe storage and
ultimate disposal of nuclear waste.
Technology is constantly changing in the world around us
and we in Congress should facilitate and recognize how
technology can improve the lives of our constituents. For
example, this committee, led by my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle, support the application of game-changing innovative
technologies for automated vehicles. I am optimistic that a
similar technology-focused approach for advanced nuclear energy
will provide immense consumer and environmental benefits.
However, to enable this innovation, the NRC must identify
barriers that would inhibit our nuclear innovators. This is why
I'm pleased with NRC's recent ``Innovation and Transformation''
initiative. As I noted in a recent letter with Subcommittee
Chairmen Upton and Shimkus to Chairman Svinicki, this
initiative is a great opportunity to rethink how the NRC
approaches its mission and performs daily functions.
I hope this initiative provides a fundamental examination
of how new regulatory approaches can capture the benefits of
new technologies, while preserving the same level of safety
assurances. I look forward to hearing more about this
initiative and what the Commission's vision is to further a
culture change throughout the organization.
For example, the development of advanced nuclear fuels and
certifying the use of those fuels through advanced modeling and
simulation would significantly increase safety margins at
nuclear power plants.
NuScale is an example of one of those innovative nuclear
companies. NuScale's small modular reactor proposed design
recently received approval for a significant milestone when the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission signed off on the design's
passive cooling system. This decision is a gamechanger for the
regulatory framework and I applaud both NRC and NuScale on this
breakthrough.
I appreciate the Commission's leadership and interest in
this licensing process. I am keenly interested in hearing more
about the status of the staff's review, the Commission's
resolution of outstanding policy issues process, and
expectations for the completion of this process.
The existing market and economic challenges for nuclear
power are well known. But with a new generation of nuclear
innovators enthusiastically tackling the big challenges, our
nuclear future remains bright.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]