- CFIUS REFORM: ADMINISTRATIVE PERSPECTIVES ON THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
[Senate Hearing 115-160]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-160
CFIUS REFORM: ADMINISTRATIVE PERSPECTIVES ON THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
EXAMINING THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED
STATES
__________
JANUARY 25, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available at: http: //www.govinfo.gov /
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-767 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
BOB CORKER, Tennessee
JACK REED, Rhode Island
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
JON TESTER, Montana
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
DOUG JONES, Alabama
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Mark Powden, Democratic Staff Director
John O'Hara, Chief Counsel for National Security Policy
Kristine Johnson, Professional Staff Member
Elisha Tuku, Democratic Chief Counsel
Colin McGinnis, Democratic Policy Director
Dawn Ratliff, Chief Clerk
Cameron Ricker, Deputy Clerk
James Guiliano, Hearing Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
THURSDAY, JANUARY 25, 2018
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
1
Prepared statement...........................................
27
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
3
WITNESSES
Heath P. Tarbert, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for
International Markets and Investment Policy....................
4
Prepared statement...........................................
28
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Crapo...........................................
37
Senator Menendez.........................................
37
Senator Warner...........................................
38
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
42
Richard Ashooh, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export
Administration.................................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
31
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Crapo...........................................
45
Senator Scott............................................
46
Senator Cotton...........................................
47
Senator Menendez.........................................
48
Senator Warner...........................................
49
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
52
Eric Chewning, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Manufacturing and Industrial Base Policy.......................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
34
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Crapo...........................................
54
Senator Cotton...........................................
55
Senator Menendez.........................................
55
Senator Warner...........................................
56
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
58
(iii)
CFIUS REFORM: ADMINISTRATIVE PERSPECTIVES ON THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
----------
THURSDAY, JANUARY 25, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met at 10 a.m., in room 538, Dirksen Senate
Office Building, Hon. Mike Crapo, Chairman of the Committee,
presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. This hearing will come to order. This
morning we will receive testimony for a third time this
Congress on the role of the Committee on Foreign Investment in
the United States, or CFIUS.
The Committee held a general oversight hearing on CFIUS in
September, and last Thursday the Committee began its review of
S.2098, the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of
2017, or FIRRMA, a comprehensive reform that significantly
expands the purview of CFIUS, which has been introduced by
Senators Cornyn and Feinstein.
CFIUS authorities cover transactions that result in foreign
control of a U.S. business that may threaten the national
security of the United States. The focus is currently on
inbound investment and technology acquisition.
Today's hearing brings in witnesses from three of the nine
Federal agencies and offices that comprise the full voting
membership of CFIUS: the Department of Treasury, which chairs--
which serves as the chair of the committee; the Department of
Defense; and the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Industry
and Security, which administers and enforces the dual-use
regulations of the U.S. export control regime.
According to their testimony last week, Senators Cornyn and
Feinstein, informed by their work on the Senate Intelligence
Committee, introduced their bill because of growing concerns
arising from China's multilayered threat to U.S. national
security, namely threats emanating from a weaponization of its
foreign investment strategy to acquire, by design, dual-use
technology and know-how from U.S. companies. Our colleagues
believe that China has found gaps in both the existing CFIUS
process and export control regime, and is exploiting each of
them to the detriment of U.S. national security and the U.S.
defense industrial base.
To address these concerns, FIRRMA is specifically designed
to broaden CFIUS's jurisdiction to review certain high-
technology joint venture and related arrangements, minority
position investments, and certain types of real estate
transactions.
At last week's hearing, a consensus emerged that much of
the bill is focused on national security threats that need to
be addressed as China executes its policies borne of its unique
civil-military integration that effectively blurs the lines
between military and commercial activities.
It is also important to note that the overwhelming majority
of foreign investments and transactions provides significant
benefit to the United States economy, including those Chinese
investments that occur in most sectors of the U.S. economy and
do not impact the national security of the United States.
It is that point of inflection between the national
security and economic growth realized from an open investment
policy that the Banking Committee has been entrusted to debate
and oversee throughout the now 42-year evolution of the CFIUS
process.
The challenge comes in the continued use of foreign
investment to promote economic growth and the next-generation
technologies, while shielding those very technologies from
foreign threats.
Last week, the panel of witnesses from the private sector
offered their perspectives on the potential effects of FIRRMA.
During the hearing's question-and-answer period, there were
several questions raised that merit feedback from today's
panel, including one, would the expansion of CFIUS authority to
unwind or alter outbound joint venture-related international
commercial activity duplicate or, in any way, undermine the
current U.S. export control regime and end up chilling this
type of commercial activity?
Two, if there are gaps in the export control process, why
should this Committee, which has jurisdiction over both the
relevant parts of the U.S. export control regime and CFIUS, opt
to create a new export control authority for CFIUS, a
traditionally unilateral inward-bound review process?
Three, what would the resource burden look like for each of
your agencies for the type of expansion envisioned by this
legislation, and what impact would it have on foreign
investment if the review period were actually increased by 50
percent to accommodate these new reviews? The three Government
agencies represented here today provide a spectrum of
viewpoints necessary to understand where the United States must
position itself with respect to CFIUS, to assure the national
security of the United States.
Given what we have heard in previous hearings, it is
apparent, on national security grounds, that legislative fixes
to the current system may be warranted, including expanding the
authority of CFIUS to monitor certain additional transactions
that are evading the process. Preservation of the U.S. defense
industrial base, protection of U.S. critical technology,
critical infrastructure, and even related American know-how are
all legitimate areas of concern.
It is not the intention of the Banking Committee to chill
direct foreign investment into the United States, but neither
can this Nation's national security interests be subordinated
to commercial interests.
I am certain that these fixes can be made with the help of
the Administration, the business community, and my colleagues
from both sides of the aisle on the Banking Committee.
With that, Senator Brown.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to our
witnesses. Mr. Chewning, nice to see you. Welcome to the
Committee. And Mr. Ashooh and Mr. Tarbert, welcome back to the
Committee. Nice to see you.
At last week's hearing we heard several differing views on
the advisability of making changes to CFIUS. All the witnesses
agreed the current system is not working. As the people charged
with making the system work, I look forward to hearing from
today's witnesses on whether they agree with that assessment
and, if so, why the current system is not working. There is no
way we can improve on the current system if we do not
understand the reasons that it is failing today.
Some of the questions go to jurisdictions. Senator Cortez
Masto and others raised the issue of real estate transactions
that might give rise to national security threats that are
difficult to reach under the current law. Other issues have
been raised about access to sensitive information that might
stem from an ownership interest short of control.
But even if we are all in agreement on how to redraw the
proper jurisdiction, I think we would still face substantial
issues around the appropriate mechanisms for preventing the
transfer of sensitive technology and intellectual property.
At last week's hearing, every witness agreed that our
adversaries use lawful and unlawful means to close the gaps
where they exist between our technological capabilities and
theirs. Every witness agreed that China is violating its trade
commitments. When China cheats, there must be consequences.
Rules mean nothing if they are not enforced. That is why I urge
the Administration to take action on unfair dumping by LG and
Samsung over the last number of years. Because of these steps,
the Administration finally announced this week Whirlpool will
add 200 more jobs in a small community south of Toledo, called
Clyde, Ohio.
China's cheating also has an impact on our advanced
technology companies. Not only do they have to compete in the
marketplace against subsidized foreign competitors, they must
also defend themselves from cyberattacks, industrial espionage,
and a whole range of techniques to steal critical technology.
Last week's witnesses also agreed that the departments with
us today are lagging in controlling the export of sensitive
technology to our adversaries. As an example, they cited the
lack of updates to the militarily critical technologies list,
which apparently is not being updated by DoD.
As I mentioned last week, I think our country faces a
twofold problem. National security is threatened by the
purchase and export of critical intellectual property and
technologies. At the same time, our domestic economic security
is threatened by foreign investment in the U.S. that falls
outside the scope of CFIUS.
I have introduced legislation with Senator Grassley--we
both sit on the Finance Committee--called the Foreign
Investment Review Act, that would require the Secretary of
Commerce to review certain foreign investments. Just as we see
in the national security area, some of these investments,
especially coming from State-owned enterprises, are not in our
long-term economic interest here in our country.
I hope we can tackle both problems in this process,
revising CFIUS to respond to the developments of the last
decade, while we also respond to the threats of our economic
security.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Brown. We will now
proceed to the testimony of our witnesses. First will be The
Honorable Heath Tarbert, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for International Markets and Investment Policy. Following Mr.
Tarbert we will hear from The Honorable Richard Ashooh,
Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration. And
then we will conclude by hearing from Mr. Eric Chewning, Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manufactured and Industrial
Base Policy.
Gentlemen, we appreciate each of you being here. We look
forward to your statements. I encourage you to follow that 5-
minute clock so the Senators will have time to engage with you
with their 5 minutes as well. And we look forward to learning
much from you.
With that, Mr. Tarbert, please begin.
STATEMENT OF HEATH P. TARBERT, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
TREASURY FOR INTERNATIONAL MARKETS AND INVESTMENT POLICY
Mr. Tarbert. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify in support of FIRRMA.
During my confirmation hearing, you asked what my top
priority as Assistant Secretary would be. I will repeat now
what I said then. My top priority is ensuring that CFIUS has
the tools and resources it needs to perform its critical
national security function.
I believe FIRRMA, a bill introduced with broad bipartisan
support, is designed to provide those tools and resources.
FIRRMA will protect our national security and strengthen
America's longstanding open investment policy.
The United States has always been a leading destination for
investors. Alexander Hamilton argued foreign capital is a
precious acquisition to economic growth. Foreign investment
provides immense benefits to American workers and families,
such as job creation, productivity, innovation, and higher
median incomes.
At the same time, we know that foreign investment is not
always benign. On the eve of America's entry into World War I,
concerned by German acquisitions in our chemical sector,
Congress passed legislation empowering the President to block
investments during times of national emergencies. During the
Depression and World War II, cross-border capital flows fell
dramatically, and in the boom years of the 1960s and '70s,
investment in the U.S. was modest compared to outflows, and
during that time, foreign investment also posed little risk.
Our main adversaries, the Soviet Union and its satellites, were
communist countries, economically isolated from our own.
But when the postwar trend changed in the 1970s, CFIUS was
born. The oil shock that made OPEC countries wealthy led to
fears that petrodollars might be used to buy strategic U.S.
assets. In 1975, President Ford issued an executive order
creating CFIUS to monitor foreign investments. Then, in 1988, a
growing number of Japanese deals motivated Congress to pass the
Exon-Florio Amendment. For the first time, the President could
block a foreign acquisition without declaring a national
emergency.
For the next 20 years, CFIUS pursued its mission without
fanfare, but in the wake of the new Dubai Ports controversy, it
became clear that CFIUS needed greater procedural rigor and
accountability. In 2007, many of you helped enact FINSA, which
formally established CFIUS and codified our current structure
and process.
Now we find ourselves at yet another historic inflection
point. The foreign investment landscape has shifted more than
at any point during CFIUS's 40-year history. Nowhere is that
shift more evident than in the caseload CFIUS now faces. The
number of annual filings has grown within the last decade from
an average of 95 or so to nearly 240 last year.
But it is the complexity, not simply the volume, that has
placed the greatest demand on our resources. In 2007, about
four cases went to the more resource-intensive investigations
stage. In 2017, nearly 70 percent did. This added complexity
arises from a number of factors: strategic investments by
foreign Governments, complex transaction structures, and
globalized supply chains.
Complexity also results from the evolving relationship
between national security and commercial activity. Military
capabilities are rapidly building on top of commercial
innovations, and what is more, the data-driven economy has
created vulnerabilities we have never before seen.
New risks require new tools. The administration endorses
FIRRMA because it embraces four pillars critical to CFIUS
modernization. First, FIRRMA expands the scope of transactions
potentially reviewable by CFIUS, to include certain nonpassive
investments, joint ventures, and real estate purchases. These
changes lie at the very heart of CFIUS modernization. Right now
we cannot review a host of transactions that present identical
concerns to those we regularly examine.
Second, FIRRMA allows CFIUS to refine its procedures to
ensure the process is tailored, efficient, and effective. Only
where existing authorities, like export controls, cannot
resolve the risk will CFIUS step in.
Third, FIRRMA recognizes that our closest allies face
similar threats and incentivizes our allies to work with us to
address those threats.
And finally, FIRRMA acknowledges that CFIUS must be
appropriately resourced. This last point bears emphasizing. Of
course, modernizing CFIUS entails a cost. But any job really
worth doing is worth doing right. Besides, we have also got to
consider the cost of doing nothing: the potential to lose our
military and technological edge, which could cost American
lives. That is simply unacceptable.
There is but one conclusion here. CFIUS must be modernized.
In so doing, we must preserve our longstanding open investment
policy. We must also protect our national security. These twin
aims transcend party lines and demand urgent action.
I look forward to working with this Committee and improving
and advancing FIRRMA. Thank you very much.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you very much. Mr. Ashooh.
STATEMENT OF RICHARD ASHOOH, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF COMMERCE
FOR EXPORT ADMINISTRATION
Mr. Ashooh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am grateful for the
opportunity to testify in support of the Foreign Investment
Risk Review Modernization Act, or FIRRMA, and the role the
Department of Commerce plays in supporting U.S. national
security, both as a member of the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States, or CFIUS, and as an export
control agency.
I want to thank Senators Cornyn and Feinstein and Burr, and
the other cosponsors for their strong leadership on this issue.
The Commerce Department supports the modernization of the CFIUS
process and we share Congress' concern about China's policies
and activities. FIRRMA takes many positive steps in addressing
those concerns.
Within the Department of Commerce, the International Trade
Administration and the Bureau of Industry and Security play
important roles in Commerce's review of CFIUS matters. BIS, as
the administrator of the Export Administration Regulations, or
EAR, has extensive experience in export controls, which are
often a consideration in CFIUS deliberations.
I would like to highlight a few specific provisions of the
legislation.
The Administration welcomes foreign investment in the
United States, and the Department supports the affirmations in
FIRRMA of that policy. We are supportive of the requirement for
mandatory filings for certain transactions involving foreign
Government-controlled activities. In fact, we encourage the
Committee to consider a lower threshold.
We appreciate that FIRRMA requires an assessment of the
resources necessary for CFIUS to carry out its critical work
and that the provisions which would expand CFIUS would not take
effect until CFIUS has put in place the regulations and has the
resources it needs to implement its expanded role.
We encourage the Committee to consider that the provision
on contributions of intellectual property and associated
support to foreign parties may duplicate existing export
control authorities, which I do not believe in the intent.
We support the provisions of FIRRMA that would facilitate
greater cooperation and information sharing with our allies and
partners to permit increased coordination with like-minded
countries.
In our role administrating the EAR, BIS's responsibilities
encompass the entirety of the export control process. We write
and implement the regulations, issue export licenses, and
conduct compliance activities, including overseas end-use
checks. We enforce regulations, which includes preventing
violations and punishing those who violate.
The EAR has traditionally been the regulatory authority for
the control of dual-use items, which are items that have a
civil end-use but can also be used for military or
proliferation-related use. The export control system
administered by BIS is a process that, like CFIUS, involves
multiple agencies. We work closely with the Departments of
Defense, Energy, and State, and these agencies review and clear
any changes to the EAR itself, as well as license applications
submitted to BIS, and ensure that the export control system is
robust.
The export control system benefits from close cooperation
with our international partners, through four major,
multilateral export control regimes. Through these regimes, the
United States and our partners coordinate on which items and
technologies merit control and how those controls should be
applied.
The EAR's authority covers a wide array of transactions and
technology transfers and governs what are considered
traditional exports of goods, software, or technology to
foreign countries, but it also covers the transfers of
controlled technology within the United States to foreign
nationals, under what we call deemed exports. It differentiates
between countries that range from our closest allies to
embargoed countries, thus allowing the export control system to
treat exports and technology transfers under different
licensing review policies, depending on the level of concern
with the recipient country. The EAR also includes list of end
uses and end users of concern that trigger extraordinary
licensing requirements.
Finally, our export control system includes aggressive
enforcement capabilities. BIS's special agents are located
across the United States and overseas with a sole focus on
identifying violations of the EAR and bringing to justice
domestic and foreign violators. In fact, last week, BIS, in
conjunction with other Federal law enforcement agencies,
announced a prosecution against two individuals conspiring to
violate export control laws by shipping controlled
semiconductor components to a Chinese company that was also on
Commerce's entity list.
In sum, the export control system and CFIUS are both vital
authorities and complementary tools that the United States
relies upon to protect our national security. Strengthening
CFIUS through FIRRMA, while ensuring that CFIUS and export
control authorities remain distinct, will enable even stronger
protections of U.S. technology.
The Department of Commerce looks forward to working with
the Committee and the bill cosponsors on this important effort,
and I would be pleased to take your questions. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you very much. Mr. Chewning.
STATEMENT OF ERIC CHEWNING, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL BASE POLICY
Mr. Chewning. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Brown, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the invitation to share
the Department of Defense's role in CFIUS. The protection of
our national security innovation base from strategic
competitors, like Russia and China, is an increasingly
important priority for the Department, and I appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you this morning.
The Department of Defense strongly supports the
modernization of the CFIUS process to ensure the interagency
committee has the authorities required to address the evolving
risks to our national security. We are thankful for the strong
leadership of Senator Cornyn, Senator Feinstein, and Senator
Burr on this issue, and appreciate the bipartisan support for
the FIRRMA legislation.
To quote Secretary of Defense Mattis, who stated this
Department's position in his letter of support to Senator
Cornyn, ``The DoD depends on critical, foundational, and
emerging technologies to maintain military readiness and
preserve our technological advantage over potential
adversaries. FIRRMA would help close related gaps.''
I have spent the last 17 years working at the intersection
of national security, industry, and finance, in both the
private and public sectors. It is important that this bill not
be considered an additional regulation on business. Under this
bill, the United States should and will likely continue to
welcome the vast majority of foreign investment that does not
present a threat to our national security.
Rather, this bill should be considered a whole of
Government response to a critical national security challenge,
an insurance policy on the hundreds of billions of dollars per
year we invest in our defense industrial base, but most
importantly, this bill will help safeguard our sons and
daughters who volunteer to step into harm's way, armed with the
weapons that our industrial base produces.
Simply put, the United States military fights and wins wars
through the unmatched performance of our men and women in
uniform and through our superior military technology. Knowing
this, our competitors are aggressively attempting to diminish
our technological advance through a multifaceted strategy, by
targeting and acquiring the very technologies that are critical
to our military success, now and in the future.
China, in particular, publicly articulates its policy of
civil-military integration, which ties to its intention to
become the world's leader in science and technology and to
modernize its military, in part, by strengthening its own
defense industrial base.
While some methods, like industrial espionage and
cybertheft are clearly illegal, other approaches, including
technology and business know-how, transferred through
acquisition of U.S. companies, may not be. Acquiring or
investing in U.S. companies offers an opportunity for our
competitors to gain access and control over technologies with
potential military applications, enabling them to create their
own indigenous capabilities, eroding our technological edge,
and ultimately, our military advantage.
The current CFIUS authorities are limited to investments
that would result in a foreign controlling interest. There are
other nontransaction types, such as certain joint ventures and
nonpassive, noncontrolling investments that could pose national
security concerns. Additionally, the purchase of real estate by
a foreign person provides opportunities to potentially
establish a persistent presence near sensitive facilities,
which would currently fall outside of CFIUS's current scope of
review.
The Department of Defense does not view CFIUS as a panacea.
Instead, it is a layered defense that can, along with export
controls, stem the flow of critical technology to our
competitors. In order to do that, however, CFIUS authorities
need to adjust to keep pace with the rapid pace of technology.
Let me add one more point as I conclude my remarks. While
the Department of Defense believes defensive measures like
CFIUS modernization are important, they alone are not
sufficient for winning a technology race. We must be proactive
to ensure we improve our technology and innovation base,
because our future economic security will be a key determinant
of our national security.
I would like to close with another statement from Secretary
Mattis, in his letter of support to Senator Cornyn. ``I
strongly support FIRRMA. The Department of Defense continues to
support foreign investment, consistent with the protection of
national security. However, as the national security landscape
changes, the existing processes and authorities must be
updated.''
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify on this
important topic. I look forward to working with this
Committee on improving and advancing FIRRMA.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chewning, and Mr.
Ashooh, I am going to go to you first with my question.
Many concerns have been raised around the need to safeguard
critical technologies, in particular, those referred to as
emerging or development technologies. Can you discuss to what
extent our export control system is equipped to address these
concerns? And what I am kind of getting at, specifically, is,
does our system include controls on the export of development
technology, which is the know-how or the secret sauce that
allows for the development of critical capabilities of concern.
Can Commerce, after identifying uncontrolled know-how of
concern, control the release of such development information
without the need of additional authority?
Mr. Ashooh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The short answer to
your three questions is yes. Let me go into detail.
Chairman Crapo. OK.
Mr. Ashooh. Certainly the emerging technology issue is one
that is the crux of this matter, and it is important to note
that our export control system is not a new system. It has been
in place throughout the cold war, and in technologies that we
consider today to be widely available or commonly known were
once emerging, and it has been our export control system that
has gone a long way to maintaining U.S. technological
leadership.
Having said that, there is a challenge here, and the
challenge is two-fold. One is identifying those emerging
technologies, and that is not specifically relegated to one
agency. That is a shared burden that the interagency faces. But
once the technology is identified, the export control system
can accommodate it and is flexible enough to deal with it. Let
me speak in more detail about that.
Under the current system, we can place controls on
individuals, on uses, on technology. The Export Administration
Regulation defines technology to include nontangible items that
most of us would consider to be know-how, not just the product
but the design that goes into the product, the design process,
the research that goes into the design. So the nontangibles
that we would consider know-how are included in the EAR.
Where the challenge exists is that we identify those. Once
we have identified them, we have many tools to apply, including
almost immediate controls that we can place on technologies
once they have been identified.
Chairman Crapo. So for export control purposes, we do not
need to look at new legislative authorities.
Mr. Ashooh. I do not believe we need new legislative
authorities, but I do not want to suggest any complacency here.
The rapid pace of emerging technologies that we are seeing,
predominantly in the private sector, requires us to be ever-
vigilant to evolving threats, but I do not believe new
authorities are necessary to do that.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. Mr. Tarbert, there is some
concern that CFIUS, under FIRRMA, could become a de facto, one-
stop shop for all inbound and outbound investment activity. Can
you think of any circumstances where a transaction is permitted
under export control authorities but then should be prohibited
by CFIUS?
Mr. Tarbert. We have seen certain examples, even during my
first 100 days there, where a specific technology may be EAR99,
but in the hands of a specific threat actor that technology,
along with the threat actor purchasing the U.S. business,
raises significant national security concerns.
Now at that point we have often seen the Commerce
Department step in and issue an informed letter, but there have
been situations where, at least not in advance, we have seen
that need. So there is a current overlap but there are many
situations where export controls are adequate and appropriate,
and FIRRMA envisions that.
Chairman Crapo. And so you would not see FIRRMA has
creating a complete overlap.
Mr. Tarbert. Not at all. We view the two as very much
complementary, and we view FIRRMA as strengthening export
controls, and not substituting CFIUS for them.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you. And Mr. Chewning, the
Defense Department understandably has concerns with the current
CFIUS process regarding the transfer of know-how pertaining to
a wide range of emerging technologies, such as artificial
intelligence, robotics, and driverless vehicle technology. The
exists the OY521 authority and the Export Administration
Regulations that can control the export of previously
uncontrolled technology, which can also be applied to know-how,
at any stage of development, if there is a national security or
foreign policy reason to do so, without a proposed rule or any
agreement of our allies.
Has Defense ever asked Commerce to use this authority to
control the export of know-how of concern in emerging
technologies?
Mr. Chewning. Thank you, Senator. I think it raises a good
point around the complementary nature of export controls and
CFIUS, and my colleague from Commerce I think raised a good
point in saying that export controls can step in once we have
identified the threat. And I think it is important to
understand, with the CFIUS process we identify a three-part
litmus test for identifying threats. So it is understanding
what the exact threat is, which is an assessment that is
informed by the intelligence community, understanding the
vulnerability, and then understanding the consequences.
And so if we are able to go through that process and
identify what exactly we need export controls to step in and
do, our colleagues from Commerce are able to do that. In the
absence of having those authorities already in place, CFIUS
becomes the last line of defense in order for us to stop a
transaction.
And so I think a useful frame for thinking about the
interplay between CFIUS and export controls is export controls
is the first line of defense, CFIUS is the last line of
defense.
Chairman Crapo. All right. Thank you. Senator Brown.
Senator Brown. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I would like to, Mr.
Ashooh, go back to, on the Chairman's first question, and ask
you a little bit more about that. Explain how the
identification process would differ from what you seek today
through the Export Administration Regs.
Mr. Ashooh. The notification process?
Senator Brown. How--if you would explain how the
identification process. The FIRRMA bill updates the definition
of critical technologies, as you know.
Mr. Ashooh. Right.
Senator Brown. CFIUS is charged with identifying emerging
technologies that could be important to maintaining our
national security advantage. So how does the identification
process--how would it differ from what you seek today through
the Export Administration Regulations?
Mr. Ashooh. Well, again, I would suggest that that is
another complementary area, because under the EAR, we are
looking for emerging and critical technologies all the time,
and we work through advisory committees to help us do that, and
rely on industry to inform us as well.
When CFIUS considers a case, Commerce, as the administrator
of the EAR, we utilize that process to then inform our own
processes and whether or not action needs to be taken under the
EAR. And so that is the way that the processes complement each
other, and any expansion of the number of transactions would,
in fact, help us understand the landscape relative to emerging
and critical technologies.
Senator Brown. OK. Mr. Chewning, you were nodding. When it
was written a year ago--and I wanted to go somewhere else--the
DIUx report made about a dozen recommendations for actions to
be undertaken by DoD, apart from what we should do, what
Congress might do legislatively. Describe what--could you
describe what actions have been taken to date by Defense on
these recommendations?
Mr. Chewning. Yeah, happy to. So we are currently going
through a broader understanding of how we need to approach the
issues around countering China, with respect to access to our
defense industrial base. The immediate set of recommendations
that we have implemented has been strengthening what we have
been able to do within the Department of Defense more broadly,
in terms of our role within the CFIUS committee and resourcing
of that effort. Then we are looking at how to evaluate the
broader set of things that DIUx has looked at, as part of that
broader campaign.
Senator Brown. Thank you. Witnesses at last week's hearing
were critical of DoD's failure to maintain the militarily
critical technologies list, as you know, and I would like your
view on whether that criticism last week was fair and why we
should not use existing approaches to control technology rather
than creating yet another new set of rules.
Mr. Chewning. Sure. So my understanding of the criticism
from last week focused on the munitions list, which was a
State-derived list used for ITAR. The concerns here are
primarily around emerging technologies, which are more
appropriately handled under the Commerce authorities. And so
the munitions list itself is not where we are seeing the threat
right not. It is with the emerging technologies that would fall
under the Commerce's control of export controls.
Senator Brown. And their criticism was confined to the
munitions list?
Mr. Chewning. It is my understanding, Senator.
Senator Brown. OK. One more question, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Tarbert, you and your office work close with the FBI. Correct?
Mr. Tarbert. Correct.
Senator Brown. Have you found the men and women of the FBI
to be dedicated professionals performing a central role in our
national security?
Mr. Tarbert. I have.
Senator Brown. OK. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. Senator Shelby.
Senator Shelby. Thank you. Mr. Tarbert, welcome back to the
Committee. You were here at a critical time a number of years
back and we have missed you for a long time but we are glad you
are back today in your present role.
Could you describe how the evolution of many foreign
Governments' acquisition strategies has caused both the
Congress and the Administration to want to reexamine and reform
CFIUS? The world has changed. Manufacturing has changed. Our
threats around the world have changed.
Mr. Tarbert. That is absolutely right, Senator, and it is
great to be back.
We are seeing radical changes. I mentioned the shift in
foreign investment that we have not seen, that is the largest
shift in the 40-year history of CFIUS, and one of the things we
are seeing are State-owned enterprises that are funded and
subsidized by the State specifically pursuing critical U.S.
technologies that are meant to be deployed in either a very
competitive way, and even, in some cases, for military means.
We are also seeing, as of recently, and as the Defense
Department mentioned the military-commercial fusion, that even
non-State-owned enterprises are being called upon to purchase
technology so they can share that technology at some point with
their Government.
Senator Shelby. How do we challenge that, in legislation
and in implementing the legislation, which all three of you all
have been doing?
Mr. Tarbert. As I just explained, there are gaps in CFIUS.
Within CFIUS's current jurisdiction, I think CFIUS is doing a
fine job and has done a fine job throughout the years,
especially since the FINSA legislation. But there are key gaps
where we cannot look at transactions.
Senator Shelby. That was 11 years ago, though.
Mr. Tarbert. That was 11 years ago, and, in fact, Senator
Shelby, if you look at the actual jurisdictional basis for
CFIUS, that stems from the 1988 statute, Exon-Florio. So the
fundamental jurisdiction of CFIUS has not been updated in 30
years.
Senator Shelby. Could you expand a few minutes on the
challenge of joint ventures between companies overseas that
would enter into a joint venture with some of our companies to
get inside America?
Mr. Tarbert. Sure. One of the things that I have noticed is
people have been saying, ``Well, CFIUS only looks at inbound
investments.'' That is actually technically not true. We have a
provision right now that has existed for nearly a decade in our
regulations that allows CFIUS to look at any situation where a
U.S. business is taken out and deposited into a foreign joint
venture, where that foreign person would have control over the
U.S. business. So in many ways the FIRRMA bill simply
modernizes that provision to address some other issues that we
are seeing in joint ventures.
But what we are seeing today is that the original statute
of 1988, says merger, acquisition, or takeover resulting in
foreign control of a U.S. business. So we can review those
transactions, and we have had very specific circumstances where
a party was going through a merger, acquisition, or takeover.
It was very clear CFIUS was either going to impose mitigation
or recommend that the President block the transaction, and
those individuals have said, ``Well, you know what we can do?
We can take the important bits out of the business, so it is
not a U.S. business we are putting in a JV, but the essential
capabilities of the U.S. business. We will stick them in a
foreign JV and they will be outside of your jurisdiction.''
So it is very problematic, and then we are left with a
situation where we have a national security mandate that we
have to block or mitigate a certain transaction, but the
parties themselves are saying, ``We are going to do this
because we know you do not have jurisdiction to stop it.''
Senator Shelby. I would like to move over to the Defense
side of this for a minute. How important is critical
infrastructure to us, and why would we not want somebody, that
maybe not be our real friend and ally but a competitor, to be
involved in that?
Mr. Chewning. That is a terrific question, Senator. We
would be concerned with potential foreign acquisition of
critical use infrastructure, which is why, within the CFIUS
process, we do a risk-based analysis, looking at the context of
a specific transaction through three lenses, looking at the
specific threat, the vulnerability, and the consequences
associated with that. And after we have gone through that
process, if we think that that risk cannot be unmitigated, that
is when we would have a problem.
Senator Shelby. Commerce, you got anything to add to this?
You agree with both of them?
Mr. Ashooh. Thank you, Senator. Yes, I do. Commerce spends
so much time in the dual-use world, while we do not regulate--
--
Senator Shelby. Well, basically, we want to do business in
the world.
Mr. Ashooh. Yes.
Senator Shelby. But we do not want to give away something
that would do us harm--do harm to national security. Is not
that the bottom line?
Mr. Ashooh. It is the bottom line, and our export control
system is designed around that. It works best when it is very,
very targeted, so that we are not over-controlling and
restricting commerce where it needs to, but we are paying
attention to the national security implications.
Senator Shelby. Thank you. My time is up.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. Senator Warner.
Senator Warner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me thank you
and the Ranking Member for taking on this issue. I think some
of the--getting this right is one of the most important
national security requirements we have. As Vice-Chair of the
Intelligence Committee I have really seen, in a very
comprehensive way, how some of our near-peer adversaries,
specifically China and Russia, are using theft of intellectual
property, use of joint ventures. They have a much, much more
comprehensive approach than we have. And I think we have seen,
in the past, where you would steal secrets and, mysteriously, a
peer company would end up having that technology, mysteriously
enough.
You have got efforts that Mr. Tarbert made mention of, in
terms of direct acquisition. But you have also seen now, with
State enterprises and near-State enterprises, using our JV laws
in ways that are pretty sophisticated, and I am not sure we
have got--well, I conceptually am supportive of the reform
legislation, whether we have got it fully right yet.
I want to raise an area that I do not believe is covered.
With our open markets, what happens when we have a,
particularly in emerging technology fields, where we have a
company that may enter into our market, in an open fashion, and
it may not trigger any of the CFIUS or traditional export
control or import control barriers. I would point out some that
have received some attention. Kaspersky Labs, a Russian-based
technology firm, that made its way all the way onto the select
GSA vendor list, even though large swaths of the American
Government realize that there was huge, huge potential
problems. And we are now in the process of trying to
disentangle with that entity. It will take us years and it will
keep us vulnerable during those years.
What I see is an issue that people are not speaking too
much about is if you look in China right now, and with their
remarkable investments in AI, machine learning, if you look at,
just over the last 4 or 5 years the emergence of a dozen-plus
Chinese tech companies that all have north of $10 billion
valuations. We have heard of the Huaweis and the Alibabas.
There are a dozen more that may not come off--maybe you guys
know, but most of our colleagues do not know.
And how are we going to ensure that as these companies, who
are already starting to kind of be pervasive across Asia, as
they enter into the American marketplace, with pricing that is
lower than our competitors, because often times they have zero
cost of capital, they become ubiquitous. You know, they
penetrate around, like, Internet of things where the next level
of connectivity that is coming up. We could wake up and--my
fear is that many of these companies, when push comes to shove,
are not pure economic plays but directly or indirectly have
ties back to the Chinese Government, yet none of the
traditional regime of the last 60 years would address that
issue.
Does anybody want to take it on? Mr. Tarbert, do you want
to take a shot?
Mr. Tarbert. I would say it is a great point, Senator, and
I think it highlights the need for a comprehensive approach to
the strategic competition that we face. CFIUS deals with a
certain set of issues. Export controls deals with complementary
issues. But there are other tools available to the U.S.
Government, from procurement, from other things, that should be
considered in addressing the overall threat. I do not think we
can look at specific threats in isolation.
Mr. Ashooh. Thank you, Senator. It is perhaps worth
sharing, as someone who came into this job about 5 months ago,
I spend the majority of my day, one way or the other, dealing
with the threats you mentioned. They are first and foremost in
what we are dealing with. And we need to be evolving with these
threats. There is no question. And I really do reinforce
Heath's comments about it is a comprehensive solution. It is
very important that we, in the agencies with varied
responsibilities, not only work together but, in particular,
with our Members of Congress where authorities fall short.
I believe we have the authorities to tackle the challenges
in front of us, but I do not want to suggest that that is
somehow not attentive to the vigorousness of this challenge.
China has publicly announced this strategy, and we need to be
aggressive in responding to it.
Senator Warner. I want to make one last point. I know my
time is up. I agree with Senator Shelby. We need to make sure
America is open for business. But I do not think, over the last
few years, I have come to understand, particularly in China and
Russia, not only their whole of Government but their whole of
society approach about how they intend to wage this economic
warfare and competition, with a very different set of rules.
And I am really concerned--I am glad to hear--I would love to
follow up with each of you.
But I know from the intel community side, I do not feel
that there is appropriate responsibility in any single entity
that the number of folks I have sat in SCIFs with who say,
``Yes, Senator, this is a problem but it is really not our
area,'' and sorting through not only the traditional
intellectual property theft or traditional acquisition, or, you
know, next-generation JV. But just through the normal course of
business, companies that are entering into our marketplace that
may have back doors, or that may have made--that may have made
agreements with their host Government in a way that they come
into this marketplace in a way that could be long-term
compromising to our national security. We have to get to it in
a much, much higher level of priority.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Warner. Senator Tillis.
Senator Tillis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
gentlemen, for being here.
I have only a couple of questions. I have got several that
I am going to submit for the record, because I think that they
could go long and they could have details that I would like to
get to.
But one question that I have is, when we think about the
global supply chains, the sort of global networks now that come
into ultimately producing a technology or a finished good, how
much insight do we have? If I were China and it looks like we
are doing a good job of really tracking and identifying what
may be a maligned intent in terms of some sort of a direct
investment in the United States, I would go figure out how to
get involved in the supply chain somewhere else, where
tangentially I can benefit. How do we deal with that?
Mr. Chewning. Senator, if you do not mind, I am happy to
take a first cut at it, if you like. So right now we do not
have a formal mechanism in place for international cooperation
with allies. Per the 2017 National Defense Authorization Act,
the Department of Defense was asked to establish the NTIB, or
the National Technical and Industrial Base, which is a
partnership with Canada, the U.K., and Australia. We are in the
process of developing that framework, and one of the pathfinder
projects we have identified for that is a thing you have
identified, is a way we can jointly work through a protection
regime around foreign direct investment into that collective
industrial base.
Senator Tillis. Thank you. The concern that I have, if you
take a look--we just passed tax reform, we are seeing economic
activity. We are clearly making ourselves more attractive to
build investment in the United States. I think we are somewhere
around $7 trillion foreign investment, maybe $6.5 trillion
investment in the United States. I do not want the productive
deal flow to slow down. I actually want it to increase.
And so I think we have to be very careful, particularly
with a Nation like China. I am not going to talk about the
specific company but there was a proposed acquisition that
ostensibly was to purchase a problem asset in the United
States, not so much for the asset, because it is not
performing, but because of the underlying infrastructure that
applied to areas of the Chinese infrastructure that they needed
help on. And this had to do with a financial services
instrument.
But it sounded like they were getting pushback because they
would have majority ownership in a company that also managed
personal information of American citizens. So it was not
necessarily a national security threat, in terms of defense
systems or military applications, but information about our
citizens.
How are we going to strike the balance, over time, when
China is going to look around and realize that as their economy
continues to modernize and grow that they have still got these
underlying infrastructures, things like insurance and other
infrastructures that they are going to build on. It is easier
to buy than build. And how do we make sure that we do not
disadvantage a very large base of proven capabilities from
being able to fill that need in China? How do we do that right,
versus having people say, ``We are not even going to pursue any
kind of discussion with a Chinese firm on this sort of
acquisition because we do not think we could actually get the
deal done''?
Mr. Tarbert. I will comment from the Treasury perspective.
First of all, we totally agree. We have no intention of
stopping deal flow. We would like to see it increased.
Senator Tillis. And I am going to submit some questions for
the record on the deal flow, specifically to you.
Mr. Tarbert. Last year, even from a country like China,
dozens of transactions were, in fact, cleared through CFIUS. So
I think that is an important point. When we see a national
security issue, in most circumstances we can figure out a way
to mitigate that and get the transaction through. So again, we
very much favor foreign investment.
Senator Tillis. And I want to talk more about some the--the
ones that you would never see because they just think that it
could either be costly or get caught up. So it is really the--
it is not--you can tell me about the ones that came through.
What we need to do is figure out what ones are not even being
discussed because they think it would wade into this area and
the deal is just not such that they want that--to me it is
another regulatory burden. A lot of M&A activity never occurs
because of the anticipated regulatory burden and the time to
execute the deal.
And so I am trying to get a better sense of, you know, how
we can actually promote more. I want more foreign direct
investment from all countries. I want you all to do a good job
of tracking down the maligned intent.
Mr. Tarbert. On that note, Senator Tillis, one of the
things that I think FIRRMA does that we at Treasury really like
is this idea of the short-form declaration. So if there are
people out there that want to do a deal, they can file,
probably on a computer data base, something around five pages
instead of the long notice, to just get a sense as to whether
this is something where we would want to require notice or we
could approve it--the committee could approve it within 30
days. So that is a way to streamline the process to encourage
more deals coming through CFIUS.
Senator Tillis. And I am going to submit several questions
for the record around FIRRMA and kind of get a good, the bad,
and the ugly response on some of the attributes and some of the
problematic provisions of FIRRMA.
I am sorry. Were you going to comment?
Mr. Ashooh. No. I would only say that with us, I think the
way we should approach it, in all things, Senator, is to focus
on the specific area of concern and tailor our system to do
that so that we leave unencumbered the very large segment of
the economy that is not an area of concern.
Senator Tillis. The key here is we need lean regulations
everywhere. We need to make sure that we got to addressing the
problem or the risk, like any regulatory risk, even outside of
this subject, but we need to do it in the leanest manner
possible so that we are attracting as much foreign direct
investment as possible, because it is key to actually driving
the GDP growth that we need to get our economy back on sound
footing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. Senator Cortez Masto.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen, for
being here. Thank you, Chair and Ranking Member for this
important discussion.
Let me start with this perspective. I come from Nevada, and
in Nevada, as you well know, Mr. Chewning, we have Naval Air
Station. We have Nellis Air Force Base. We have Creech Air
Force Base. We have Hawthorne Army Depot. And I have been to
all of those facilities. Born and raised there. Live there,
grown up with them.
One of the things I hear constantly from many there, both
at Creech and Nellis, and Naval Air Station, is the concern,
national security concerns, because if you have been there you
know they are in the middle of the desert, and there is
property being purchased near those military installations by
foreign nationals, and the concerns that that impact has on our
national security.
So I know you talked a little bit about this, but could you
also talk about--and I am curious, all three--in the current
law, the way it stands, is it--can you prevent somebody from
coming in--and this is vacant land that is being purchased. No
businesses being put on it. It is vacant land, near a military
installation, for purpose of obtaining, I believe, and I think
they have concerns about, some of our national security assets
and information about it. Can, under the current law, that type
of acquisition be stopped?
Mr. Tarbert. Senator, I can speak to CFIUS, and the answer
is no. In fact, even during my first 100 days on the job we saw
an example. I cannot get into specifics but it was in a rural
area and there was vacant land, and, therefore, CFIUS did not
have jurisdiction. Now if someone had put a farmer's market on
that land, then it would have been a U.S. business, so we could
assert jurisdiction. But I think the fact that you could have
put a farmer's market on it and had jurisdiction, but the fact
that it was vacant, you could not review it, points out one of
the concerns we have about the current jurisdiction.
Senator Cortez Masto. And that is true for----
Mr. Chewning. Yes, Senator, and just to build on the point,
it is great, wide-open country there, and it provides terrific
observation to certain sensitive military activities that we
may not want observed by certain actors, and that is definitely
a concern of ours.
Senator Cortez Masto. And under FIRRMA, this is covered,
this would be covered. You would be able to prevent that type
of acquisition. Is that correct?
Mr. Chewning. Yes, Senator. Yes, it is my understanding.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK. And let me just say, this is not
something that happens sporadically. I was literally there over
the summer, at Creech. We were just having this conversation.
And if you know where Creech Air Force Base is, it is in the
middle of nowhere. But at the entrance of Creech there was a
number of foreign nationals that had stopped, trying to access,
and with cameras. This happens all the time. And so it is a
concern, I think, for our national security.
At the same time, I think we need to balance that. I hear
this conversation where we need to balance, I believe--and I
echo my colleagues--this national security with our economic
security. And I know last week, at the CFIUS hearing with
businesses, investors, a witness from IBM said, ``If FIRRMA
passes, IBM would move its labs outside the U.S.'' And I am
curious. What is your response to industry's concern that
FIRRMA would make it more difficult to finance their
operations? And I will start with you, sir.
Mr. Tarbert. I do not think that is what the industry
argues. In fact, many in industry support this bill because
they understand that it helps to protect both American national
security but also intellectual property. We have had a CFIUS
regime now, as I mentioned, for close to 40 years, and we
continue to be an innovation hub. People still want to do
business here. They want to innovate here, because we protect
intellectual property and we have a number of legal safeguards.
Senator Cortez Masto. And so let me ask you this question,
because I think that balance is important. But, more
importantly, to achieve that balance, we have to have all of
the agencies and actors that are looking at this in an
oversight coordinating and working together. And because there
is not one agency looking at all of these, I think our concern
is how do we ensure that there is that coordination, that
collaboration, and that something is not falling through the
cracks here? And I think my concern, like many of my
colleagues, is how do we ensure that happens?
Mr. Tarbert. CFIUS was created to bring to bear all of
those resources throughout the Government, and one of the great
things about CFIUS is because it is not a singular agency, but
rather a committee of 16, effectively, at least 11 but 16 when
you include all the observers, it brings to bear all of that
expertise. So if we see a transaction that requires experts at
the Department of Energy, at our laboratories, we can bring
them in.
So I think CFIUS is really meant to do exactly that, and we
value that close coordination. We have weekly meetings, monthly
meetings at various levels within the organization, where all
of those departments and agencies are represented.
Senator Cortez Masto. And do you feel the same way,
gentlemen?
Mr. Ashooh. Yes, and Senator, I might add, our export
control process also is interagency. In fact, we work very
closely with the Department of Defense and Department of State
in processing our license applications.
But I think that one of the positives about FIRRMA that I
do think bears mentioning is, certainly from an export control
perspective we are living in a global environment, and it is
important that, under this legislation, we are allowed to
collaborate more than we are currently with friendly Nations.
That is something we do in the export control world. We have
multilateral regimes that work all the time, because when we
get together on things it is far more impactful. That needs to
apply in CFIUS as well.
Senator Cortez Masto. OK.
Mr. Chewning. Yes, Senator. We support the committee
approach as being holistic.
Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I notice my time is up and
I have gone a little bit over. Thank you very much for your
being here today and, Chair, for the Committee hearing.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. Senator Tester.
Senator Tester. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member, for the recognition, and I want to thank you all for
being here.
I just--I guess I will start out with a general question
since we are working something not CFIUS related but something
I think deals with national security, and that is the Farm
Bill. Would you agree that food security and national security
are connected? Any one of you.
Mr. Tarbert. Yes.
Mr. Ashooh. Yes.
Senator Tester. Did CFIUS play a role in Bayer's purchaser
of Monsanto?
Mr. Tarbert. By law we are unable to talk about any
particular transaction publicly, but we can provide briefings
to any Member of Congress.
Senator Tester. Can you give me a nod of the head, then, if
you cannot talk about it?
Mr. Tarbert. I am not sure if we are permitted, under the
statute, to speak publicly about anything, but what we can
provide a confidential briefing on any particular case.
Senator Tester. Well, let me ask this.
Mr. Tarbert. Sure.
Senator Tester. Do you believe that CFIUS--and this can be
for anybody up there--do you believe that CFIUS currently has
enough power to protect the food system here in the United
States, currently?
Mr. Tarbert. I would say that it has enough for those
transactions that implicate the food system under its
jurisdiction. So cases that would implicate food security that
come before CFIUS, I would say yes. What I do not know,
Senator, is whether there are issues with respect to food
security that fall outside the kinds of transactions that we
look at.
Senator Tester. Do you--would the Cornyn bill have an
effect on agribusiness transactions?
Mr. Ashooh. It could, possibly.
Senator Tester. OK. Well just--I do not--it is kind of odd
in this Committee. I mean, it is odd in any committee when we
cannot talk about the kind of transactions that you guys deal
with. I mean, I do not understand--I get it if you are talking
about a potential military conflict, but if you think food
security is national security, to ask if you dealt with the
Bayer-Monsanto merger and to say you cannot respond to any
specific cases, that tells me you dealt with it. Otherwise you
would say no, because you did not deal with that case. Enough
said.
Mr. Tarbert. I am just going to smile.
Senator Tester. OK. That is good. Well, I will just tell
you that I really--I think one of the reasons we have a Farm
Bill and we put out billions of dollars in subsidies is for
food security, and I think food security is critically
important in this country, and I think it is a national
security issue. And I will also tell you that Bayer is a big
dog, internationally, and so is Monsanto, and for them to be
able to combine, I would really love to know the thought
process that went into that, because from a national security
standpoint, I think it makes us less secure. It gives control
of our food to a select few people.
Mr. Tarbert. And just to be clear, Senator, we are not
permitted to speak publicly about a particular transaction, but
every Member of Congress and your staff has the ability to
request a briefing on a transaction.
Senator Tester. I got it.
So let us talk about the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. I
know that the SEC plays a role. Potentially the Department of
Agriculture would play a role in that kind of deal. Maybe the
Department of Agriculture would play a role in the Bayer-
Monsanto deal. I guess the question is, do you get enough
support from agencies in your decision making? Is there
adequate reason to adding more input from agencies as you guys
make your administrative decisions?
Mr. Tarbert. Sure. On transactions, at least during my
first 100 days, there----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Tarbert. ----where we have seen cases, let us say, that
have dealt with food security issues----
Senator Tester. Yes.
Mr. Tarbert. ----we have always involved the Department of
Agriculture.
Senator Tester. OK. So you do not--is there any downside to
adding more administrative agencies to CFIUS?
Mr. Tarbert. Here is what I would think.
Senator Tester. Yeah.
Mr. Tarbert. If we added--so, basically, any transaction
that comes through CFIUS--and keep in mind we had nearly 240
last year----
Senator Tester. Right.
Mr. Tarbert. ----every single agency has to review the
transaction and sign off, a Senate-confirmed official. So if we
have only three cases per year, let us say----
Senator Tester. Yeah.
Mr. Tarbert. ----that deal with food security----
Senator Tester. Yeah.
Mr. Tarbert. ----we would be asking the Department of
Agriculture to commit all sorts of resources and their time and
effort to deal with a bunch of cases that have nothing to do
with food security.
Senator Tester. I got you.
Mr. Tarbert. So that would be the only----
Senator Tester. So you think it is much more effective to
bring them in on an ad hoc basis.
Mr. Tarbert. They absolutely should be brought in when food
security is an issue, and we do.
Senator Tester. OK. And the same thing with agencies like
the SEC and things like that.
Mr. Tarbert. Yes, sir.
Senator Tester. OK. Very good. I have got more questions
for the record. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. Senator Menendez.
Senator Menendez. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, last year, NeST
Technologies, a New Jersey-based company, had agreed to be
purchased by HNA, a Chinese conglomerate, on the condition that
the transaction received approval from CFIUS. According to a
lawsuit filed last month by NeST Technologies, the deal fell
apart because HNA, the Chinese conglomerate, provided knowingly
false, inconsistent, and misleading information about its
ownership and ties to the Chinese Government during the CFIUS
review of the acquisition.
But HNA's interest in the United States is not limited to
the New Jersey company. They have received CFIUS approval to
purchase a California technology distributors, they are
actively working to purchase a controlling stake in Skybridge
Capital, the investment firm owned by Anthony Scaramucci.
So should not there be severe consequences for parties that
either mislead or fail to provide accurate information to
CFIUS?
Mr. Tarbert. Yes, there should be. If there are situations
where we see a notice that is filled with misleading
statements, there is the ability to take action. FIRMA
specifically requires a certification for that very----
Senator Menendez. And in that respect, then, should not
consequences flow to any previously approved or pending
transactions? For example, should CFIUS reopen previously
cleared HNA transactions or modify their approach to reviewing
pending transactions involving companies like HNA, in light of
the information? If they have shown themselves to be a bad
actor, and they move from one transaction to the other, should
not there be a heightened scrutiny of their efforts to acquire
U.S. companies that would fall under the rubric of the CFIUS
review?
Mr. Tarbert. I will not specifically--talk to any specific
case, but what I will say is----
Senator Menendez. I am not asking about any specific case.
I am asking about any other follow-on, regardless of what the
transaction is.
Mr. Tarbert. Yes.
Senator Menendez. Should not--whether it is HNA or a
similarly situated foreign company that is, in essence, seeking
to deceive, because their real purpose is not for a commercial
transaction but to create a transfer to the Government that
they are ultimately backed by. Should not that raise a higher
scrutiny for you?
Mr. Tarbert. Well, it definitely raises scrutiny when you
look at the specific tests we use, threat plus vulnerability
equals consequence. That plays into the threat issue. If they
are materially misleading and misrepresenting who they are, and
there are ties to a Government, for example, if we see a
company doing that, then that would play into our analysis.
Senator Menendez. Well, I certainly am glad to hear that,
and I hope--commend to your attention that this is one company
that, in fact, seems to be doing that.
Mr. Ashooh. Senator, if I might----
Senator Menendez. Yes.
Mr. Ashooh. ----and again, not to speak to a specific case,
but Bureau of Industry and Security within Commerce routinely
uses information gleaned from CFIUS process to provide
appropriate follow-up for our separate authorities, under the
export control regime, but that is a common occurrence.
Senator Menendez. Let me ask, Mr. Secretary, I have been
closely following, and raised in this Committee several times,
a situation in Venezuela, particularly the loan, in 2016, by
the Russian State oil company, Rosneft, to Venezuela State-
owned oil company, PDVSA. As collateral for the loan, PDVSA
pledged a nearly 50-percent ownership stake in U.S.-based Citgo
to Rosneft. And I remain deeply concerned about the potential
for a hostile adversary like Russia to have ownership of
critical U.S. energy infrastructure.
Last May, Secretary Mnuchin told me, in a hearing, that any
Rosneft acquisition of Citgo would be reviewed by CFIUS. I
followed up in an inquiry to Treasury in September of last
year, but 4 months later I have not had a response.
In your opinion, does CFIUS require any additional
statutory authorities to conduct a thorough review of this
possible acquisition?
Mr. Tarbert. I will not speak to the specific case, but I
will say that FIRRMA has a couple of provisions in there that
would ensure that any similar type of transaction would be
covered. For example, it specifically talks about assets
purchased in bankruptcy, and it also has a provision that
addresses nonpassive investments. So if you had a situation
where bonds were being converted but there was not control, I
believe that FIRRMA would address that situation.
Senator Menendez. Oh, if I took Rosneft out and I just
described the nature of the possibility, would you say that you
have the authorities necessary, under CFIUS, to review such a
transaction?
Mr. Tarbert. I would say that just on the facts provided, I
am not able to say that we do.
Senator Menendez. Well, you need to tell the Committee
that. You need to let us know.
Mr. Tarbert. Well, again, not the specific, but just based
on----
Senator Menendez. Mr. Secretary, please do not play word
games with me. I am asking you whether you have the
authorities, under any such transaction, whether it be a
bankruptcy someplace else, where shares are held, to any
critical infrastructure in the United States. If you do not
have the authorities then you need to tell----
Mr. Tarbert. No, I would say if it results in a situation
where there is not control, then we do not have the authority,
and we would need it.
Senator Menendez. Where there is not control.
Mr. Tarbert. Where there is not control.
Senator Menendez. So if--so their pledge, 50 percent, it
would have been easy for them to get another percent or two on
the open market so they would be over 50 percent and,
therefore, a controlling interest. In that case, you are saying
you do have the authority.
Mr. Tarbert. If that--if they had--if they had----
[Overlapping speakers.]
Mr. Tarbert. ----that allows them to----
Senator Menendez. ----less than a controlling authority,
you need new authority.
Mr. Tarbert. Exactly. That is exactly right.
Senator Menendez. I appreciate that. Yeah, I have other
questions but I will submit them.
Mr. Tarbert. And we can--for specific inquiries, again, we
make ourselves available to Members of Congress, where we
cannot speak publicly on----
Senator Menendez. OK. Well, I hope my request of 4 months
ago eventually gets an answer. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses for being here today.
So we are here to talk about CFIUS, which reviews
acquisitions by foreign companies to ensure that they do not
threaten our national security, because we know that our
adversaries are particularly interested in acquiring emerging,
early stage technologies and they may be structuring their
transactions in order to avoid CFIUS review.
So to prevent that from happening, we have to be able to
identify what are our most critical technologies. But GAO found
that the Pentagon is no longer updating the military critical
technologies list that has the technologies listed that we need
to maintain our military superiority.
The CFIUS reform bill that we are discussing would
significantly expand the category of covered transactions to
include ``other emerging technologies that could be essential
for maintaining or increasing our technological advantage.'' I
know that both the Chair and the Ranking Member talked a little
bit about this, but I want to dig in just a bit more and ask
the question, given how rapidly technology is advancing, how do
you think your agencies should identify emerging technologies
and identify the transactions involving these technologies for
CFIUS review?
If you could all just give me a short bite on this it would
be helpful. Maybe I could start with you, Secretary Tarbert.
Mr. Tarbert. I think we would want to rely on the
interagency process and particularly those experts on all those
individual technologies by sector, to really get a thorough
idea.
Senator Warren. So you say go to the experts, ask the
experts, and develop a list out of that?
Mr. Tarbert. As well as making use of the notice and
comment rulemaking process, after which time we would update
the list frequently.
Senator Warren. OK. It sounds like it is further on down
the list, though.
Mr. Ashooh, could you add more?
Mr. Ashooh. I take your question to be how do we identify--
--
Senator Warren. Right.
Mr. Ashooh. ----those emerging technologies, and----
Senator Warren. Right. How do you know an emerging
technology to know to watch out? That is what I am really
trying to ask.
Mr. Ashooh. That is certainly the crux--emerging
technology, especially critically technology used to be led by
the national security establishment. It is not now, so it is a
challenge, so there is no one way.
I will tell you, within Commerce, we lean heavily on what
we call technical advisory committees, which are made up of the
folks who are representative of where those emerging
technologies come from. And one of the priorities of the Under
Secretary of BIS has been to revisit those advisory committees,
to make sure they are fresh, they have got the right people.
But that is not the only way.
Senator Warren. Right.
Mr. Ashooh. It is just one key way that I thought I would
mention.
Senator Warren. And I worry about it not being systematic,
that they are more episodic rather than regularly built in, so
that they are alert to the fact that they are the ones that you
are counting on.
Mr. Ashooh. We share that. Yeah, we share the systematic
need to do this, and it has to be regimented and are working on
ways to do that.
Senator Warren. Good. And, Mr. Chewning, would you like to
add anything to that?
Mr. Chewning. Yes, Senator. I think I would just say that
the lists are important. They need to be updated. I also would
like to point out the complementary nature of the list with the
CFIUS process that takes a holistic view on risk, based on
threat, vulnerability, and consequence. I think that is a nice
interplay between the two, because there are some threats we
may not know, that would not be on a list, and that we would
want to be able to catch through the RBA process, as well.
Senator Warren. Fair enough. I am just trying to get this
back so you know even the areas to be alert in, and I would be
interested in any follow-up you have on that----
Mr. Chewning. I would be happy to provide that.
Senator Warren. ----about how we might be doing this.
I think it is really important for CFIUS to be proactive
and not just reactive in identifying these emerging
technologies, and the foreign adversaries, I guarantee, are
looking at and trying to figure out how they might be able to
acquire.
I also would emphasize that if we are going to expand CFIUS
mandate for 21st-century economy and the security environment
we now face, we have to make sure it has a 21st-century level
of resources available to you, to effectively handle the
growing volume and complexity of these transactions. You have
to grow along with the threat here.
The discussion of CFIUS focuses on protecting our national
security while preserving foreign investment, but I want to
touch on one other issue that I think affects both priorities,
and that is our investment in basic research. Jim Lewis, a
former official with the Department of State and Commerce,
testified in this Committee last year that CFIUS reforms should
be paired with policies that drive innovation here at home, and
that means investing in research that helps our economy and
helps our military.
He said, our underinvestment in scientific research creates
a self-imposed disadvantage in military and economic
competition with China, and that maintaining our economic and
military superiority requires investment both by encouraging
private-sector investment and by governing in those areas, like
basic research, where the private sector spending is likely to
be insufficient.
So let me just ask this in the quickest possible way, and I
will start with you, Mr. Chewning. Would more Government
investment in scientific research support the core objectives
of CFIUS in protecting strategic industries from foreign
competition and maintaining our technological----
Mr. Chewning. Absolutely, Senator, yes.
Senator Warren. And would you agree with that?
Mr. Ashooh. Yes.
Senator Warren. And would you agree with that, Secretary
Tarbert?
Mr. Tarbert. Yes.
Senator Warren. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it. I hope that we will push hard on this research
point as well, when we are talking about revisions to CFIUS.
Chairman Crapo. That is an excellent point, and thank you
very much for focusing on that.
That concludes the questioning. I have a couple of quick
announcements for those Senators who want to ask questions, to
follow up on this for the record. Those questions will be due
by Thursday, February 1st. And, witnesses, you will be probably
asked some follow-up questions too. I ask you to respond to
them promptly.
And I am going to take the Chairman's prerogative and give
you the first one to put on your list right now. It is one we
did not get to. It is one that Senator Warren just alluded to.
This question, which I would like you to put first on your list
to respond to, is that the legislation, FIRRMA, authorizes
CFIUS to impose filing fees on transactions to cover the
committee's funding needs. Will these fees be sufficient to
address the increased caseload anticipated with FIRRMA, and
what new resources will your agencies need to carry out these
reforms? How many more cases do you anticipate CFIUS would
review as a result of FIRRMA?
So there is your first question.
Senator Shelby. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Crapo. Yes. I do not want to start too much here,
but go ahead.
Senator Shelby. No, no. I hope they have sufficient funds.
If they do not have sufficient funds--I am putting on my
appropriator's hat now--we will get you the sufficient funds,
because I congratulate you and Senator Brown for bringing this
hearing together. This is of utmost importance to this country,
what you guys do, and you have got to have the resources to do
it. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator. And with that, this
hearing is adjourned. Thank you again for being here.
[Whereupon, at 11:19 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements, responses to written questions, and
additional material supplied for the record follow:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
This morning, we will receive testimony for a third time this
Congress on the role of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States, or ``CFIUS''.
The Committee held a general oversight hearing on CFIUS in
September, and last Thursday, the Committee began its review of S.
2098, the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2017, or
FIRRMA, a comprehensive reform bill that significantly expands the
purview of CFIUS, introduced by Senators Cornyn and Feinstein
CFIUS's authorities cover transactions that result in foreign
``control'' of a U.S. business that may threaten the national security
of the United States. The focus is currently on inbound investment and
technology acquisition.
Today's hearing brings in witnesses from three of the nine Federal
agencies and offices that comprise the full voting membership of CFIUS:
the Department of the Treasury, which serves as Chair of the Committee;
the Department of Defense; and the Department of Commerce's Bureau of
Industry and Security, which administers and enforces the dual use
regulations of the U.S. export control regime.
According to their testimony last week, Senators Cornyn and
Feinstein, informed by their work on the Senate Intelligence Committee,
introduced their bill because of growing concerns arising from China's
multilayered threat to U.S. national security.
Namely, threats emanating from a weaponization of its foreign
investment strategy to acquire, by design, dual-use technology and
know-how from U.S. companies.
Our colleagues believe that China has found gaps in both the
existing CFIUS process and export control regime, and is exploiting
each of them to the detriment of U.S. national security and the U.S.
defense industrial base.
To address these concerns, FIRRMA is specifically designed to
broaden CFIUS's jurisdiction to review certain high technology joint
venture and related arrangements, minority-position investments and
certain types of real estate transactions.
At last week's hearing, a consensus emerged that much of the bill
is focused on national security threats that need to be addressed as
China executes its policies born of its unique civil-military
integration that effectively blurs the lines between military and
commercial activities.
It is also important to note that the overwhelming majority of
foreign investments and transactions provide significant benefit to the
U.S. economy, including those Chinese investments that occur in most
sectors of the U.S. economy and do not impact the national security of
the United States.
It is that point of inflection, between national security and
economic growth realized from an open investment policy, that the
Banking Committee has been entrusted to debate and oversee throughout
the now 42-year evolution of the CFIUS process.
The challenge comes in the continued use of foreign investment to
promote economic growth and next generation technologies while
shielding those very technologies from foreign threats.
Last week, the panel of witnesses from the private sector offered
their perspectives on the potential effects of FIRRMA.
During the hearing's question and answer period, there were several
questions raised that merit feedback from today's panel:
One, would the expansion of CFIUS authority to unwind or alter
outbound joint venture-related international commercial activity
duplicate or in any way undermine the current U.S. export control
regime and end up chilling this type of commercial activity?
Two, if there are gaps in the export control process, why should
this Committee, which has jurisdiction over both the relevant parts of
the U.S. export control regime and CFIUS, opt to create new export
control authority for CFIUS, a traditionally unilateral, inward bound
review process?
Three, what would the resource burden look like for each of your
agencies for the type of expansion envisioned by this legislation, and
what impact would it have on foreign investment if the review period
were actually increased by 50 percent to accommodate these new reviews?
The three Government agencies represented here today provide a
spectrum of viewpoints necessary to understand where the United States
must position itself with respect to CFIUS to assure the national
security of the United States.
Given what we have heard in previous hearings, it is apparent on
national security grounds that legislative fixes to the current system
may be warranted, including expanding the authority of CFIUS to monitor
certain additional transactions that are evading the process.
Preservation of the U.S. defense industrial base, protection of
U.S. critical technology, critical infrastructure, and even related
American know-how are all legitimate areas of concern.
It is not the intention of the Banking Committee to chill direct
foreign investment into the United States, but neither can this
Nation's national security interests be subordinated to commercial
interests.
I am certain that these fixes can be made with the help of the
Administration, business community, and my colleagues, from both sides
of the dais, on the Banking Committee.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF HEATH P. TARBERT
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Markets and
Investment Policy
January 25, 2018
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and distinguished Members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of
the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA), S.2098,
115th Cong. (2017).
My top priority as Assistant Secretary is ensuring that the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) has the
tools and resources it needs to perform the critical national security
functions that Congress intended it to. \1\ I believe FIRRMA--a bill
introduced with broad, bipartisan support--is designed to provide CFIUS
with the tools it needs to meet the challenges of today and those
likely to arise in the future. FIRRMA will protect our national
security and strengthen America's longstanding open investment policy
that fosters innovation and economic growth.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Nomination Hearing before the S. Comm. on Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs, 115th Cong. (May 16, 2017) (testimony of
Dr. Heath P. Tarbert).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importance of Foreign Investment in the United States
From the early days of our Republic, the United States has been a
leading destination for investors, entrepreneurs, and innovators. In
his famous Report on the Subject of Manufactures, Alexander Hamilton
argued that foreign capital was not something to be feared or viewed as
a rival to domestic investment, but was instead a ``precious
acquisition'' in fostering our economic growth. \2\ Throughout the 19th
and 20th centuries, capital from abroad funded the construction of
America from our railways to our city skylines, while at the same time
helping make such innovations as the automobile a reality. \3\ Foreign
investment has also brought significant benefits to American workers
and their families in the form of economic growth and well-paid jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Alexander Hamilton, ``Report on the Subject of Manufactures''
(Dec. 5, 1791), available at https://founders.archives.gov/documents/
Hamilton/01-10-02-0001-0007.
\3\ See Mira Wilkins, ``The History of Foreign Investment in the
United States to 1914'' (Harvard Univ. Press 1999).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The same is true today, with a total stock of foreign direct
investment in the United States standing at a staggering $7.6 trillion
(at market value) in 2016. \4\ Numerous studies have demonstrated that
the benefits from foreign investment in the United States are
substantial. Majority-owned U.S. affiliates of foreign entities
accounted for over 23 percent of total U.S. goods exports in 2015. \5\
They also accounted for 15.8 percent of the U.S. total expenditure on
research and development by businesses. \6\ They employed 6.8 million
U.S. workers in 2015, and provided compensation of nearly $80,000 per
U.S. employee, as compared to the U.S. average of $64,000. \7\ One
study estimated that spillovers from foreign direct investment in the
United States accounted for between 8 percent and 19 percent of all
U.S. manufacturing productivity growth between 1987 and 1996. \8\ As
Secretary Mnuchin--echoing his predecessor, Secretary Hamilton--has
observed, ``we recognize the profound economic benefits of foreign
investment'' today and place the utmost value on having ``industrious
and entrepreneurial foreign investors'' continue to invest, grow, and
innovate in the United States. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, ``U.S. Net International
Investment Position at the End of the Period'', Table 1.1. (Dec. 28,
2017), available at https://bea.gov/scb/pdf/2018/01-January/0118-
international-investment-position-tables.pdf.
\5\ U.S. Dep't of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Admin.,
``Foreign Direct Investment in the United States'', ESA Issue Brief 06-
17, Oct. 3, 2017, at 2.
\6\ Id.
\7\ Id.
\8\ Wolfgang Keller and Stephen R. Yeaple, ``Multinational
Enterprises, Int'l Trade, and Productivity Growth: Firm Level Evidence
From the United States'', 91 Review of Economics & Statistics, November
2009, at 821, 828.
\9\ Steven T. Mnuchin, Secretary, Dep't of the Treasury,
``SelectUSA Investment Summit Welcome Address'' (June 20, 2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Evolution of CFIUS
Despite its many benefits, we are equally cognizant that foreign
investment is not always benign. On the eve of America's entry into
World War I, concerned by German acquisitions in our chemical sector
and other war-related industries, \10\ Congress passed the Trading with
the Enemy Act, giving the President broad power to block investments
during times of war and national emergency. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Edward M. Graham and David M. Marchick, Institute for Int'l
Economics, ``U.S. Nat'l Security & Foreign Direct Investment'' 4-8
(2006). Prior to America's entry into World War I, it was revealed that
the German Government made a number of concealed investments into the
United States, including establishment of the Bridgeport Projectile
Company which ``was in business merely to keep America's leading
munitions producers too busy to fill genuine orders for the weapons the
French and British so desperately needed.'' Ernest Wittenberg, ``The
Thrifty Spy on the Sixth Avenue El'', American Heritage (Dec. 1965),
available at http://www.americanheritage.com/content/thrifty-spy-sixth-
avenue-el. The company placed an order for five million pounds of
gunpowder and two million shell cases ``with the intention of simply
storing them.'' Id. The plot was revealed when a German spy
inadvertently left his briefcase containing the incriminating documents
on a New York City train, with the documents being returned to the
custody of the Treasury Department. Id.
\11\ 50 U.S.C. 4305. TWEA, originally passed in 1917, empowered
the President to ``investigate, regulate, direct and compel, nullify,
void, prevent or prohibit, any acquisition holding, withholding, use,
transfer, withdrawal, transportation, importation or exportation of, or
dealing in, or exercising any right, power, or privilege with respect
to, or transactions involving, any property in which any foreign
country or a national thereof has any interest.'' Id. 4305(b)(1)(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the Great Depression and World War II, international
investment flows dropped dramatically. \12\ And in the boom years of
the 1950s and 1960s--as many countries devastated by World War II were
rebuilding their economies--investment in the United States from abroad
was modest compared to outflows. Indeed, for the first time ever,
America became a net source of investment capital instead of its
destination. \13\ And what foreign investment did exist posed little
risk since our main strategic adversaries--the Soviet Union and its
satellites--were communist countries whose economic systems were
largely isolated from our own.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Graham and Marchick, supra n. 10, at xvi, 14, 18.
\13\ Id. at 9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When the post-war trend changed in the 1970s, however, CFIUS was
born. The oil shock that made OPEC countries wealthy led to concern
that petrodollars might be used to purchase key U.S. assets. In 1975,
President Ford issued an Executive Order creating CFIUS to monitor and
report on foreign investments, but with no power to stop those posing
national security threats. \14\ Then in the 1980s, a growing number of
Japanese acquisitions motivated Congress to pass the Exon-Florio
Amendment in 1988. \15\ For the first time, the President could block
the foreign acquisition of a U.S. company or order divestment where the
transaction posed a threat to national security without first declaring
an emergency. That law created Section 721 of the Defense Production
Act of 1950, which remains the statutory cornerstone of CFIUS today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Exec. Order 11,858, 40 FR 20,263 (May 7, 1975).
\15\ Pub. L. 100-418, Title V, 5021, 102 Stat. 1107 (1988).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subsequently, in 1992, Congress passed the Byrd Amendment which
requires CFIUS to undertake an investigation where two criteria are
met: (1) the acquirer is controlled by or acting on behalf of a foreign
Government; and (2) the acquisition results in control of a person
engaged in interstate commerce in the United States that could threaten
our national security. \16\ In the years that followed, it became
evident that CFIUS and Congress did not share the same view on when a
45-day investigation period was discretionary rather than mandatory, a
rift that was more clearly exposed in the wake of the Dubai Ports World
controversy. In order to instill greater procedural rigor and
accountability into CFIUS's process, Congress enacted the Foreign
Investment and National Security Act of 2007 (FINSA), which formally
established CFIUS by statute and codified its current structure and
processes. \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Pub. L. 102-484, 106 Stat. 2315 (1992).
\17\ Pub. L. 110-49, 121 Stat. 246 (2007).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Critical Need for CFIUS Modernization
Now, more than a decade after FINSA and three decades after Exon-
Florio, we find ourselves at another historic inflection point. Within
the last few years, the national security landscape as it relates to
foreign investment began shifting in ways that have eclipsed the
magnitude of any other shift in CFIUS's 40-year history. Nowhere is
that shift more evident than in the caseload CFIUS now faces. The
resources of CFIUS are challenged by increased case volume and
complexity. The average volume of CFIUS cases has been growing steadily
from fewer than 100 in 2009 and 2010 (the 2 years following the
financial crisis) to nearly 240 last year. While it is difficult to
measure case complexity in real terms, one indicator is the rate at
which cases have proceeded to CFIUS's investigation stage, which is
more resource intensive. In 2007, approximately 4 percent of cases went
to investigation; in 2017, approximately 70 percent did. Another
potential measure of complexity is the number of cases in which CFIUS
determines that mitigation or prohibition is necessary to address
national security concerns, which require significantly more time and
resources. From roughly 2008 through 2015, such cases represented fewer
than 10 percent of the total covered transactions CFIUS reviewed; this
figure has risen to approximately 20 percent of total covered
transactions CFIUS reviewed in 2017.
The added complexity CFIUS is confronting arises from a number of
different factors, including: the way foreign Governments are using
investments to meet strategic objectives, more complex transaction
structures, and increasingly globalized supply chains. Complexity also
results from continued evolution in the relationship between national
security and commercial activity. Military capabilities are rapidly
building on top of commercial innovations. Additionally, the digital,
data-driven economy has created national security vulnerabilities never
before seen. Today, the acquisition of a Silicon Valley start-up may
raise just as serious concerns from a national security perspective as
the acquisition of a defense or aerospace company, CFIUS's traditional
area of focus.
CFIUS's exposure to such cases has allowed it to play a critical
role in protecting against threats to national security, but has at the
same time highlighted gaps in our jurisdictional authorities. We
continue to be made aware of transactions we lack the jurisdiction to
review but which pose similar national security concerns to those
already before CFIUS. These gaps are widening as more threat actors
seek to exploit them. The problem lies in the fact that CFIUS's
jurisdictional grant is now 30 years old, originating with the Exon-
Florio Amendment and maintained in FINSA. Under current law, CFIUS has
authority only to review those mergers, acquisitions, and takeovers
that result in foreign ``control'' of a ``U.S. business.'' That made
sense in the 1980s and even in the first decade of this century, but
the foreign investment landscape has changed significantly, with
noncontrolling investments and joint ventures becoming ever more
popular.
Consequently, certain transactions--such as investments that are
not passive, but simultaneously do not convey ``control'' in a U.S.
business--that the Committee has identified as presenting a national
security risk nonetheless remain outside its purview. Similarly, CFIUS
is also aware that some parties may be deliberately structuring their
transactions to come just below the control threshold to avoid CFIUS
review, while others are moving critical technology and associated
expertise from a U.S. business to offshore joint ventures. While we
recognize there can and should be space for creative deal-making,
purposeful attempts to evade CFIUS review put this country's national
security at risk. Finally, we regularly contend with gaps that likely
never should have existed at all. For example, the purchase of a U.S.
business in close proximity to a sensitive military installation is
subject to CFIUS review, but the purchase of real estate at the same
location (on which one could place a business) is not. These gaps can
lead to disparate outcomes in transactions presenting identical
national security threats.
Support for FIRRMA
The Administration endorses FIRRMA because it embraces four pillars
critical for CFIUS modernization. First, FIRRMA expands the scope of
transactions potentially reviewable by CFIUS, including certain
nonpassive, noncontrolling investments, technology transfers through
arrangements such as joint ventures, real estate purchases near
sensitive military sites, and transactions structured to evade CFIUS
review. The reasons for these changes are twofold: (1) they will close
gaps in CFIUS's authorities by expanding the types of transactions
subject to CFIUS review; and (2) they will give CFIUS greater ability
to prevent parties from restructuring their transactions to avoid or
evade CFIUS review when the aspects of the transaction that pose
critical national security concerns remain.
Second, FIRRMA empowers CFIUS to refine its procedures to ensure
the process is tailored, efficient, and effective. Under FIRRMA, CFIUS
is authorized to exclude certain noncontrolling transactions that would
otherwise be covered by the expanded authority. Such exclusions could
be based on whether the foreign investors are from a country that meets
specified criteria, such as having a national security review process
for foreign investment. FIRRMA also allows CFIUS to identify specific
types of contributions by technology, sector, subsector, transaction
type, or other transaction characteristics that warrant review--
effectively excluding those that do not. Additionally, CFIUS can define
circumstances in which certain transactions can be excluded because
other provisions of law--like export controls--are determined to be
adequate to address any national security concerns. Only where existing
authorities cannot resolve the risk will CFIUS step in to act.
Third, FIRRMA recognizes that our own national security is linked
to the security of our closest allies, who face similar threats. In
light of increasingly globalized supply chains, it is essential to our
national security that our allies maintain robust and effective
national security review processes to vet foreign investments into
their countries. FIRRMA gives CFIUS the discretion to exempt certain
transactions from review involving parties from certain countries based
on such factors as whether the country has a mutual defense treaty in
place with the United States; a mutual arrangement to safeguard
national security with respect to foreign investment; and a parallel
process to review the national security implications of foreign
investment. FIRRMA will also enhance collaboration with our allies and
partners by allowing information sharing for national security purposes
with domestic or foreign Governments.
Fourth, FIRRMA requires an assessment of the resources necessary
for CFIUS to fulfill its critical mission. FIRRMA would establish for
the first time a ``CFIUS Fund'' (Fund), which would be authorized to
receive appropriations. Under FIRRMA, these funds are intended to cover
work on reviews, investigations, and other CFIUS activities. FIRRMA
also authorizes CFIUS to assess and collect fees, to be deposited into
the Fund, for any covered transaction for which a notice is filed. Once
appropriated, these funds could also be used by CFIUS. Although the
exact amount will be set by regulation, it would be capped at 1 percent
of the value of the transaction or $300,000 (indexed for inflation),
whichever is less. Finally, FIRRMA grants the Secretary of the
Treasury, as CFIUS chairperson, the authority to transfer funding from
the CFIUS Fund to any member agencies to address emerging needs in
executing requirements of the bill. This approach would enhance the
ability of agencies to work together on national security issues.
Modernizing CFIUS entails a cost, and FIRRMA does not (and cannot)
fully address the resource needs of CFIUS and its member agencies. But
the cost of funding a modernized CFIUS is not the only consideration.
We must all consider the cost of doing nothing: the potential loss of
America's technological and military edge, which will have a real cost
in American lives in any conflict. That is simply unacceptable.
In sum, CFIUS must be modernized. In doing so, we must preserve our
longstanding open investment policy. At the same time, we must protect
our national security from current, emerging, and future threats. The
twin aims of maintaining an open investment climate and safeguarding
national security are the exclusive concern of neither Republicans nor
Democrats. Rather, they are truly American aims that transcend party
lines and regional interests. But they demand urgent action if we are
to achieve them. I look forward to working with this Committee on
improving and advancing FIRRMA, and I am hopeful the bill will continue
to move forward on a bipartisan, bicameral basis.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF RICHARD ASHOOH
Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration
January 25, 2018
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the Committee:
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the Committee today in
support of the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA) (S.2098). I would also like to highlight the critical roles
the Department of Commerce plays in supporting U.S. national security--
both as a member of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States (CFIUS) and as an export control agency.
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
Let me start by thanking Senator Cornyn, Senator Feinstein, Senator
Burr, and the other cosponsors for their strong leadership and
dedication on this very important issue. We appreciate the work Senator
Cornyn and Congressman Pittenger have done on FIRRMA. The Commerce
Department supports the modernization of the CFIUS process to ensure
that it has the authorities and capacity required to address risks to
our national security from foreign investment. The Department also
shares Congress' concern about China's industrial policies and
activities. We believe FIRRMA takes many positive steps in addressing
those concerns.
I have now had experience with the CFIUS review process in the
public and private sectors. Since becoming Assistant Secretary of
Commerce for Export Administration last year, I have reviewed almost
100 CFIUS cases and participated in policy deliberations on many
sensitive and complex transactions. While in the private sector, I
worked for a defense company owned by a foreign company, whose
acquisition by the foreign parent was reviewed by CFIUS. Based on my
experience, it is clear that CFIUS plays an important role in
protecting our national security. Together with the International Trade
Administration (ITA), my organization, the Bureau of Industry and
Security (BIS), play important roles in Commerce's review of CFIUS
matters, reviewing every transaction and bringing different expertise
to CFIUS's deliberations. ITA has extensive expertise on U.S. and
global market conditions and provides insights into how the foreign
investments reviewed by CFIUS fit into the overall market. BIS, on the
other hand, as the administrator of the Export Administration
Regulations (EAR), has extensive experience in export controls, which
are often implicated in CFIUS reviews.
I would like to highlight a few specific provisions in the
legislation:
As you are aware, the Administration welcomes foreign
investment and the Department of Commerce houses SelectUSA,
which helps promote foreign investment in the United States.
The Department welcomes the affirmations in FIRRMA of that
policy. As we consider how to modernize CFIUS, we should be
careful that the U.S. Government not send a signal that we have
changed our policy of encouraging foreign direct investment.
However, we are also very attuned to the need to protect U.S.
national security and feel that CFIUS has an important role to
play in that regard.
We are supportive of the requirement for mandatory filings
for certain transactions involving foreign Government-
controlled entities. However, we are concerned that the 25-
percent threshold in FIRRMA is too high and that transactions
could easily be structured to evade it. We encourage the
committee to consider a lower threshold.
We appreciate that FIRRMA requires an assessment of the
resources necessary for CFIUS to carry out its critical work,
and would both establish a CFIUS Fund and permit filing fees to
help achieve that end. We also appreciate that the bill states
that the provisions which would expand CFIUS authorities will
not take effect until CFIUS has put in place the regulations
and has the resources it needs to implement its expanded role.
Additionally, we support the provisions of FIRRMA that
would facilitate greater cooperation and information sharing
with our allies and partners. This would permit increased
coordination with like-minded countries, particularly on
acquisitions that cross borders, as we attempt to address
national security concerns.
The Department of Commerce looks forward to working with the
Committee as it continues its CFIUS modernization efforts.
Administering Export Controls
As this Committee well knows, BIS addresses the challenges that
arise where business and national security intersect. Our mission is to
advance U.S. national security, foreign policy, and economic interests
by ensuring an effective export control and treaty compliance system
and promoting continued U.S. strategic technology leadership.
In our role administering the Export Administration Regulations
(EAR), BIS's responsibilities encompass the entirety of the export
control process--we write and implement the regulations, issue export
licenses, conduct compliance activities (including overseas end-use
checks), and enforce the regulations, including by preventing
violations and punishing those who violate.
The EAR has traditionally been the regulatory authority for the
control of ``dual-use'' items, which are items that have a civil end
use but can also be used for a military or proliferation-related use.
However, in recent years some less sensitive military items previously
controlled under the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR)
have been transferred to the EAR. The dual-use items subject to control
and these less sensitive military items are listed on the Commerce
Control List (CCL) within the EAR. Additionally, commercial items that
are not determined to merit control on the CCL as dual-use items are
still subject to the EAR and are controlled to sanctioned destinations
and parties as well as to prevent sensitive end uses such as those
relating to developing weapons of mass destruction. We refer to such
items as EAR99 items.
It is important to note that the export control system administered
by BIS is an instrument of national security that, like CFIUS, involves
multiple agencies. We work closely with the Departments of Defense,
Energy, and State and these agencies review and clear any changes to
the EAR itself as well as license applications submitted to BIS. The
different equities, viewpoints and technical expertise that our four
agencies bring to the table ensure that the export control system is
robust and that national security remains at the forefront.
The EAR's authority covers a wide array of transactions and
technology transfers. The goods, software, and technology listed for
control on the CCL are set by using specific technical parameters. The
interagency decisions on where to set these parameters are national
security determinations that define when particular items become
sufficiently applicable to a military end-use to warrant control. The
EAR governs what are considered traditional exports of goods, software
or technology to foreign countries, but the EAR also covers the
transfers of controlled technology within the United States to foreign
nationals under what we call ``deemed exports.'' It is also important
to note that the EAR differentiates between countries that range from
our closest allies to embargoed countries. This differentiation allows
the export control system to treat exports and technology transfers
under different licensing review policies depending on the level of
concern with the recipient country. The EAR also includes lists of end-
uses and end users of concern that trigger extraordinary licensing
requirements if an export is in support of or destined for such an end-
use or end user.
In addition to being an interagency national security process, our
export control system benefits from close cooperation with our
international partners through the four major multilateral export
control regimes. Through these regimes--the Wassenaar Arrangement, the
Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile Technology Control Regime, and the
Australia Group--the United States and our partners agree on which
items and technologies merit control and how those controls should be
applied. It has long been our position that export controls are
significantly more effective when they are implemented multilaterally.
This helps ensure that these sensitive technologies are controlled by
all countries that are capable of producing them to make it more
difficult for them to be acquired by parties of concern.
The export control system and CFIUS are complementary tools that we
utilize to protect U.S. national security, with CFIUS addressing risks
stemming from foreign ownership of companies important to our national
security, and export controls dealing with transfer of specific goods
and technologies out of the United States or to foreign nationals,
regardless of mode of transfer. Some risks, such as the potential
transfer of sensitive technology from a United States firm by a new
foreign owner, could fall under the purview of both mechanisms. Each
mechanism has its strengths, and it is important that each be applied
in ways that complement, and not duplicate, the other. If implemented
appropriately, FIRRMA will strike this important balance.
One issue that has received a lot of attention in recent months is
the concept of ``emerging'' technologies that may not yet be well
understood but could potentially be sensitive and present national
security concerns. Our export control system has been addressing
technological innovation for decades in light of the rapid pace of
innovation and the increased overlap between civil and military
technologies. Moreover, BIS has existing tools to identify and deal
with emerging technologies through its specialized expertise and the
EAR. One way that BIS seeks to keep as updated as possible on emerging
technologies is through our technical advisory committees (TACs), which
are our primary vehicle for interacting with industry in technical
areas impacted by our export controls. These TACs cover various
technology sectors including transportation, information technology,
and sensors.
The export control system is flexible and able to address concerns
about emerging technologies, and the agencies involved in that process
have experience with these issues. CFIUS deals with individual
transactions that come before the committee for review. BIS, with the
interagency, can prohibit the export of specific controlled
technologies from anywhere in the United States and block their access
by almost any foreign national.
Finally, the Bureau of Industry and Security contributes to the
national security of the United States through its aggressive
enforcement of the EAR. Our Special Agents are located in 20 cities
across the United States with a sole focus on identifying violations of
the EAR and bringing to justice domestic and foreign violators. In
addition we have export control officers stationed abroad who conduct
end-use checks. Our enforcement efforts have included everything from
the successful prosecution of individuals illegally shipping components
for Improvised Explosive Devices (IED) into Iraq and illegal sales of
U.S. technology to Iran, to stopping the illegal shipment of shotguns,
jet engines, night vision equipment, and integrated circuits to
prohibited end users or for prohibited end uses.
We in BIS are committed to continuing to identify and control
sensitive emerging technologies and to ensuring that the export control
and CFIUS processes relevant to managing security challenges presented
by emerging technologies are systematic, proactive, and
institutionalized. We are currently undertaking a review to better
utilize our authorities to combat threats arising from this kind of
technology.
Summary
In sum, CFIUS and export controls are both vital and robust
authorities the United States relies upon to protect our national
security. It is important that they remain complementary and not
overlap unnecessarily, as that has the potential to overburden the
CFIUS process and partially duplicate the more comprehensive coverage
of technology transfer under the export control system. Commerce looks
forward to working with the Congress on the technical aspects of FIRRMA
to ensure it achieves the intended effect. Commerce is committed to
working in both forums to protect sensitive U.S. technologies and
assets that provide key advantages to our industrial base and national
security.
The Department of Commerce looks forward to working with the
Committee and bill sponsors on advancing and improving FIRRMA.
Thank you.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF ERIC CHEWNING
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manufacturing and Industrial
Base Policy
January 25, 2018
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for the invitation to share the Department of Defense's role
in the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) and
the national security risks to America arising from inbound foreign
direct investment. The protection of our national security innovation
base from strategic competitors, in the national security realm like
China and Russia, is an increasingly important priority of the
Department and I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you this
morning.
The Department of Defense strongly supports modernization of the
CFIUS process to ensure that the interagency Committee has the
authorities required to address the evolving risks to our national
security from transactions that are currently uncovered. We are
thankful for the strong leadership of Senator Cornyn, Senator
Feinstein, and Senator Burr on this issue and appreciate the bipartisan
support for the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA), S.2098, 115th Cong. (2017). The Department shares Congress'
trepidations about strategic competitors' use of predatory economics
and believes FIRRMA will take many positive steps to address these
concerns. To quote Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis, stating this
Department's position, in his letter of support to Senator Cornyn, the
``DoD depends on critical, foundational, and emerging technologies to
maintain military readiness and preserve our technological advantage
over potential adversaries. FIRRMA would help close related gaps . . .
.''
As the National Security Strategy and the National Defense Strategy
make clear, the Department's direction is to compete, deter, and win
alongside our allies and partners in conflict and preserve peace
through strength. Our defense industrial base is an extension of our
military force structure. Only a defense industrial base that is
robust, secure, and resilient, is able to support the needs of our
military, innovate to retain our technological edge, surge when
necessary, and keep our systems safe in cyberspace. As the Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Manufacturing and Industrial Base Policy, my
role within the Department of Defense is to ensure the United States
maintains a superior industrial base that supports the Secretary's
three priorities, namely (1) enhancing warfighter lethality, (2)
strengthening alliances and attracting new partners, and (3) reforming
the Department's business practices. In this capacity, I represent the
Department in the interagency CFIUS process.
I've spent the last 17 years working at the intersection of
national security, industry, and finance, in both the private and
public sectors. It is important that this bill not be considered an
additional regulation on business. Under this bill, the United States
should and will likely continue to welcome the vast majority of foreign
investment that does not present any threat to our national security.
Rather, this bill, should be considered a whole-of-Government response
to a critical national security challenge--an insurance policy on the
hundreds of billions of dollars per year we invest in our defense
industrial base. Most importantly, this bill will help safeguard our
sons and daughters who volunteer to step into harm's way, armed with
the weapons that our industrial base produces.
Challenge to Technological Advantage
Simply put, the United States military fights and wins wars through
the unmatched performance of our men and women in uniform and our
superior military technology. Knowing this, our competitors are
aggressively attempting to diminish our technological advantage through
a multifaceted strategy by targeting and acquiring the very
technologies that are critical to our military success now and in the
future. China, in particular, publicly articulates its policy of civil-
military integration, which ties into its intentions to become the
world leader in science and technology and to modernize its military in
part by strengthening the industrial base that supports it. \1\ These
plans are backed by hundreds of billions of dollars in Chinese State
funding. For example, China's efforts to create an indigenous
semiconductor capability alone enjoy approximately $150 billion in
State-connected funding. \2\ In addition to semiconductors, our long-
term strategic competitors have a clear focus in investing in the
critical future technologies that are foundational for both commercial
and military applications: artificial intelligence, autonomous
vehicles, robotics, augmented reality, directed energy, and
hypersonics. We see a notable increase in Chinese interest in each of
these nascent technology areas, with Chinese entities participating in
about 16 percent of all U.S. venture deals in 2015, up from a 6-percent
average participation rate during 2010-2015. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Please see China's ``Report on the Work of Government, 2016''.
\2\ ``Ensuring Long Term U.S. Leadership in Semiconductors''.
Executive Office of the President, President's Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology, January 2017. Retrieved at https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/
pcast_ensuring--long-term_us_leadership_in_semiconductors.pdf.
\3\ Michael Brown and Pavneet Singh, ``China's Technology Transfer
Strategy: How Chinese Investments in Emerging Technology Enable a
Strategic Competitor To Access the Crown Jewels of U.S. Innovation'',
Defense Innovation Unit Experimental, January 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While some facets of our competitors' strategy, like industrial
espionage and cybertheft, are clearly illegal, other approaches,
including technology and business know-how transferred through
acquisition in U.S. companies, may not be. Acquiring or investing in
U.S. companies offers an opportunity for our competitors to gain access
and control over technologies with potential military applications,
enabling them to create their own indigenous capabilities, eroding our
technological edge, and ultimately our military advantage.
Additionally, some investments in the U.S. may also limit the
availability of certain capabilities within the U.S. industrial base,
potentially depriving our warfighters of access to important
technological solutions needed to maintain our overmatch on the
battlefield. We believe that the loss of critical technology to a
competitor can inflict irreparable damage on our national security in
the long term.
Department of Defense Role in CFIUS
CFIUS is designed to address the national security risks arising
from foreign investments that could result in foreign control of a U.S.
business. Of the defined factors to be considered when determining the
requirements of national security under the current Foreign Investment
and National Security Act (FINSA) statute, several are directly related
to defense, military requirements, and technological leadership as it
relates to national security. In addition, seven of the fifteen
coordinators of the National Security Threat Assessment (NSTA), which
is relied upon in every CFIUS case, are DoD intelligence organizations.
Moreover, the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) makes the statutorily
required assessment of the risk of diversion of defense critical
technology.
As one of nine voting members of CFIUS, DoD provides significant
input related to the impact of foreign investment on U.S. defense
requirements and readiness, military competitiveness, and critical
technology development, among other things. As such, DoD has been the
co-lead alongside the Department of Treasury on a yearly average of 44
percent of all CFIUS cases filed since 2012, the highest percentage of
any committee member other than Treasury.
Examples of Limitations of CFIUS
Since CFIUS was first instituted in the 1970s, our competitors have
discovered methods beyond the committee's authorities and successfully
acquire U.S. technologies and critical business know-how. Our national
security competitors' ability to evolve, outpaces our ability to adapt
under the current statutory and regulatory system. What's more, the
current CFIUS authorities only cover some of the relevant transactions
because deals that do not result in a foreign controlling interest are
beyond its jurisdiction. There are other transaction types, such as
certain joint ventures, and nonpassive, noncontrolling investments,
that can pose national security concerns, such as transferring
technology and critical capabilities. Additionally, the purchases of
real estate by a foreign person provides opportunities to potentially
establish a persistent presence near sensitive facilities, which would
currently fall outside of CFIUS's scope to review.
CFIUS Modernization Needed
The Department of Defense does not view CFIUS as a panacea.
Instead, it is part of a layered defense that can, along with export
controls and other regulatory mechanisms, stem the flow of critical
technologies to our competitors. In order to do that, however, CFIUS's
authorities need to adjust to keep pace with the rapid change of
technology and nimble, long-term competitors.
The Department is particularly supportive of the proposed
adjustments in the FIRRMA legislation that gives CFIUS the discretion
to broaden the scope of covered transactions to include certain
contributions of intellectual property with associated support by a
U.S. critical technology company to a foreign person through a joint
venture or other similar arrangement. In addition, the Department
appreciates the inclusion of foreign purchases or leases of certain
real estate located in close proximity to sensitive facilities and the
bill's recognition that enhanced international cooperation is necessary
to ensure important technology does not flow to our competitors through
our allies and partners.
Conclusion
Let me add one important point as I conclude my remarks. While the
Department of Defense believes defensive measures like CFIUS
modernization are necessary, they alone are not sufficient for winning
a technology race with our long-term strategic competitors. We must be
proactive to ensure we improve our technology and innovation base
because our future economic security will be a key determinant of our
national security.
I would like to close with another statement from Secretary Mattis
in his letter of support to Senator Cornyn. ``I strongly support the
Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2017 (FIRRMA). The
Department of Defense (DoD) continues to support foreign investment,
consistent with the protection of national security. However, as the
national security landscape changes, the existing process and
authorities must be updated.''
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify on this
important topic. I look forward to working with this Committee on
improving and advancing FIRRMA.
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN CRAPO
FROM HEATH P. TARBERT
Q.1. The legislation FIRRMA authorizes CFIUS to impose filing
fees on transactions to cover the committee's funding needs.
Will these fees be sufficient to address the increased case
load anticipated with FIRRMA and what new resources will your
agencies need to carry out these reforms?
A.1. The largest portion of increased work burden resulting
from FIRRMA is likely to be in connection with transactions
that are much smaller than the mergers and acquisitions
currently within the scope of CFIUS. These transactions may
generate little, if any, revenue. Thus, while fees may offset
some of the costs of administering the CFIUS process, they are
unlikely to cover the increased load across the committee. The
funds derived from the filing fees are more likely to serve as
a supplemental funding source that would enable CFIUS to be
better positioned to deal with unexpected increases in case
volume, along with ensuring CFIUS's additional functions of
monitoring of mitigation agreements and transactions that are
not voluntarily notified with CFIUS are sufficiently resourced.
Q.2. How many cases do you anticipate CFIUS would review as a
result of FIRRMA?
A.2. The total number of cases under FIRRMA is hard to
estimate, but it could be several multiples of CFIUS's current
caseload. FIRRMA provides several mechanisms to ensure that the
process remains efficient. For example, FIRRMA would give CFIUS
the authority to issue regulations to focus the expanded
jurisdiction on the technologies and sectors that most warrant
application of CFIUS authorities. It also creates a streamlined
``declarations'' process, which would lower the burden on many
parties seeking review of transactions and allow CFIUS to
calibrate the resources that it devotes to a transaction based
on the likelihood that a particular transaction may pose a
national security risk.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM HEATH P. TARBERT
Q.1. At the CFIUS hearing on January 18, a witness raised the
concern that the committee should also consider the national
security implications of investments by foreign companies that
are not technically owned by a foreign Government, but perhaps
show other signs of Government influence--such as loans from
State-owned banks, close ties between corporate management and
political leaders, or other methods that Governments use to
influence corporate behavior.
What are reforms that you would advise the Committee to
consider so that we account not only for the national security
risks of investments by overtly State-owned companies, but also
from foreign firms that may be otherwise influenced or
controlled by foreign Governments?
A.1. You raise an important point: foreign firms may not be
State-owned but are nonetheless influenced or controlled by
foreign Governments. While this is an issue that regularly
confronts CFIUS, we believe that CFIUS has the authority
necessary now to consider any factors relevant to assessing
whether a particular covered transaction poses a national
security risk. This includes consideration of formal and
informal ways in which a foreign Government or possible threat
actor, even beyond actual ownership, may be able to influence a
foreign person that is acquiring a U.S. business. Factors such
as prior Government affiliations of corporate management,
Government financing, and Government practices of compelling
private company cooperation with strategic State interests,
among other factors, are regularly considered in the assessment
of the threat posed by acquirers. CFIUS will continue to be
able to consider these same analytical factors when reviewing
transactions under FIRRMA. Moreover, FIRRMA's coverage of
nonpassive investments would give CFIUS the authority to review
some investments that do not meet the current threshold for
control.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER
FROM HEATH P. TARBERT
Q.1. As we search for the most appropriate remedy to the very
real problem of foreign countries gaining access to critical
U.S. technologies, there are some suggesting that we should be
pursuing other changes instead of or in addition to the CFIUS
reform.
What role should export controls play in addressing this
problem?
A.1. Treasury believes that CFIUS and export controls both play
a role in addressing this problem. CFIUS and export controls
are complementary and mutually reinforcing processes. Even
today, CFIUS does not act when it determines that the national
security risk posed by the transaction can be adequately
addressed by other laws, including export control laws.
This would continue to be the case under FIRRMA. In
circumstances where export controls prove adequate and
appropriate to address risks that FIRRMA would allow CFIUS to
cover (e.g., involving a specific license granted by the
Department of Commerce following appropriate disclosure of
information related to the transaction), we would expect to
carve those circumstances out of CFIUS's jurisdiction via
rulemaking.
Q.2. Could the export control system be modified to address the
concern that know-how--not just intellectual property--is being
transferred through joint ventures and other partnerships?
A.2. Treasury defers to the export control agencies regarding
the extent to which export controls could be modified to
address some of the types of risks that the joint venture
provision of FIRRMA is intended to address.
Q.3. Are there other changes outside of CFIUS and export
controls that should be considered to address this security
challenge?
A.3. Ensuring that we have the tools necessary to protect
national security is only one element of what is necessary to
address this security challenge. As I stated during my
testimony, the United States has been a leading destination for
investors, entrepreneurs, and innovators. It is important that
this remains the case and that we continue to invest in our
companies and innovators. The President's National Security
Strategy specifically identifies in Pillar II that we must
promote American prosperity, which includes leading in
research, technology, invention, and innovation, along with
promoting the U.S. national security innovation base. One of
the strengths of the United States is our ability to foster
innovation and develop new technologies.
Q.4. One of the strengths of the U.S. is our ability to foster
innovation and develop new technologies.
Would increasing filing times and additional fees for
expanded CFIUS jurisdiction, as proposed by the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) significantly
inhibit venture capital investments and hurt entrepreneurship
by creating excessive barriers, such as prolonged wait times,
to foreign investment?
A.4. The United States has remained a leading destination for
foreign investment, notwithstanding a robust CFIUS process.
Treasury does not anticipate that the addition of 15 days to
the first-stage ``review'' period or an optional one time
extension of 30 days in extraordinary circumstances would be a
material deterrent to foreign investment. In fact, these
changes may allow more transactions to be cleared in the
initial ``review'' period, which would create additional
predictability in the process, and still would keep the
duration of the CFIUS process well below the duration of
similar processes in most other countries. What is more, the
option for filing short ``declarations'' of transactions and
the ability of CFIUS to clear a transaction within 30 days
based on such a streamlined submission would likely reduce the
burden that many investors currently face under the CFIUS
process. Finally, CFIUS does not expect to set filing fees in
regulations at a level that is likely to have a material impact
on investment decisions.
Q.5. Would significantly expanding CFIUS's jurisdiction
negatively affect our investment relationship with Europe and
other traditional economic allies, who could get caught up in
an expansion of CFIUS's scope of review?
A.5. As noted above, CFIUS's current ability to review
transactions involving Europe and our other traditional
economic partners for national security concerns has not
affected the long-standing status of the United States as a
leading destination for foreign investment. Today, transactions
from these countries that do not warrant CFIUS review are
either not filed with CFIUS or, if they are, are cleared by
CFIUS within the initial review period. FIRRMA generally
maintains the voluntary filing system and provides companies
with the option for a more streamlined declarations process in
the event they would like formal clearance from CFIUS. FIRRMA
also gives CFIUS the discretion to exempt certain transactions
from allied countries in certain circumstances.
Q.6. Do you think that significantly expanding CFIUS's
jurisdiction and identifying ``countries of particular
concern'' for purposes of CFIUS review could be considered a
discriminatory measure by trade partners?
A.6. FIRRMA would not require CFIUS to identify ``countries of
special concern,'' and the legislation expressly states that
CFIUS is not expected to maintain such a list. Nor would FIRRMA
mandate any outcome with respect to countries of special
concern or alter CFIUS's existing practice of reviewing each
transaction on its merits and solely for national security
purposes. CFIUS would continue to exercise its authority
consistent with existing trade agreements. Therefore, we do not
believe FIRRMA would be considered a discriminatory measure for
trade law purposes.
Q.7. What would be the potential consequences of doing so from
a trade perspective?
A.7. Please see the previous answer.
Q.8. Should we expect retaliation?
A.8. CFIUS can reduce the chances of any retaliation by
continuing its focus exclusively on national security risks,
examining only those risks posed by the transaction under
review, and clearing transactions, regardless of origin, that
do not pose national security concerns.
Q.9. What forms could that retaliation take?
A.9. Please see the previous answer.
Recent proposed legislation, the Foreign Investment Risk
Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA), broadens the Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States' (CFIUS) purview so
that the Committee would review transactions that involve
critical technologies. According to the bill's definition of
``critical technologies'', this includes ``emerging
technologies that could be essential for maintaining or
increasing the U.S. technological advantage with respect to
national security.'' And there is an open question as to
whether widely available advanced technology made by multiple
companies, in many different countries should be covered by
this definition given that CFIUS is a unilateral, not
multilateral, tool. I have heard from some that this definition
may be too broad a category, effectively forcing hundreds, if
not thousands, of transactions to be subject to CFIUS review. A
related concern is that the term ``U.S. business'' is not
defined, and it is unclear whether a wholly owned foreign
subsidiary of a U.S. headquartered company would be considered
a ``U.S. business'' and whether CFIUS would apply to
transactions between the U.S. company and its foreign
subsidiary.
Q.10. Recent proposed legislation, the Foreign Investment Risk
Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA), broadens the Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States' (CFIUS) purview so
that the committee would review transactions that involve
critical technologies. According to the bill's definition of
``critical technologies'', this includes ``emerging
technologies that could be essential for maintaining or
increasing the U.S. technological advantage with respect to
national security.'' And there is an open question as to
whether widely available advanced technology made by multiple
companies, in many different countries should be covered by
this definition given that CFIUS is a unilateral, not
multilateral, tool. I have heard from some that this definition
may be too broad a category, effectively forcing hundreds, if
not thousands, of transactions to be subject to CFIUS review. A
related concern is that the term ``U.S. business'' is not
defined, and it is unclear whether a wholly owned foreign
subsidiary of a U.S.-headquartered company would be considered
a ``U.S. business'' and whether CFIUS would apply to
transactions between the U.S. company and its foreign
subsidiary.
Is there a way to narrow the scope of the definition so
that it becomes more manageable for CFIUS to monitor?
A.10. Yes. FIRRMA explicitly provides CFIUS with the authority,
through the rulemaking process, to narrow the scope of certain
definitions and create exemptions, which would ensure that the
number of transactions reviewed by CFIUS is manageable. The
declarations process included in FIRRMA would also permit
streamlined filings that can be reviewed more efficiently,
thereby enabling CFIUS to focus its resources on the
transactions most likely to raise concerns.
Q.11. Or do you believe that it should be this expansive?
A.11. Treasury believes that there are certain clarifications
that can be accomplished through revisions to FIRRMA, and we
look forward to working with this Committee on such
clarifications. However, Treasury believes that the rulemaking
process is a necessary tool in ensuring that the process
remains efficient and effective over time.
Q.12. Do you have a sense of how many transactions this
legislation would bring into CFIUS's scope?
A.12. The total number of cases under FIRRMA is hard to
estimate, but it could be several multiples of CFIUS's current
caseload. As mentioned above, FIRRMA offers a number of
mechanisms by which CFIUS can ensure that the process remains
administrable.
Q.13. And how many new employees you would need?
A.13. We are working to estimate the resource requirements
under FIRRMA, but will not have firm estimates on the overall
cost or number of covered transactions until any required
implementing regulations have been formulated. While there are
many unknowns about the impact of the proposed bill, Treasury
expects the number of covered transactions to increase
significantly. However, certain efficiencies will be gained
over time in the processing of cases, partially offsetting the
additional resource requirements through a reduction in the
per-case processing cost. I will keep you updated on the
development of our estimates and look forward to working with
you to strengthen and modernize CFIUS.
Q.14. And how much that would cost?
A.14. As mentioned above, Treasury will not have firm estimates
on the overall cost or number of covered transactions until any
required implementing regulations have been formulated.
Q.15. How long do you think it would take to get that many
employees in place?
A.15. As currently drafted, FIRRMA includes direct hiring
authority to allow agencies to resource the CFIUS function
quickly. This authority will be critical for agencies to
implement FIRRMA in a timely manner. Given the unknowns
surrounding the number of covered transactions and therefore
the number of new employees required, it is difficult to
provide a specific timeframe. However, we expect that
recruiting would begin immediately upon the enactment of FIRRMA
and hiring would commence as soon as appropriations are
available.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM HEATH P. TARBERT
Q.1. Gaming and Tourism--Foreign companies are beginning to
expand into new industries, including gaming and tourism in the
State of Nevada. As an example, foreign companies have been
investing in and developing properties on the Las Vegas Strip.
In the context of CFIUS reviews, hotel deals previously
examined by the committee include the acquisition of New York's
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel by Anbang Insurance group in 2014.
Given the importance of the tourism industry to Nevada,
could you elaborate on the concerns associated with foreign
acquisition of hotels or tourism companies in the United
States? How does CFIUS review such transactions, and what is
the committee's track record on approving or denying these
types of deals?
A.1. An acquisition of land or a building is currently
reviewable by CFIUS if it involves the acquisition of a ``U.S.
business,'' as defined in CFIUS's regulations. As it pertains
to CFIUS's review of any specific transaction involving one or
more hotels, Treasury can provide a classified briefing to
answer your questions. However, as a general matter, in
reviewing such transactions, CFIUS considers the national
security ``vulnerabilities'' related to activities that occur
at the property (e.g., does the hotel house or host sensitive
U.S. Government operations?) or near the property (e.g., is the
hotel near a sensitive training facility?). CFIUS also
considers the threat posed by the foreign party (i.e., the
capability and intent of the foreign acquirer to harm the
national security of the United States) and the national
security consequences should a threat actor exploit the
vulnerabilities. If CFIUS identifies a risk, then it can seek
to enter into an agreement with the parties to mitigate the
risk and allow the transaction to proceed. If the risk cannot
be mitigated, then it would recommend to the President that he
prohibit the transaction.
FIRRMA would expand CFIUS's jurisdiction to allow it to
look at certain real estate acquisitions even if a given
transaction does not involve the acquisition of a ``U.S.
business.'' As was highlighted during our colloquy in the
hearing, the proximity risk associated with vacant land that
can be rapidly developed is not necessarily significantly
different than the risk associated with land that already
houses a business. As a reflection of its general ``track
record,'' however, CFIUS has historically cleared the majority
of transactions that it has reviewed.
As mentioned above, I would be happy to provide you with a
classified, confidential briefing on specific transactions.
Q.2. Greenfield Acquisition--In Nevada, we're home to a number
of technology startups, including drone technology.
Can you discuss the potential positive and negative
consequences of expanding CFIUS review to ``greenfield''
projects--or those involving start-ups?
A.2. Your question raises an important distinction regarding
CFIUS's authority to review ``greenfield'' projects versus
investments in ``start-ups.''
First, CFIUS currently has the authority to review the
foreign acquisition of a U.S. business, which includes
acquisitions of early-stage start-ups. However, CFIUS cannot
review a non-controlling foreign investment in such a company,
even if the foreign investor is not passive and can influence
or gain access to the company in ways that pose national
security concerns. FIRRMA would address this issue by providing
CFIUS the authority to review such transactions.
Second, FIRRMA would allow CFIUS to review certain real
estate transactions based on proximity concerns even if there
is no existing business. We believe that such broad authority
is warranted by the current and expected investment landscape
as it pertains to national security risks. FIRRMA would not,
however, give CFIUS general authority to review the
establishment of a new business (commonly referred to as a
``greenfield'') in the United States by a foreign person.
Q.3. Can you discuss the use of ``mitigation agreements''--or
conditions placed on acquisitions approved by CFIUS?
A.3. Mitigation agreements are an important tool available to
CFIUS to address identified national security concerns arising
from a covered transaction that are not otherwise adequately or
appropriately addressed by other provisions of law (e.g.,
export controls, Government procurement authorities).
Consistent with the open investment policy of the United
States, mitigation agreements enable CFIUS, in most instances,
to allow a transaction in which CFIUS identifies national
security concerns to proceed by addressing those concerns
through tailored and effective mitigation measures in lieu of
recommending to the President that he prohibit a transaction.
Q.4. Are they being used appropriately?
A.4. Yes. CFIUS accepts mitigation only if we think the
measures will be (1) effective at addressing the national
security risk(s) and (2) capable of being monitored and
enforced.
Q.5. Does CFIUS have the resources and staffing to ensure
adherence to these mitigation agreements?
A.5. Treasury is committed to ensuring that CFIUS has the
resources necessary to fulfill its responsibilities to ensure
compliance with mitigation agreements. Generally, compliance
monitoring is performed by the co-lead agency (alongside
Treasury) that negotiated the given mitigation agreement (e.g.,
the Department of Defense, Department of Homeland Security,
etc.).
Q.6. What are the pros and cons of making the filing of CFIUS
reviews mandatory--rather than discretionary--for State-
controlled acquiring firms?
A.6. Treasury believes that CFIUS should remain a generally
voluntary process. We believe that a mandatory process would
likely divert CFIUS resources to transactions that do not
warrant examination. As it is, CFIUS has the authority to
initiate a review where warranted. However, transaction parties
should be required to inform CFIUS about certain types of
transactions before they consummate the transaction. FIRRMA
accomplishes this by requiring mandatory declarations in two
circumstances: (1) certain covered transactions with foreign
Government interests; and (2) other covered transactions
identified by CFIUS in regulations. This ensures that CFIUS
would be aware, in advance, of covered transactions that may be
more likely to pose national security concerns or could cause
national security harm that is more difficult to remediate
after completion of the transaction. As you imply in your
question, we believe that transactions involving State-
controlled acquiring firms are of the kind that we would like
to see subject to an advance notification process. CFIUS can
then determine whether such transactions require a review.
Q.7. Should they be reviewed differently than private-firm
mergers or acquisitions, or firms that are in part-owned by
Nation States?
A.7. The Foreign Investment and National Security Act of 2007
(FINSA), CFIUS's current statute, establishes special
procedures for CFIUS review of transactions that could result
in foreign Government control of a U.S. business. Specifically,
it requires that CFIUS proceed from the ``review'' stage (30
days) to the ``investigation'' stage (up to 45 additional days)
for foreign Government-controlled transactions unless a
determination is made at least at the Deputy Secretary level
that the transaction ``will not impair the national security of
the United States.'' FIRRMA also would establish a mandatory
declaration requirement for certain transactions involving
foreign Government investors, as noted above. Treasury believes
that this framework provides appropriate authority for CFIUS to
address national security risks posed by foreign Government
investments.
Q.8. It has been 10 years since Congress last comprehensively
considered the statutory framework for CFIUS. As practitioners
that have worked in this space for long tenures, has any
consensus emerged about what budget, regulatory, or statutory
changes may be needed?
A.8. As I outlined in my testimony, the Administration endorses
FIRRMA because it embraces four pillars critical for CFIUS
modernization. First, FIRRMA expands the scope of transactions
potentially reviewable by CFIUS, including certain non-passive,
non-controlling investments, technology transfers through
arrangements such as joint ventures, real estate purchases near
sensitive military sites, and transactions structured to evade
CFIUS review.
Second, FIRRMA empowers CFIUS to refine its procedures to
ensure the process is tailored, efficient, and effective. Under
FIRRMA, CFIUS is authorized to exclude certain non-controlling
transactions that would otherwise be covered by the expanded
authority.
Third, FIRRMA recognizes that our own national security is
linked to the security of our closest allies, who face similar
threats. In light of increasingly globalized supply chains, it
is essential to our national security that our allies maintain
robust and effective national security review processes to vet
foreign investments into their countries. FIRRMA will also
enhance collaboration with our allies and partners by allowing
information-sharing for national security purposes with
domestic or foreign Governments.
Fourth, FIRRMA requires an assessment of the resources
necessary for CFIUS to fulfill its critical mission, so that
Congress has full understanding of the needs required to
fulfill CFIUS's expanded scope. FIRRMA would establish for the
first time a ``CFIUS Fund,'' which would be authorized to
receive appropriations. FIRRMA also authorizes CFIUS to assess
and collect fees, which would be set by regulation at a level
we anticipate would not affect the economics of any given
transaction. Once appropriated, these funds could also be used
by CFIUS. Finally, FIRRMA grants the Secretary of the Treasury,
as CFIUS chairperson, the authority to transfer funding from
the CFIUS Fund to any member agencies to address emerging needs
in executing requirements of the bill. This approach would
enhance the ability of agencies to work together on national
security issues.
Q.9. Can you delineate the appropriate role for export controls
versus CFIUS?
A.9. CFIUS and export controls are complementary and mutually
reinforcing processes. Even today, CFIUS does not act when it
determines that the national security risk posed by the
transaction can be adequately addressed by other laws,
including export control laws.
This would continue to be the case under FIRRMA. In
circumstances where export controls prove adequate and
appropriate to address risks that FIRRMA would allow CFIUS to
cover (e.g., involving a specific license granted by the
Department of Commerce following appropriate disclosure of
information related to the transaction), we would expect to
carve those circumstances out of CFIUS's jurisdiction via
rulemaking.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN CRAPO
FROM RICHARD ASHOOH
Q.1. The legislation FIRRMA authorizes CFIUS to impose filing
fees on transactions to cover the committee's funding needs.
Will these fees be sufficient to address the increased case
load anticipated with FIRRMA and what new resources will your
agencies need to carry out these reforms?
A.1. The largest portion of increased work burden resulting
from FIRRMA is likely to be in connection with transactions
that are much smaller than the mergers and acquisitions
currently within the scope of CFIUS. These transactions may
generate little, if any, revenue. Thus, while fees may offset
some of the costs of administering the CFIUS process, they are
unlikely to cover the increased load across the committee. The
funds derived from the filing fees are more likely to serve as
a supplemental funding source that would enable CFIUS to be
better positioned to deal with unexpected increases in case
volume, along with ensuring CFIUS's additional functions of
monitoring of mitigation agreements and transactions that are
not voluntarily notified with CFIUS are sufficiently resourced.
Q.2. How many cases do you anticipate CFIUS would review as a
result of FIRRMA?
A.2. The total number of cases under FIRRMA is hard to
estimate, but it could be several multiples of CFIUS's current
caseload. FIRRMA provides several mechanisms to ensure that the
process remains efficient. For example, FIRRMA would give CFIUS
the authority to issue regulations to focus the expanded
jurisdiction on the technologies and sectors that most warrant
application of CFIUS authorities. It also creates a streamlined
``declarations'' process, which would lower the burden on many
parties seeking review of transactions and allow CFIUS to
calibrate the resources that it devotes to a transaction based
on the likelihood that a particular transaction may pose a
national security risk.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR SCOTT
FROM RICHARD ASHOOH
Q.1. On January 22, Secretary Ross stated that, ``The CFIUS
process must be strengthened to protect our national security,
including expanding it to cover joint ventures, and respond to
an unprecedented stream of investment from China.'' My
understanding is that CFIUS does not currently cover such joint
ventures in places like China.
Please answer the following with specificity:
Do you agree with Secretary Ross' view on the need to
expand CFIUS's jurisdiction to cover these joint ventures? Why
or why not?
A.1. CFIUS jurisdiction should be periodically reviewed, and if
necessary, amended to allow CFIUS to address developments in
global markets, in technology, in forms of investment, in
foreign policy, and in threats to the national security.
Commerce supports efforts to expand CFIUS's visibility into a
broader range of investments.
At the same time, we are cognizant that other national
security authorities, notably export controls, can also be used
to address specific national security risks posed by specific
transactions. For example, we believe that export controls are
better positioned to address national security issues
pertaining to technology transfers given that the export
control system is a well-established interagency system that
covers all modes of technology transfer.
Q.2. Does the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA) enact this expansion of CFIUS jurisdiction in a manner
that balances national security and economic interests?
A.2. I believe that it does. As I stated in my testimony,
Commerce supports the statement in FIRRMA that the United
States retains its longstanding policy of welcoming foreign
investment. Even though FIRRMA would expand the scope of CFIUS,
it is clearly intended to do so in a manner that maintains the
United States' position as a prime destination for foreign
investment. Additionally, even with the expanded scope of
FIRRMA, CFIUS will remain sharply focused on the small
percentage of transactions that present national security
concerns.
Q.3. What unique challenges are posed to our export control
system with China, a nonmarket economy?
A.3. Many of China's industrial policies pose challenges for
the U.S. export control system. For instance, China's policy of
civil-military integration is a particular concern. The
agencies involved in our export control system take these
policies into consideration when reviewing exports of
controlled items to China. The agencies must balance these
policies and the concerns they raise with the significant
amount of legitimate commercial business that takes place in
China when reaching decisions on such reviews.
Q.4. What additional prudential and consumer protection
requirements, if any, would you consider as part of the
approval process of an ILC application from a FinTech company?
A.4. Response not received in time for publication.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR COTTON
FROM RICHARD ASHOOH
Q.1. If someday, many years from now, there was a President (an
American ``Karl Marx'') who actively sought to interfere in the
U.S. investment climate, who considered Government involvement
in private investment to be a virtue, what guardrails, if any,
are written into the bill that would constrain such an anti-
free market Administration?
A.1. CFIUS by law is narrowly focused on national security
issues and FIRRMA would maintain that focus. As a result, I
believe that it would be very difficult for any President or
Administration to be able to unduly intervene in the private
sector as the national security focus that is part of CFIUS's
statutory mandate provides key limitations in that area.
Q.2. Who involved in the CFIUS would lose their job, or at
least have a poor annual review, if CFIUS unnecessarily
interfered in private enterprise?
A.2. One of the key aspects of CFIUS, an area that was
specifically addressed by Congress in the FINSA legislation in
2007, is the requirement that political-appointee level
officials engage in CFIUS's review of each transaction. As
such, an official appointed by the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate (i.e., at Commerce, an
Assistant Secretary-level official) from each co-lead agency
must sign and submit to Congress a certified notice at the
completion of each CFIUS review stating that there are no
unresolved national security concerns. If the case has included
an investigation by CFIUS, the report on the investigation must
be signed by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary, or a person
serving in an equivalent position, from each lead agency. This
ensures that there is accountability in the CFIUS process in
all cases.
Q.3. What automatic processes are in place to gather
information on if the CFIUS process is outside its
jurisdiction, is taking too long to look at transactions, or is
unnecessarily taking up more of the private sector's time and
resources?
A.3. I defer to the Department of the Treasury, as CFIUS chair,
on this question. However, I will note that CFIUS endeavors in
all cases to complete its review in the most expeditious manner
possible. Further, CFIUS annually reports to Congress on its
activities and is subject to its oversight.
Q.4. My understanding is that CFIUS typically does not cover
joint ventures that are based overseas. The sponsors of this
bill have circulated a list of endorsements of the bill,
including one from Wilbur Ross, the Secretary of Commerce. Sec.
Ross said that CFIUS must be strengthened to protect our
national security ``including expanding it to cover joint
ventures.''
Do you agree with Sec. Ross (quote below)?
Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross (quote provided on 1/22/
18): ``The CFIUS process must be strengthened to protect our
national security, including expanding it to cover joint
ventures, and respond to an unprecedented stream of investment
from China. Senator Cornyn's and Representative Pittenger's
FIRRMA legislation takes many positive steps in that regard,
and I look forward to its eventual passage. FIRRMA envisions a
robust CFIUS review process that complements our strong current
export control regime. It is also important for Congress to
fully fund CFIUS's expanded responsibilities and provide a
sufficiently stringent threshold of review of transactions that
may threaten our national security.''
A.4. CFIUS jurisdiction should be periodically reviewed, and if
necessary, amended to allow CFIUS to address developments in
global markets, in technology, in forms of investment, in
foreign policy, and in threats to the national security.
Commerce supports efforts to expand CFIUS visibility into a
broader range of investments.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM RICHARD ASHOOH
Q.1. Judging from the Committee's previous CFIUS hearing on
January 18, I sense that there is broad agreement among
bipartisan members of Congress as well as industry stakeholders
that investments by foreign State-owned enterprises in
sensitive U.S. technologies warrant a higher level of scrutiny
than similar investments made by private foreign companies.
In your testimony, you stated that the 25-percent threshold
that would require a foreign controlled entity to file a
mandatory filing in the FIRRMA is too high, and that
transactions could easily be structured to evade it.
Could you expound on this thought?
A.1. The Department of Commerce is supportive of the
requirement in FIRRMA for mandatory filings for certain
transactions involving foreign Government-controlled entities.
Our concern over the 25-percent threshold in FIRRMA centers on
Commerce's belief that CFIUS must have enhanced visibility into
transactions that could raise national security concerns. Under
the existing statute, we sometimes see transactions in which
the foreign acquirer obtains less than 25-percent ownership
interest in the U.S. company but still obtains control through
governance rights or other mechanism. In those cases, the
transaction is appropriately subject to CFIUS review under
existing law. Given the national security concerns that may
arise from foreign Government ownership of a U.S. firm, it is
important that CFIUS be made aware of foreign Government-owned
entities acquiring significant stakes in U.S. companies,
particularly if those shares are so significant as to allow the
foreign Government to control the U.S. company. We believe that
requiring mandatory filings for such transactions to be in the
U.S. national security interest.
Q.2. In your opinion, what would be an appropriate threshold?
A.2. One way to address this concern would be to lower the
mandatory filing threshold to 10 percent, which corresponds to
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filing requirements
under Section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. We are
also open to alternative ways to meet the stated objective of
strengthening CFIUS's ability to learn of, and potentially
review, the acquisition of significant interests in U.S. firms
by foreign Government-owned entities, a type of transaction
that can raise heightened national security concerns.
Q.3. At the CFIUS hearing on January 18, a witness raised the
concern that the committee should also consider the national
security implications of investments by foreign companies that
are not technically owned by a foreign Government, but perhaps
show other signs of Government influence--such as loans from
State-owned banks, close ties between corporate management and
political leaders, or other methods that Governments use to
influence corporate behavior.
What are reforms would you advise the committee to consider
so that we account not only for the national security risks of
investments by overtly State-owned companies, but also from
foreign firms that may be otherwise influenced or controlled by
foreign Governments?
A.3. CFIUS considers all types of foreign Government influence
and control in determining whether the transaction is subject
to CFIUS review and in conducting its national security review,
and should retain this ability. CFIUS has existing mechanisms
to assess the extent and degree of foreign Government influence
over a foreign acquirer, including through the support of the
Intelligence Community. This information is considered as CFIUS
makes the determinations described above and assesses whether
the transaction is foreign Government controlled (a requirement
under the Foreign Investment and National Security Act of 2007)
and, thus, poses an attendant risk.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER
FROM RICHARD ASHOOH
Q.1. As we search for the most appropriate remedy to the very
real problem of foreign countries gaining access to critical
U.S. technologies, there are some suggesting that we should be
pursuing other changes instead of or in addition to the CFIUS
reform.
What role should export controls play in addressing this
problem?
A.1. CFIUS and export controls are both vital and robust tools/
processes/systems the United States relies upon to protect our
national security. CFIUS is a process to review whether certain
business transactions present a risk to U.S. national security,
with technology transfer being one of several possible factors
which may be of concern. The export control system governs
technology transfer itself, irrespective of mode of transfer,
to protect sensitive U.S. origin goods, software, and
technology. As such, these two authorities are complementary
and must continue to work in a parallel, coordinated fashion.
Where technology transfers present concerns, the export
control system is best designed to address those concerns. The
Export Administration Regulations' (EAR) authority covers a
wide array of transactions and technology transfers. The EAR
governs both traditional exports of goods, software, or
technology to third countries as well as the transfers of
controlled technology within the United States to foreign
nationals under what we call ``deemed exports.'' The goods,
software, and technology listed for control on the Commerce
Control List (CCL) are set by using specific technical
parameters. The interagency decisions on where to set these
parameters are national security determinations that define
when particular items become sufficiently applicable to a
military end-use to warrant control.
In addition to being an interagency national security
process, our export control system benefits from close
cooperation with our international partners through the four
major multilateral export control regimes. Through these
regimes--the Wassenaar Arrangement, the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, the Missile Technology Control Regime, and the Australia
Group--the United States and our partners determine which items
and technologies merit control and how those controls should be
applied. It has long been our position that export controls are
significantly more effective when they are implemented
multilaterally. This helps ensure that these sensitive
technologies are controlled by all countries that are capable
of producing them to make it more difficult for them to be
acquired by parties of concern.
Q.2. Could the export control system be modified to address the
concern that know-how--not just intellectual property--is being
transferred through joint ventures and other partnerships?
A.2. The Export Administration Regulations (EAR), administered
by the Department of Commerce, does control ``technology,''
including things like technical know-how, so the export of such
technology to a foreign joint venture or partnership would be
subject to the license requirements in the export control
system.
Our export control system is constantly reviewed and
updated, particularly as it relates to the lists of items that
are subject to control, to ensure that we are controlling the
kinds of critical technologies that merit such measures. BIS is
committed to continuing to identify and control sensitive
emerging technologies, and ensuring that the process is
systematic, proactive, and institutionalized. We are currently
undertaking a review to better utilize our authorities to
combat threats arising from this kind of technology.
Q.3. Are there other changes outside of CFIUS and export
controls that should be considered to address this security
challenge?
A.3. The export control system and CFIUS are likely the two
authorities that address this security challenge most directly,
although other authorities, such as cybersecurity, are also
part of the challenge.
Q.4. One of the strengths of the U.S. is our ability to foster
innovation and develop new technologies.
Would increasing filing times and additional fees for
expanded CFIUS jurisdiction, as proposed by the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) significantly
inhibit venture capital investments and hurt entrepreneurship
by creating excessive barriers, such as prolonged wait times,
to foreign investment?
A.4. FIRRMA recognizes that certain complex transactions take
longer to review than the current timelines allow. It is our
hope that an increased review period will allow CFIUS to
conclude its review of transactions in response to the initial
filing in the vast majority of cases, rather than requiring
multiple re-filings, as often happens now. This will provide
greater predictability and certainty to the investment
community. Similarly, the fee authority will help agencies hire
and maintain adequate staff to review transactions, which in
turn should lead to greater assurance that transactions will
not be subject to re-filings.
Q.5. Would significantly expanding CFIUS's jurisdiction
negatively affect our investment relationship with Europe and
other traditional economic allies, who could get caught up in
an expansion of CFIUS's scope of review?
A.5. Even with the expanded scope of FIRRMA, CFIUS will remain
sharply focused on the small percentage of transactions that
present national security concerns. Investments from our allies
traditionally have not presented serious national security
concerns, and the increased jurisdiction of CFIUS post-FIRRMA
would not change that underlying reality.
FIRRMA would also allow CFIUS to develop regulations to
exempt transactions from CFIUS review in appropriate
circumstances if the foreign persons are from an allied
country. It is worth noting as well that several of our allies
are also considering strengthening their investment security
review processes in response to current global economic trends
and security concerns. FIRMMA's provisions to allow increased
cooperation with allies will support CFIUS efforts to encourage
a coordinated and likeminded approach to investment security
reviews.
Q.6. Do you think that significantly expanding CFIUS's
jurisdiction and identifying ``countries of particular
concern'' for purposes of CFIUS review could be considered a
discriminatory measure by trade partners?
A.6. FIRRMA defines ``country of special concern'' to mean ``a
country that poses a significant threat to the national
security interests of the United States.'' In conducting its
national security reviews, CFIUS is acutely aware that the
country of origin of an investor has an impact on the potential
threat to the national security arising from the transaction.
That said, CFIUS does not make arbitrary distinctions between
countries, and treats each transaction on a case-by-case basis.
FIRRMA states expressly that CFIUS would not be required to
maintain a list of countries of special concern.
Q.7. What would be the potential consequences of doing so from
a trade perspective?
A.7. CFIUS identifies national security concerns with only a
minority of investments that it reviews. Even with an expanded
scope post-FIRRMA, we anticipate that CFIUS would only need to
mitigate or recommend a prohibition on a small percentage of
overall investment. Commerce will work with the other CFIUS
agencies as we prepare implementing regulations to ensure that
CFIUS review is focused on transactions that are of genuine
national security concern and that we continue to welcome
foreign investment.
Q.8. Should we expect retaliation?
A.8. It is reasonable to assume that certain Governments may
not support an expanded CFIUS mandate, to the extent that such
a reform may directly impact their companies or their stated
industrial policies. However, it is difficult to predict how
specifically they may respond. The United States will continue
to push other countries to ensure that trade and investment is
fair and reciprocal. The U.S. investment regime is already much
more open than many foreign countries' regimes.
Q.9. What forms could that retaliation take?
A.9. It is difficult to speculate on specifically what form
retaliation could take. The United States will continue to push
other countries to ensure that trade and investment is fair and
reciprocal.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM RICHARD ASHOOH
Q.1. Can you discuss the use of ``mitigation agreements''--or
conditions placed on acquisitions approved by CFIUS?
Are they being used appropriately?
Does CFIUS have the resources and staffing to ensure
adherence to these mitigation agreements?
A.1. The Department does believe that CFIUS mitigation
agreements are being used effectively. CFIUS works diligently
to ensure that the mitigation measures enacted as part of a
CFIUS transaction are effective and targeted at addressing the
specific national security risks arising from the transaction
so that they are not overly broad or burdensome. CFIUS also
takes care to ensure that CFIUS mitigation agreements do not
overlap or duplicate other existing authorities (such as
Commerce and State's export control and Defense's National
Industrial Security Program authorities), but are instead
focused on areas that are not adequately or appropriately
covered by such authorities.
As the Department of Commerce is not a signatory to any
CFIUS mitigation agreements at this time, I would defer to my
colleagues at agencies that are responsible for the monitoring
of CFIUS mitigation agreements on whether they have adequate
resources to effectively monitor them.
Q.2. What are the pros and cons of making the filing of CFIUS
reviews mandatory--rather than discretionary--for State-
controlled acquiring firms?
A.2. As I stated in my testimony, the Department of Commerce is
supportive of the requirement in FIRRMA for mandatory filings
for certain transactions involving foreign Government
controlled entities. However, we are concerned that the 25-
percent threshold in FIRRMA is too high and that transactions
could easily be structured to evade it.
We are interested in ensuring that CFIUS has full
visibility into transactions that could raise national security
concerns. Under the existing statute, we sometimes see
transactions in which the foreign acquirer obtains less than a
25-percent ownership interest in the U.S. company but still
obtains control through governance rights or other mechanisms.
In those cases, the transaction is appropriately subject to
CFIUS review under existing law. Given the national security
concerns that may arise from foreign Government ownership of a
U.S. firm, it is important that CFIUS be made aware of foreign
Government-owned entities acquiring significant stakes in U.S.
companies, particularly if those shares are so significant as
to allow the foreign Government to control the U.S. company. We
believe that requiring mandatory filings for such transactions
to be in the U.S. national security interest.
Q.3. Should they be reviewed differently than private-firm
mergers or acquisitions, or firms that are in part-owned by
Nation States?
A.3. CFIUS reviews each case on a fact-specific, case-by-case
basis. However, under existing law, some transactions are
subject to heightened scrutiny based on a number of different
factors, including whether it is a foreign Government-
controlled transaction. Transactions involving a foreign
Government-controlled acquirer deserve additional scrutiny
because of the foreign Government's ability to influence
conduct by the acquirer and potentially the U.S. target. For
instance, a foreign Government-controlled entity could be
considered more likely than a private company to act on behalf
of the foreign Government and take actions in furtherance of
the Government's policies, which may be counter to U.S.
national security interests.
Q.4. It has been 10 years since Congress last comprehensively
considered the statutory framework for CFIUS. As practitioners
that have worked in this space for long tenures, has any
consensus emerged about what budget, regulatory, or statutory
changes may be needed?
A.4. As I stated in my testimony, the Department of Commerce
supports FIRRMA and its modernization of CFIUS. The national
security and economic landscape have changed significantly
since CFIUS was last updated and those changes require that
CFIUS be able to respond accordingly to protect U.S. national
security. FIRRMA would provide the necessary statutory changes
to CFIUS's authorities so that it can address risks arising
from a wide variety of transaction types--not just ones where a
foreign person gains ``control'' over a U.S. business, as is
currently the case. The expanded scope of CFIUS envisioned by
FIRRMA may require additional resources, and Commerce is
supportive of FIRRMA delaying the effective date for many
provisions until regulations, organizational structure,
personnel, and other resources are in place. This will help
ensure that CFIUS agencies are prepared to implement its
expanded scope.
Q.5. Can you delineate the appropriate role for export controls
versus CFIUS?
A.5. CFIUS and export controls are both vital and robust tools/
processes the United States relies upon to protect our national
security. CFIUS is a process to review whether certain business
transactions present a risk to U.S. national security, with
technology transfer being one of several possible factors which
may be of concern. The export control system governs technology
transfer itself, irrespective of the mode of transfer, to
protect sensitive U.S. origin goods, software, and technology.
As such, these two tools/processes are complementary and must
continue to work in a parallel, coordinated fashion. It is
important, as Congress reviews both processes (a review that
Commerce supports), that they remain complementary as their
authorities are modernized and potentially expanded.
Under the BIS-administered export control system, we work
closely with the Departments of Defense, Energy, and State.
These agencies review and clear any changes to the Export
Administration Regulations--including identifying and
controlling emerging technology. Those agencies also have a
role in reviewing license applications submitted to BIS. The
different equities, viewpoints, and technical expertise that
these four agencies bring to the table ensure that the export
control system is robust and that national security concerns
are thoroughly considered for any technology transfer of
concern.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN CRAPO
FROM ERIC CHEWNING
Q.1. The legislation FIRRMA authorizes CFIUS to impose filing
fees on transactions to cover the committee's funding needs.
Will these fees be sufficient to address the increased case
load anticipated with FIRRMA and what new resources will your
agencies need to carry out these reforms?
A.1. We do not anticipate that the filing fees will generate
sufficient revenue to adequately fund CFIUS activities
throughout the interagency process. The large volume of
additional, small transactions which FIRRMA would subject to
CFIUS review are likely to generate very little additional
revenue. Instead, the filing fees are likely to provide a
supplemental funding source that would better position CFIUS to
handle unexpected increases in case volume. Therefore, DoD will
certainly need additional resources to accomplish its CFIUS
mission. We foresee using those resources to fund additional
personnel to manage CFIUS reviews in DoD, as well as a modern,
interagency case management and big data analytics platform for
processing and triaging CFIUS cases.
Q.2. How many cases do you anticipate CFIUS would review as a
result of FIRRMA?
A.2. Precise estimates of the anticipated caseload under FIRRMA
are elusive because the bill assigns to implementing
regulations significant elements of the covered transaction
definition. We believe the annual case volume under FIRRMA,
however, could be several multiples of the current caseload.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR COTTON
FROM ERIC CHEWNING
Q.1. Last year Cosco Shipping Lines (Cosco), a State-owned
entity of the Chinese Government, acquired Hong Kong based
Orient Overseas Container Line (OOCL). Among other things, the
acquisition includes the Long Beach Container Terminal.
Strategic seaports in the United States are designated by DOD
because of their ability to support U.S. force and materiel
deployments in times of war and national emergency. Long Beach
seaports is designated as strategically important.
Chinese investment occurs throughout the United States and,
in fact, Cosco already has as presence in a marine terminal in
Long Beach. However, that terminal is 100-percent operated by a
separate, unaffiliated, American owned company.
It seems logical that the operations of strategic assets at
seaports be performed by a company owned, operated, and
controlled by U.S. citizens.
Do you believe it is reasonable that this criterion, that
operations of foreign-owned shipping apparatuses are operated
by a separate, unaffiliated, American-owned company, be part of
the CFIUS analysis of foreign acquisitions within strategically
important U.S. ports?
A.1. DoD carefully reviews each CFIUS case for national
security risks arising from that transaction. Whenever DoD
identifies a national security concern, we evaluate possible
risk mitigation options in coordination with subject matter
experts across DoD. In some instances, the best mitigation tool
may be requiring that certain company operations be assigned to
an unaffiliated, U.S.-owned company.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM ERIC CHEWNING
Q.1. As we look at ways to protect critical technologies from
falling into the hands of foreign Governments, we need to pay
equal attention to the investments we have to make so that the
U.S. retains technological superiority and continues to enjoy
the economic growth that comes with robust innovation. Earlier
this month, Bloomberg released its 2018 Innovation Index, which
ranks countries based on research and development spending,
value-added manufacturing, educations, and other factors. For
the first time in the 6 years since the index began, the U.S.
dropped out of the top 10 most innovative economies. You ended
your testimony by saying that while defensive measures like
CFIUS modernization are necessary, they are not sufficient for
keeping America as a technological leader.
What steps should Congress consider in conjunction with
CFIUS reform to ensure that we continue to foster an
innovation-intensive economy that strengthens our national and
economic security?
A.1. As it pertains to foreign investment, we approach this
problem with two broad solution strategies: protect and
promote. FIRRMA's modernization of CFIUS is part of our protect
strategy. The promote strategy identifies relevant, innovative
technology companies and funnels the capital to those companies
necessary to foster and sustain innovation. This capital can,
in some instances, originate from U.S. Government sources, like
grants. Other U.S. Government sources of capital, such as U.S.
Government credit facilities, can also support innovation long-
term.
More broadly, an innovation-intensive economy requires
investments in the workforce and industrial base that can
develop and commercialize emerging technologies. Those
investments include, for example, funding for U.S. science,
technology, engineering, and math education and programs that
promote advanced U.S. manufacturing, like DoD's Manufacturing
Innovation Institutes.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER
FROM ERIC CHEWNING
Q.1. As we search for the most appropriate remedy to the very
real problem of foreign countries gaining access to critical
U.S. technologies, there are some suggesting that we should be
pursuing other changes instead of or in addition to the CFIUS
reform.
What role should export controls play in addressing this
problem?
A.1. The National Security Strategy and National Defense
Strategy highlight protecting our warfighters' technological
superiority as a national priority. Export controls and CFIUS
are complementary aspects of a layered defense to accomplish
this goal. Export controls function as a first line of defense
to counter threats associated with technology transfer to our
competitors. Export controls protect both military and dual-use
(military and civilian use) technologies that are categorized
by way of interagency deliberations, discussions with industry,
and in many cases, international negotiations with other
participating members of the multilateral export control
regimes.
CFIUS is a critical second line of defense. This second
line of defense addresses emerging and foundational
technologies that may not be currently covered by export
control. The second line of defense also enables us to protect
the know-how, expertise, and industrial relationships that
would enable a competitor to re-create a technology competency
on foreign soil. Acting in concert, this layered defense
identifies and controls transfers of new and emerging
technologies, reviews transfers of sensitive information and
capabilities through foreign acquisitions, and engages with
foreign partners to ensure they protect the critical
technologies we do share.
We have seen examples of these two layers working together
in the past. In one instance, CFIUS prevented a country from
acquiring a U.S. company with sensitive technology after the
export control regime denied export licenses for the same
technology to that country. Given that our competitors will
continue using all available avenues to fill gaps in their
military requirements, we need both strong export controls and
a modernized foreign investment review process to maintain our
technological advantage.
Q.2. Could the export control system be modified to address the
concern that know-how--not just intellectual property--is being
transferred through joint ventures and other partnerships?
A.2. For those technology areas where export controls are
currently in place, a license is usually required for foreign
nationals seeking access to U.S. technology (including know-
how), whether outside the United States, as an export, or
inside the United States, as a ``deemed export.'' U.S.
Government licensing authorities have the ability to require
export licenses and investigate compliance with export control
laws and regulations. While these authorities are broad,
defining a technology with sufficient clarity to control it
pursuant to these authorities can be a lengthy processes that
challenges efforts to protect emerging technologies. DoD is
currently reviewing the recently introduced Export Control
Reform Act of 2018 (H.R. 5040) to confirm there is sufficient
language to ensure an effective national security review of
sensitive technologies.
Q.3. Are there other changes outside of CFIUS and export
controls that should be considered to address this security
challenge?
A.3. DoD, along with other U.S. Government agencies, is
assessing a range of tools to prevent access to critical U.S.
technology by foreign nationals from countries such as China
and Russia, including more rigorous vetting of visa
applications for work in certain technology sectors,
cooperative research and development programs, and scientific
exchanges.
Q.4. One of the strengths of the U.S. is our ability to foster
innovation and develop new technologies.
Would increasing filing times and additional fees for
expanded CFIUS jurisdiction, as proposed by the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) significantly
inhibit venture capital investments and hurt entrepreneurship
by creating excessive barriers, such as prolonged wait times,
to foreign investment?
A.4. DoD does not see the increased review times and the
addition of filing fees as significant foreign investment
inhibitors. FIRRMA would lengthen the current 30 day review
period to 45 days. We do not expect the additional 15 days in
review and the optional one-time 30-day extension in
extraordinary circumstances to have a material impact on
foreign investment rates. In fact, we anticipate these
extensions would reduce the need for the parties to withdraw
and refile more complicated transactions, adding clarity to the
process and, overall, shortening timelines for final approval.
We do not anticipate that the regulatory process would
establish filing fees at a level likely to have a material
impact on investment decisions.
Q.5. Would significantly expanding CFIUS's jurisdiction
negatively affect our investment relationship with Europe and
other traditional economic allies, who could get caught up in
an expansion of CFIUS's scope of review?
A.5. Investors from our traditional economic partners have
routinely filed cases with CFIUS for years, and the United
States has long been a leading destination for foreign direct
investment despite the CFIUS review. These investors are making
a business calculation that trades a short, statutorily defined
CFIUS review for the confidence that the United States will not
seek to unwind their transactions at a later date. As FIRRMA
generally maintains the voluntary filing system, we anticipate
that investors will continue to seek those safe harbor
protections under FIRRMA just as they do today. When they do,
we anticipate CFIUS clearing most of those transactions in the
initial review period.
Q.6. Do you think that significantly expanding CFIUS's
jurisdiction and identifying ``countries of particular
concern'' for purposes of CFIUS review could be considered a
discriminatory measure by trade partners?
A.6. As FIRRMA does not mandate any outcome with respect to
countries of special concern, CFIUS action on national security
grounds cannot be considered discriminatory. CFIUS, focused
exclusively on national security risk, operates pursuant to
national security exemptions in existing trade agreements, and
CFIUS is expected to continue to do so under FIRRMA.
Q.7. What would be the potential consequences of doing so from
a trade perspective?
A.7. As DoD does not foresee FIRRMA as a discriminatory
measure, we do not foresee consequences from a trade
perspective.
Q.8. Should we expect retaliation?
A.8. DoD anticipates that CFIUS under FIRRMA would continue its
current practices, which would reduce the chance of
retaliation. Those practices are a continued, exclusive focus
on national security risks posed by the specific transaction
under review and a record of clearing transactions, regardless
of the buyer's country, that do not pose national security
concerns.
Q.9. What forms could that retaliation take?
A.9. By continuing to follow current CFIUS practices, DoD does
not anticipate increased retaliation risk under FIRRMA.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF
SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM ERIC CHEWNING
Q.1. Mining and Proximity to Military Installations--As you may
know, in Nevada, we have had several concerning investments by
Chinese companies near our Air Force and Navy bases. In fact,
in 2015, an Air Force commander explained concerns with
building near Nellis Air Force Base in Las Vegas.
Do you believe CFIUS's current authorities and processes
sufficiently address military concerns regarding Chinese
investments near military installations?
A.1. No, current CFIUS authorities and processes do not
sufficiently address DoD's concerns associated with foreign
investment in proximity to sensitive military activities and
installations. Current authorities fall short whenever a
transaction involves the acquisition of real property
interests, through a purchase or lease, or mineral rights, but
does not constitute control of a U.S. business. In these
circumstances, sensitive military activities and installations
remain vulnerable to persistent observation and information
collection. As introduced, FIRRMA addresses this weakness by
including land purchases and leases by a foreign person in the
definition of a covered transaction.
Q.2. Is CFIUS equipped to combat the most sophisticated
techniques for information collection near these installations?
A.2. The CFIUS process is not explicitly designed or intended
to mitigate the most sophisticated techniques near sensitive
military installations. Further, CFIUS currently has no
authority to review foreign purchases or leases of land near
these installations when the transaction does not constitute
foreign control of a U.S. business. The FIRRMA bill, as
introduced, would give CFIUS this authority.
Q.3. What more can be done to mitigate the potential for
information collection near these installations?
A.3. We support the expansion of the definition of a covered
transaction in the FIRRMA bill, as introduced, as a means of
better addressing the risks associated with foreign investment
in close proximity to military installations. FIRRMA would
expand the definition of the term ``covered transaction'' under
CFIUS to include the purchase or lease of real property in
proximity to military installations.
Q.4. Can you discuss the use of ``mitigation agreements''--or
conditions placed on acquisitions approved by CFIUS?
A.4. Whenever DoD identifies national security risks arising
from a transaction, we explore risk mitigation measures that
may reduce the risk to an acceptable level. Doing so is
consistent with U.S. Government policy, articulated in
Executive Order 11858, as amended, of supporting international
investment in the United States consistent with the protection
of national security. These mitigation measures typically
oblige the parties to implement technical, personnel, and
management controls. If DoD determines that a mitigation
agreement would sufficiently reduce the risk, we, along with
the Department of the Treasury, enter into agreement
negotiations with the parties. If we cannot reach a mutually
acceptable agreement, we prepare a recommendation to the
President that he prohibit the transaction. If we do reach a
mutually acceptable agreement with the parties, DoD recommends
that CFIUS approve the transaction contingent on the parties'
compliance with the agreement.
Q.5. Are they being used appropriately?
A.5. Yes, the use of these types of mitigation agreements under
the circumstances described above is an appropriate mechanism
for realizing the benefits of foreign investment consistent
with the protection of national security.
Q.6. Does CFIUS have the resources and staffing to ensure
adherence to these mitigation agreements?
A.6. Monitoring the parties' ongoing compliance with mitigation
agreements is a critical part of the CFIUS lifecycle. These
mitigation agreements are typically effective in perpetuity,
absent a material change such as the sale of the mitigated
company to a U.S. entity. The number of mitigation agreements
that require monitoring increases each year, and the resources
necessary to monitor them increases proportionally. Rather than
asking the U.S. taxpayer to bear these increasing costs, DoD is
exploring how to shift the burden to the foreign acquirers. We
could accomplish that shift by requiring the parties to employ
company-compensated, trusted third-party monitors with specific
expertise in the necessary mitigation fields.
Q.7. What are the pros and cons of making the filing of CFIUS
reviews mandatory--rather than discretionary--for State-
controlled acquiring firms?
A.7. The current CFIUS statute establishes a higher standard
for clearance for transactions in which the buyer is determined
to be foreign Government-controlled. The higher standard
reflects Congress's recognition that a foreign Government-
controlled transaction is likely to present an elevated threat,
and therefore an elevated risk, in comparison to a similar
transaction in which the buyer is purely commercial. Making
reviews mandatory for foreign Government-controlled
transactions guarantees that CFIUS reviews these transactions
that are likely to pose an elevated national security risk.
Such a guarantee is especially important in the context of
venture capital investments in startup companies. Information
about these small, private investments is not always readily
available, hamstringing CFIUS efforts to identify and review
them.
The potential disadvantage of this kind of obligatory
filing is that it may bring certain benign transactions before
CFIUS that would not have been filed under a strictly voluntary
system. This potential disadvantage is unlikely to create
significant problems for CFIUS or the parties because the
declaration process described in FIRRMA enables CFIUS to triage
these transactions rapidly.
Q.8. Should they be reviewed differently than private-firm
mergers or acquisitions, or firms that are in part-owned by
Nation States?
A.8. As described above, the CFIUS statute currently prescribes
a higher standard of clearance for transactions in which the
buyer is determined to be foreign Government-controlled. In
that sense, foreign Government-controlled transactions are
reviewed differently. In another sense, however, CFIUS reviews
all cases similarly by applying the same analytical framework
to all cases to identify national security risks arising from
the transactions. DoD supports the application of a consistent
risk analysis methodology to all cases, while holding foreign
Government-controlled transactions to a higher standard for
clearance.
Q.9. It has been 10 years since Congress last comprehensively
considered the statutory framework for CFIUS. As practitioners
that have worked in this space for long tenures, has any
consensus emerged about what budget, regulatory, or statutory
changes may be needed?
A.9. DoD views FIRRMA as the best expression of interagency
consensus regarding the changes necessary to modernize CFIUS.
Q.10. Can you delineate the appropriate role for export
controls versus CFIUS?
A.10. The National Security Strategy and National Defense
Strategy highlight protecting our warfighters' technological
superiority as a national priority. Export controls and CFIUS
are complementary aspects of a layered defense to accomplish
this goal. Export controls function as a first line of defense
to counter threats associated with technology transfer to our
competitors. Export controls protect both military and dual-use
(military and civilian use) technologies that are categorized
by way of interagency deliberations, discussions with industry,
and in many cases, international negotiations with other
participating members of the multilateral export control
regimes.
CFIUS is a critical second line of defense. This second
line of defense addresses emerging and foundational
technologies that may not be currently covered by export
control. The second line of defense also enables us to protect
the know-how, expertise, and industrial relationships that
would enable a competitor to re-create a technology competency
on foreign soil. Acting in concert, this layered defense
identifies and controls transfers of new and emerging
technologies, reviews transfers of sensitive information and
capabilities through foreign acquisitions, and engages with
foreign partners to ensure they protect the critical
technologies we do share.
We have seen examples of these two layers working together
in the past. In one instance, CFIUS prevented a country from
acquiring a U.S. company with sensitive technology after the
export control regime denied export licenses for the same
technology to that country. Given that our competitors will
continue using all available avenues to fill gaps in their
military requirements, we need both strong export controls and
a modernized foreign investment review process to maintain our
technological advantage.