- ARE WE READY FOR THE NEXT HURRICANE SEASON? STATUS OF PREPARATION AND RESPONSE CAPABILITIES FOR 2018
[Senate Hearing 115-771]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-771
ARE WE READY FOR THE NEXT HURRICANE
SEASON? STATUS OF PREPARATION
AND RESPONSE CAPABILITIES FOR 2018
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE,
SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 12, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available online: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-948 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE, SCIENCE, AND TRANSPORTATION
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota, Chairman
ROGER WICKER, Mississippi
BILL NELSON, Florida, Ranking
ROY BLUNT, Missouri
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
TED CRUZ, Texas
AMY KLOBUCHAR, Minnesota
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
EDWARD MARKEY, Massachusetts
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
TOM UDALL, New Mexico
JAMES INHOFE, Oklahoma
GARY PETERS, Michigan
MIKE LEE, Utah
TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, West Virginia
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
JON TESTER, Montana
Nick Rossi, Staff Director
Adrian Arnakis, Deputy Staff Director
Jason Van Beek, General Counsel
Kim Lipsky, Democratic Staff Director
Chris Day, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
Renae Black, Senior Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on April 12, 2018...................................
1
Statement of Senator Wicker......................................
1
Statement of Senator Nelson......................................
2
Prepared statement...........................................
4
Statement of Senator Cruz........................................
5
Statement of Senator Hassan......................................
50
Statement of Senator Peters......................................
53
Statement of Senator Cantwell....................................
55
Witnesses
Jamie M. Miller, Deputy Director for Governmental Affairs and
Chief Innovation Officer, State of Mississippi, Mississippi
Development Authority..........................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
8
Mayor Allen Owen, Mayor of Missouri City, Texas..................
9
Charles Lindsey, City Manager, City of Marathon, Florida.........
10
Prepared statement...........................................
12
Jennifer Pipa, Regional Chief Executive Officer, Central Florida
Region, American Red Cross.....................................
15
Prepared statement...........................................
17
RDML Timothy Gallaudet, Ph.D., USN (Ret.), Assistant Secretary of
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere; and Acting Under Secretary
of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce........
21
Prepared statement...........................................
23
Rear Admiral Linda L. Fagan, Deputy Commandant for Operations
Policy and Capability, U.S. Coast Guard........................
31
Prepared statement...........................................
32
Hon. T. Bella Dinh-Zarr, Ph.D., MPH, Board Member, National
Transportation Safety Board....................................
35
Prepared statement...........................................
37
Appendix
Response to written questions submitted to RDML Timothy Gallaudet
by:
Hon. Roger Wicker............................................
59
Hon. Dan Sullivan............................................
60
Hon. Bill Nelson.............................................
61
Hon. Richard Blumenthal......................................
66
Hon. Edward Markey...........................................
67
Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto..................................
67
Hon. Maggie Hassan...........................................
70
Response to written question submitted to Hon. T. Bella Dinh-Zarr
by:
Hon. John Thune..............................................
70
ARE WE READY FOR THE NEXT HURRICANE
SEASON? STATUS OF PREPARATION
AND RESPONSE CAPABILITIES FOR 2018
----------
THURSDAY, APRIL 12, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m. in
room SR-253, Russell Senate Office Building, Hon. Roger Wicker
presiding.
Present: Senators Wicker [presiding], Cruz, Nelson,
Cantwell, Klobuchar, Tester, Peters, and Hassan.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROGER WICKER,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MISSISSIPPI
Senator Wicker. Good morning. Thank you for waiting during
two relatively early morning votes for the Senate. And I'm
happy to chair this timely hearing after the 2017 hurricane
season and Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, Maria, and Nate.
My home State of Mississippi is especially vulnerable to
natural disasters, and the memory of Hurricane Katrina still
remains fresh. I want to take this opportunity to remind the
Committee that Barry Myers, President Trump's nominee to be the
NOAA Administrator, still awaits confirmation from the Senate.
I think as this hearing progresses, we should be mindful of
that.
Mr. Myers' long successful career with AccuWeather, a
private weather entity, provided him with expertise to lead our
Federal efforts on creating the world's best weather model.
Precise weather forecasting provides great safety for Americans
who face the threat of hurricanes and other natural disasters.
Mr. Myers has pledged to recuse himself from any conflict of
interest. It is certainly past time for him and many other
Trump nominees to be confirmed.
One thing we know for certain, Americans have the resolve
to rebuild after hurricanes. Mississippians recovered thanks to
the generosity of many heaven-sent Good Samaritans, and we
rebuilt our coast after Hurricane Katrina stronger than before.
The result continues to be evident in the aftermath of
Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria. In this light, an important
topic of this hearing is, Can we rebuild better? can we rebuild
in order to withstand future storms?
Hurricane Nate, a Category 1 hurricane that made landfall
twice in Mississippi showed that we can absorb the impacts from
serious storms. In the past, a Category 1 hurricane would have
resulted in far worse consequences, but the investments and
decisions made on the front end, learning from Hurricane
Katrina, gave us the ability to prevent the worst of damages.
Hurricanes like Harvey, Irma, and Maria require us to prepare.
Just as we tell our coastal residents to prepare for a
hurricane, it is vital to have Federal agencies, such as NOAA,
the Coast Guard, and the NTSB ever at the ready.
Federal bureaucracies are not always efficient, and there
is always work to be done to streamline and expedite Federal
actions. We must be ready to respond to these disasters quickly
and efficiently. This past hurricane season, there were
successes in improved forecasting from NOAA and heroic
responses by the Coast Guard and other agencies. We need to
continue to plan so we can respond quickly should sequential
devastating storms stretch our resources to the maximum. It is
important to tap into the networks of our State emergency
responders and volunteer networks, such as churches and the
American Red Cross.
In the past, storms of this magnitude caused greater damage
than was seen in 2017. So we're making progress. I'm hopeful
that hearings like this can continue to minimize the impact to
lives, property, and communities from these hurricanes. Things
can be replaced, but people cannot.
So, Senator Nelson, our Ranking Member is now recognized
for whatever opening statement he would like to make.
STATEMENT OF HON. BILL NELSON,
U.S. SENATOR FROM FLORIDA
Senator Nelson. Well, Mr. Chairman, here we are just about
in hurricane season again, and we're still recovering from the
hurricanes of last year. I imagine the Senator from Texas still
has damage out there; in Florida, we do.
FEMA did a pretty good job in Texas and in Florida, but
there are folks today in Puerto Rico that still do not have
electricity and potable water, and that's unacceptable. And yet
we continue to try to examine what's gone wrong and what's
right and what can be done better. And as we're aware, there
are some areas where we can and must do better, and Puerto Rico
is an example. Florida is an example that local governments
still are not being compensated for the debris pickup that they
have advanced as a local government since they couldn't keep
leaving it out on the curbside.
That is unacceptable that FEMA has not reimbursed them. But
there seems to be a pattern because that was even the case in a
hurricane 2 years ago when the State of Florida, which is
responsible for taking local governments' requests, failed and
missed the deadline, and as such, lo and behold, the local
governments didn't get reimbursed, and we had to go in and
plead for an amendment to that, an appeal to that.
Local governments have been financially struggling to
recover from Hurricane Irma, the one I was talking about 2
years ago, was massive, and even Hurricane Hermine, which hit
Florida 16 months ago. And so now 6 months after Hurricane
Irma, some of those reimbursements haven't been made.
Of course, local communities are cash-strapped and in need
of the Federal funds in order to continue their recovery
efforts and prepare for the one that's starting June the first.
They can't keep going like we're going.
So the citrus crop in Florida is just about to be picked.
The trees are laden with fruit. Senator Cruz, the King Ranch
has a major citrus operation of some 40,000 acres in South
Florida; it was ready to be picked. Bam, here comes the wind,
and they lost almost 100 percent of the crop in South Florida.
Further north, they lost 50 percent of the crop. A good number
lost 75 percent of the crop.
So we went to work in the disaster assistance bill to get
money to try to make them whole. It's in the USDA, Agriculture.
They haven't been compensated yet, and it's 6 months, to
allocate to agriculture $2 billion specifically to citrus,
about 760 million for the loss of the crop, and about $200
million we appropriated to address fishery disasters, and $18
million to address the canals littered with debris in places
like the Florida Keys, and it's sitting at the Department of
Treasury as NOAA's plan to get it out the door awaits approval
from the White House Office of Management and Budget. This is
going so painfully slow. One of our witnesses here is from
Marathon. He'll tell you about the debris in the canals. This
funding was intended to help people not to be mired in a sea of
bureaucratic red tape.
Or let's take the Army Corps of Engineers. They've
reportedly been moving workers out of Puerto Rico before the
power is restored. Obviously, the Federal Government has got to
do a lot better. And that's why we've asked to hear directly
from folks who were on the ground and those who had agencies
here in Washington that are involved in hurricane assistance.
I want to welcome a couple of our witnesses from Florida.
Chuck Lindsey is the City Manager for Marathon, a city working
to return to normal after Irma slammed into the Keys and the
folks around Marathon and a couple of Keys to the south were
the ones that got it the worst because they were on the eastern
side of the eye of the hurricane.
Jennifer Pipa is a Regional Chief Executive Officer of the
Red Cross and lives in Tampa. She deployed to Houston following
Hurricane Harvey, and then one week later they had to take them
out of Texas and send them to Florida, and then she went to
Puerto Rico. It's certainly rare that we have someone before us
who has witnessed the devastation in all three locations and
played a key role in delivering disaster relief.
Ms. Pipa, we look forward to hearing from you.
And I'm also anxious to hear from Admiral Gallaudet. He is
retired Navy, Rear Admiral, now heads the part of NOAA, and
hear about the next steps now that Congress has given the
agency the funding to purchase the second hurricane hunter jet,
because the only one that we've had for years and years does go
down for maintenance, and Lord forbid that we would ever have
an accident because of complete loss. Now we're going to have a
backup.
And so we are also going to hear from NTSB Board Member
Bella Dinh-Zarr about any progress that's been made to
implement recommendations stemming from the investigation into
the sinking of the El Faro cargo ship, which tragically was
lost in a hurricane and should have never been steered into the
path of that oncoming hurricane.
Rochelle Hamm is in the audience today to honor her husband
Frank's memory, an El Faro crewmember. And since his death, Ms.
Hamm and other El Faro families have left no stone unturned to
improve maritime safety.
And like the families, I think a lot of us think we do need
to do a better job of making sure ships have access to the most
up-to-date weather information--they didn't on El Faro--and
that they have the best lifeboats and lifesaving equipment--
they didn't on El Faro. Vessels ought to properly be inspected
to have that safety equipment.
So welcome, Mrs. Hamm.
And thank you to all the witnesses and thank you to Senator
Wicker for holding this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Senator Nelson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Bill Nelson, U.S. Senator from Florida
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The last time we discussed hurricanes in
this committee was in May of 2016.
So, here we are with hurricane season nipping at our heels again.
At the same time we're still actively recovering from the busy and
deadly 2017 season.
Today, we're going to examine what's gone wrong, what's gone right
and what can be done better.
And as we're all very well aware, there are some areas where we can
and must do better.
Delays by FEMA to reimburse local governments have been completely
unacceptable.
Local governments are financially struggling to recover from
Hurricane Irma, while at the same time still waiting for funds related
to Hurricane Matthew and Hermine, which hit Florida over sixteen months
ago.
Six months after Hurricane Irma, some counties have yet to see a
dime of the FEMA reimbursements they were promised.
Our communities are cash-strapped and in need of Federal funds in
order to continue their recovery efforts and prepare for the upcoming
hurricane season less than two months away. They can't do that the way
things are currently going.
Florida's citrus farmers, too, need to make decisions about
harvesting and planting, but they're still waiting for the USDA to
allocate the over two billion dollars Congress provided in February.
And the two hundred million dollars we appropriated to address
fishery disasters and the eighteen million dollars to address the
canals littered with debris in places like the Florida Keys is sitting
at the Department of Treasury as NOAA's plan to get it out the door
awaits approval from the White House Office of Management and Budget.
This funding was intended to help people, not to be mired in a sea
of bureaucratic red tape.
Or, take the Army Corps of Engineers, who have reportedly been
moving workers out of Puerto Rico before power is fully restored.
Suffice to say, we can do better. And we must.
That's why we've asked to hear directly from both folks who are on
the ground and those who head agencies here in Washington that are
involved in hurricane assistance, recovery and preparedness efforts.
First, I'd like to welcome a couple of our witnesses from Florida.
Chuck Lindsey is the city manager for Marathon, Florida--a city
working to return to normalcy after Hurricane Irma slammed into the
Florida Keys. Welcome, Chuck.
Jennifer Pipa is a regional chief executive officer of the Red
Cross and lives in Tampa. Jennifer deployed to Houston following
Hurricane Harvey--then one week later to Florida for Irma response--and
then to Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria. It's certainly rare that we
have someone before us who witnessed the devastation in all three
locations and played a key role in delivering disaster relief. Ms.
Pipa, we look forward to hearing from you.
I'm also anxious to hear from Admiral Gallaudet on NOAA's next
steps now that Congress has given the agency the funding to purchase a
Hurricane Hunter replacement jet.
And finally, I want to hear from NTSB Board Member Bella Dinh-Zarr
about any progress that's been made to implement recommendations
stemming from the investigation into the sinking of the El Faro cargo
ship, which tragically was lost during Hurricane Joaquin in 2015.
Rochelle Hamm is in the audience today to honor her husband Frank's
memory--an El Faro crew member. Since his death, Mrs. Hamm and the
other El Faro families have left no stone unturned to improve maritime
safety.
Like the families, I too think we need to do a better job of making
sure ships have access to the most up-to-date weather information, they
have the best lifeboats and lifesaving equipment and that vessels are
properly inspected.
Welcome, Ms. Hamm.
Thank you to our witnesses. And thank you to Chairman Thune and to
Senator Wicker for holding this very important hearing. With that, I'll
turn it over to our local impact panel.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Nelson.
Senator Cruz, I understand there is a distinguished Texan
on the panel that you would like to introduce.
STATEMENT OF HON. TED CRUZ,
U.S. SENATOR FROM TEXAS
Senator Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my privilege
to have the opportunity to introduce Mayor Allen Owen, of
Missouri City, Texas. Mayor Owen has led a life dedicated to
public service. He has served as the Mayor of Missouri City for
the past 24 years, and he was a Member of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council.
In addition to holding public office, Mayor Owen has worked
tirelessly in the community by serving on countless boards and
associations, such as the Fort Bend Literary Council, the FBI
Citizens Academy Alumni Association, and the Fort Bend Women's
Center, and he's a lifetime Vice President and Director of the
Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo.
Mayor Owen has been so active in the community, if I were
to read his entire record of community involvement, we would
run out of time for the rest of the hearing. However, what
brings Mayor Owen to this Committee today is August 25, 2017,
the day Hurricane Harvey made landfall in Texas. Hurricane
Harvey was unlike any storm we've ever seen before. It
devastated our Gulf Coast and is considered one of the
costliest disasters in United States history.
As Harvey became--as Harvey made landfall, roads became
rivers, winds obliterated entire communities, and too many
precious lives were lost.
Like many Texans, Mayor Owen didn't sit back and wait for
help. Mayor Owen helped coordinate 1,300 high-water rescues,
and housed and fed 60 state troopers and 17 National Guardsmen
for over a week. He spent an entire week in the city's
operations center with no way to get home. And even though the
water has since receded, the work hasn't stopped.
Eight months since Hurricane Harvey made landfall, Mayor
Owen continues to be an integral part of the rebuilding process
in Missouri City. From cleaning out waterlogged houses to
consoling those who were most affected by the devastation,
Mayor Owen is a wonderful example of what it means to be a
Texan. And I am proud that he is here today to help represent
the great State of Texas before this Committee.
Welcome, Mayor.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much, Senator Cruz. And I
want to welcome my fellow Mississippian and my friend Mr. Jamie
Miller, who serves as Deputy Director for Governmental Affairs
and Chief Innovation Officer for the Mississippi Development
Authority, MDA. He serves as disaster recovery administrator
and oversees state-owned ports.
Mr. Miller lives in Gulfport, Mississippi. He responded to
Hurricane Katrina both personally and professionally. And I
think it's noteworthy that he served as Policy Advisor to
Governor Haley Barbour's Office of Recovery and Renewal
following Hurricane Katrina.
So I think it's fair to say, Senator Cruz and Mr. Ranking
Member, that all four members of our first panel have been
there and done that, and I can say from my own personal
knowledge that Jamie Miller knows what he's talking about when
it comes to this subject matter.
So we'll set the clock for 5 minutes for each witness. If
there's more to be provided to the Committee, we'll, of course,
take the entire statement for the record. But we'll begin down
here with Mr. Miller and proceed down the table.
You are recognized, sir, and welcome.
STATEMENT OF JAMIE M. MILLER,
DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
AND CHIEF INNOVATION OFFICER, STATE OF MISSISSIPPI,
MISSISSIPPI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Mr. Miller. Thank you, sir. Good morning, Senator Cruz,
Ranking Member Nelson, and good morning to my Senator, Senator
Roger Wicker.
I want to thank this Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation for hosting today's hearing, and asking a very
important question: Are we ready for the next hurricane season?
It is my honor to come before you and offer Mississippi's
perspective on hurricanes, hurricane preparedness, and our
ability to respond and mitigate the impacts of the next major
storm.
Mississippi is a state where we value simple and practical
solutions to problems. We value personal responsibility and
taking care of our neighbors. As the most charitable state in
the Nation per capita, we value giving.
Hurricanes have taught Mississippi some challenging
lessons. They remind us of how vulnerable we are to their
power, but I'm here to share with this Committee the lessons
taught have not gone unlearned. Mississippi has been the
beneficiary of the American people's incredible generosity when
storms such as Hurricane Camille, Frederick, Elena, Georges,
and Katrina made landfall in Mississippi. Mississippi was given
a great responsibility to put those dollars to use to devise
creative programs and policies to protect our citizens and to
mitigate future damages.
When Mississippi's coastal communities were built, it was
without regard for significant hurricane impact. That all
changed after Katrina. With the daunting task of rebuilding
roads, infrastructure, housing, and the economy from a mountain
of debris, Mississippi put the necessary safeguards in place to
avoid the total devastation from future storms. Those
safeguards required dramatic changes to building codes and
elevation requirements.
Housing programs implemented post-Katrina included the
Homeowner's Assistance Program, or HAP. HAP required grant
recipients to elevate their homes, comply with building codes,
and maintain flood insurance. The Homeowner's Elevation Program
provided grants to residents, although they did not lose their
home, to elevate structures to the base flood elevations. And,
finally, Mississippi's Small Rental Assistance Program was
designed to rebuild single family rentals and duplexes with the
new property covenants.
Infrastructure initiatives included the Gulf Coast
Infrastructure Program, which focuses on building a utility
infrastructure backbone mitigated against future storm damage.
The Port of Gulfport Restoration Program created a more
resilient facility to withstand future hurricane damage.
Efforts included elevating the port and creating an evacuation
plan to ensure containers, equipment, and cargo did not wash
inland. New buildings were also required to be built to the
FEMA Flood Velocity Zone standards so critical structural
components could withstand the storm surge.
Mississippi believes in hazard mitigation. Coupled with the
housing and infrastructure programs mentioned, Mississippi has
invested more than $350 million in hazard mitigation directly.
We invested $230 million in public and private safe rooms, $85
million in wind retrofits for homeowners, 21 million in flood
control, and 16 million to acquire properties in the
floodplain.
The payoff for Mississippi's investments in preparedness
and mitigation was never more evident than October 8, 2017,
when Hurricane Nate made landfall along the Mississippi Gulf
Coast. Nate brought sustained winds of 85 miles an hour and a
significant storm surge of 12 feet. This storm, by all
accounts, should have caused an estimated $100 million in
damages. However, Mississippi incurred no deaths, no injuries,
and not one single home or business sustained major damage.
Once the water subsided and debris was cleared, Mississippians
went back to business as usual in a minimal amount of time.
Governor Phil Bryant said it best when he correctly stated,
``Mississippi did not dodge a bullet, we took a direct hit.''
As the waters of the Gulf of Mexico begin to warm,
Mississippians know now is the time to put together their
individual preparedness and recovery plans. We have strong
leadership from a dedicated Governor, statewide Emergency
Management Agency, and seasoned local emergency managers and
communities that remain vigilant. And although we will never be
able to completely prevent the damages caused by violent
storms, Mississippi is better prepared today to withstand the
effects of tropical weather thanks to our responsible use of
mitigation and preparedness resources. Our structures are
higher and stronger, and Mississippians are much smarter.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jamie M. Miller, Deputy Director, Governmental
Affairs; and Chief Innovation Officer, State of Mississippi,
Mississippi
Development Authority
Good morning. Thank you Chairman Thune, Senator Wicker and members
of the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee for
hosting today's hearing and asking an important question. Are we ready
for the next hurricane season?
Mississippi's People and Lessons Learned
It is my honor to come before you and offer Mississippi's
perspective on hurricanes, hurricane preparedness and our ability to
respond and mitigate the impacts of the next major storm.
Mississippi is a state where we value simple and practical
solutions to problems. We value personal responsibility and taking care
of our neighbors. As the most charitable state in nation per capita, we
value giving. Hurricanes have taught Mississippi some challenging
lessons. They remind us how vulnerable we are to their power. But I'm
here to share with this committee the lessons taught have not gone
unlearned.
Mississippi has been the beneficiary of the American people's
incredible generosity when storms such as Hurricane Camille, Frederick,
Elaina, Georges and Katrina made landfall in Mississippi. Mississippi
was given a great responsibility to put those dollars to use to devise
creative programs and policies to protect our citizens and mitigate
future damages.
Mississippi's Investment in Mitigation
When Mississippi's coastal communities were built, it was without
regard for significant hurricane impact. That all changed after
Katrina. With the daunting task of rebuilding roads, infrastructure,
housing and the economy from a mountain of debris, Mississippi put the
necessary safeguards in place to avoid the total devastation from
future storms. Those safeguards required dramatic changes to building
codes and elevation requirements.
Housing programs implemented post-Katrina included the Homeowner
Assistance Program, or HAP. HAP required grant recipients to elevate
their homes and maintain flood insurance. The Homeowners Elevation
Program provided grants to residents who did not lose their homes, to
elevate the structures to FEMA base flood map elevations. And finally,
Mississippi's Small Rental Assistance Program was designed to rebuild
single family rentals and duplexes with the new property covenants.
Infrastructure initiatives included the Gulf Coast Infrastructure
Program, which focuses on building a utility infrastructure backbone
mitigated against future storm damage.
The Port of Gulfport Restoration Program created a more resilient
facility to withstand future hurricane damage. Efforts included
elevating the port and creating an evacuation plan to ensure
containers, equipment and cargo did not wash inland. New buildings were
also required to be built to the FEMA Flood Velocity Zone standards, so
critical structural components could withstand storm surge.
Mississippi believes in hazard mitigation. Coupled with the housing
and infrastructure programs mentioned, Mississippi has invested more
than $350 million in hazard mitigation directly. We invested $230
million in public and private safe-rooms, $85 million in wind retrofits
for homeowners, $21 million in flood control and $16 million to acquire
properties in the floodplain.
Hurricane Nate in 2017
The payoff for Mississippi's investments in preparedness and
mitigation was never more evident than October 8, 2017, when Hurricane
Nate made landfall along the Mississippi Gulf Coast. Nate brought
sustained winds of 85 mph and a significant storm surge of 12-feet.
This storm, by all accounts, should have caused an estimated $100
million in damages. However, Mississippi incurred no deaths or injuries
and not one single home or business sustained major damage. Once the
water subsided and debris was cleared, Mississippians went back to
business as usual in a minimal amount of time. Governor Phil Bryant
said it best when he correctly stated, ``Mississippi did not dodge a
bullet, we took a direct hit.''
Mississippi is Ready in 2018
As the waters of the Gulf of Mexico begin to warm, Mississippians
know--now is the time to put together their individual preparedness and
recovery plans. We have strong leadership from a dedicated Governor,
statewide Emergency Management Agency and seasoned local emergency
managers and communities that remain vigilant.
Although we will never be able to completely prevent the damages
caused by violent storms, Mississippi is better prepared today to
withstand the effects of tropical weather thanks to our responsible use
of mitigation and preparedness resources. Our structures are higher and
stronger, and Mississippians are much smarter.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Mr. Miller, for that fine
statement. And it was precisely 5 minutes long. So thank you
very much.
Mayor Owen, you are welcome and recognized.
STATEMENT OF MAYOR ALLEN OWEN,
MAYOR OF MISSOURI CITY, TEXAS
Mr. Owen. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and to my favorite,
Senator Cruz, for asking me here.
Monday, I was in a hearing in Houston, in the Houston area,
that Chairman McCaul brought his Homeland Security Committee to
Houston to talk about lessons learned from Harvey. So I guess
I'm going to repeat what I said a lot on Monday, but, you know,
Ranking Member Nelson forgot about the storm we called Ike.
So we've had two hurricanes recently, and nobody has talked
about Ike. And the reason I bring it up is that we still have
not been paid totally from the money that was owned to us from
FEMA from Ike, and that was in 2010. We received payments up
until 2013. We have had two floods since then. We still have
not received a penny from that. We have not received a penny
from Harvey either.
Harvey was different. I've been in office 32 years. This
wasn't my first rodeo nor my first storm. It was different
because once it hit Corpus Christi and Rockport, it moved to
Houston, and it sat on top of us for 72 hours and dumped
anywhere from 52 to 72 inches of rain, causing tremendous
flooding throughout not only Houston, but the entire Gulf
Coast. And I'm 40 miles from Galveston.
So we're typically prepared for hurricanes and storms like
that. We weren't prepared for this. There was no way for us to
prepare for that much water to be dumped in a short period of
time. And I'm glad that Ranking Member Nelson understands what
the impact is on local communities.
A point that I made Monday is that, you know, when cities
have their bonding agencies come into town, they're now
requiring that cities maintain a 25 percent reserve balance in
our fund balance. But when disasters occur like Harvey, I paid
a million dollars in overtime, I had costs for lost equipment,
traffic signals. I had to write a check for that. I can't wait
3 years to get reimbursed because when I take that money out of
my fund balance, and I drop below that 25 percent, and the
bonding agencies come back in, they're going to look at my
rating again. That affects my entire balance of budget. And I
can't afford to do that.
And we emphasized to FEMA that, you know, the things that
are going through the process right now of even filling out the
forms. I recently hired a $24,000 consultant to tell us how to
fill out the form for FEMA to make sure the i's are dotted and
the t's are crossed. The money is going to the State of Texas,
and I haven't seen a dime of it. They need to write the check
to the people that are writing the checks and making sure that
we're taking it into consideration.
I'm going to ask you a question. And I'm a former banker.
When FEMA--when a house floods and you don't have flood
insurance--and, by the way, 95 percent of the people who
flooded do not have flood insurance because they were told they
weren't in a flood zone--when they flood and they don't have
flood insurance, they get paid $33,000 maximum to repair their
home. I can take $15 million and prevent 2,000 homes from
flooding that flooded during Harvey, with pumps that were
inundated, we didn't have enough of them, drain-out ditches,
taking care of things that mitigate storms that would prepare
for us.
This wasn't the first flood we've had. Again, this was a
flood that was all water and no wind. We didn't lose
electricity. We had people that were actually flooded. And as
the Senator said, we did 1,300 high-water rescues to get people
out of their homes in a short period of time.
But if I had the money to do the mitigation that's
necessary to prevent that from happening, those 2,000 people
that lost their homes would not have had a single drop of water
in them because I could have taken that water, put it across on
the other side of the levy that protects Missouri City from the
Brazos River, by the way, which is at 59 feet. And while I'm
sitting in that operations center on August the 26th
celebrating my 50th wedding anniversary, by the way, for the
next 7 days, I couldn't get out of my own house, we watched the
Brazos River, being told that we were going to--that it would
crest at 59 feet. That levy is at 59 feet.
I have inundation maps in the city that show me what effect
flooding would have at 52, 54, 56, and 58 feet. At 58 feet, I
would have had water in 9,500 homes. At 59 feet or 60, I would
have an entire city that was flooded, because we did not
prepare for that and we did not prepare for that type of rain
event.
We need to make sure that the Corps of Engineers is working
with us on alternative channels with alternative holding
basins. In that hearing Monday, I can tell you that the City of
Houston and Harris County drilled the Corps on not having
adequate protection for them.
So our part of mitigation is trying to get the funding up
front to prevent what happened this past August.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Wicker. And thank you very, very much, Mayor Owen.
Mr. Lindsey.
Senator Cruz. I've got to point out the Texas witness was
exactly 5 minutes, too.
[Laughter.]
Senator Wicker. Absolutely. And he asked a question, and I
was about to say that question was so easy, I'm going to let
Senator Cruz answer it later on.
[Laughter.]
Senator Wicker. Mr. Lindsey, we're delighted to have you.
STATEMENT OF CHARLES LINDSEY, CITY MANAGER,
CITY OF MARATHON, FLORIDA
Mr. Lindsey. Thank you. Good morning, Senator Wicker,
Ranking Member, and our Florida Senator Bill Nelson, and
members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to be
here today to speak on behalf of our residents.
We extend all of our thanks--or we extend our thanks to
also all the Members of Congress for approving the disaster
assistance needed during these very difficult times.
Marathon is an island community of roughly 8,900 residents.
We are located in the heart of the Florida Keys, and like all
Keys communities, are faced with numerous challenges protecting
our economy and our environment. We support a $2.7 billion
tourism-based economy, a vital commercial and fishery--or
commercial and recreational fishery.
We support--and what's most important is we shoulder the
responsibility to protect the third largest barrier reef system
in the world, which includes the Florida Keys National Marine
Sanctuary. We do this in part by relying on a unique community
bond that exists from Key Largo to Key West. Following a
catastrophic event like Irma, that bond was really put to the
test. Last September, our local governments united, and with
the patience of our residents, conducted a Keys-wide evacuation
that had not been attempted in a decade, and clearly saved
lives.
We readied our emergency personnel, pre-staged our
equipment, and prepped our emergency operations centers
awaiting Irma's arrival. Upon sunrise the first morning, it was
painfully clear our beautiful islands had been devastated. When
we knew our--we knew our residents, our economy, and our
environment demand rapid response and recovery. We were
overwhelmed with incredible support from our Senators Nelson,
Rubio, and Congressman Curbelo, as well as their staffs.
Governor Scott led us from the front. He, along with his staff,
the City of Miami Beach, Homestead Police Department, Miami-
Dade Task Force One, and hundreds and hundreds of others
provided valuable support assisting Marathon and the entire
Keys, and for that, we are indebted to them.
An economy that's based on tourism and a healthy
environment demands rapid recovery, but this is also the most
difficult thing to achieve, and Marathon really can't simply do
it alone. Up until recently, our progress was evident, however,
our progress has come to a crawl, placed in extreme risk with
minimal reserves, and the 2018 hurricane season fast
approaching, a season already predicting what I believe to be
14 named storms.
You see, as of yesterday, seven months after Irma, Marathon
and the Keys communities have received no Federal reimbursement
dollars. We responded as required, quickly, efficiently, and
responsibly, but in doing so, depleted all of our funds set
aside for hurricane response on the understanding that initial
Federal reimbursement would come quickly.
It's important to note that these funds went first to the
most crucial health and safety needs, initial debris removal,
and force labor costs, not large projects or reconstruction of
infrastructure.
We were encouraged when the President acted quickly on the
declaration and approved 100 percent funding reimbursement
coverage for the first 30 days, and Congress, not hesitating,
provided it. However, this initial reimbursement remains frozen
between you and us.
The slow-to-respond FEMA system has caused us to pull from
our remaining accounts, we're having to utilize 2018 revenues,
and it's forced us to secure large lines of credit. In
addition, marine debris remains at crisis levels in our canals
and near-shore waters. Always ready, the Coast Guard and the
Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission did an outstanding job
facilitating the removal of thousands of vessels; however,
extreme costs, layers of Federal regulation, inflexible
policies, and inefficient reimbursement make marine debris
removal nearly impossible for us or our state to conduct,
especially without adequate Federal funding or, at a minimum,
upfront commitment that these funds will actually be
reimbursed.
Cars, homes, and construction debris are creating dangerous
conditions for our residents and our ecosystem. Currently,
there is one partial solution that works for the entire Keys,
it's an existing debris removal program in the Department of
Agriculture's Natural Resource Conservation Service. Monroe
County has submitted an application, and NRCS has determined
that 103 of our most impacted canals are eligible for $35.4
million in reimbursement funds with a $10.5 million local match
requirement. Now we need support and timely action by NRCS to
award these funds to Monroe County so that local communities
like Marathon can access them and begin debris removal.
In closing, you know, we've done and continue to do our
part. We need the Federal system to do its part and expedite
FEMA reimbursement, and we need, Marathon needs NRCS to award
funding. This will allow us to recover from this last storm and
prepare for the next.
On behalf of my wonderful city, it's an honor to be here
today. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lindsey follows:]
Prepared Statement of Charles Lindsey, City Manager,
City of Marathon, Florida
Good morning Chairman Thune, Ranking Member and our Florida Senator
Bill Nelson, and Members of the Committee, my name is Charles Lindsey.
I am the City Manager for the City of Marathon, Florida. I want to
thank all of you for the opportunity to represent the residents of
Marathon and speak to you today about the conditions following the 2017
hurricane season. I also wish to thank all Members of Congress for
providing the emergency disaster assistance funding needed during some
very difficult times.
Marathon is a coastal island municipality of 8,910 residents
located in the heart of the Florida Keys. Due to our remote
geographical location, smaller population, and restricted growth we,
along with all the communities of the FL Keys face numerous challenges
protecting our economy and our delicate environment. We have a
relatively small population but we all support a $2.7 Billion tourism-
based economy attracting millions of visitors annually. We have vital
commercial, charter and recreational fisheries and a responsibility to
protect our unique environment which includes the third largest barrier
reef system in the world and the flagship Florida Keys National Marine
Sanctuary. To do all of this we rely in large part on a unique, small
community bond that exists from Key Largo to Key West. Following a
catastrophic event like IRMA, our situation demands it.
In September of 2017 as Hurricane IRMA built to Category 5 strength
and headed toward the south Florida coast the ``Keys spirit'' came
alive. With initial projections changing hourly we worked together to
develop immediate plans to assist each community and conduct an
evacuation that had not been attempted in over a decade. From Miami to
Key West, in Irma's final days, an exact impact location was difficult
to predict but there was no doubt we would be hit hard.
Our local FL Keys governments worked together and with the
tremendous patience of our residents conducted one of the most
effective evacuations in Florida Keys history, no doubt saving many
lives. We developed adaptive strategies to shelter our Emergency
Management and crucial personnel in place and shifted locations as
IRMA's projected path dictated. Our Marathon Team did not leave the
Keys and along with the Monroe County team shifted locations slightly
northeast to Key Largo where the Ocean Reef community provided us
shelter. Our Marathon Sheriff with a small volunteer contingent of law
enforcement officers remained in Marathon and established order for the
few residents who did not heed the mandatory evacuation order.
Immediately following the destruction caused by one hundred mile an
hour winds for 12 hours and a dramatic storm surge, our Marathon Fire
Rescue Department and city staff responded quickly. Losing
communications during the storm we immediately reestablished contact
with our law enforcement team and worked throughout the night to clear
our airport runway, Marathon's only lifeline to the mainland.
Upon sunrise on the first morning, it was clear our beautiful
island had been devastated. Our residents were away from their homes
and our economy and environment demanded a ``fast'' response and
recovery. Immediate emergency action was necessary, essential services
needed to be restored for residents to return, and recovery had to
begin immediately to mitigate risk to our economy.
We were overwhelmed with incredible support from Senator Nelson,
Senator Rubio, and Congressman Curbelo and their respective staffs.
Quickly on scene or in direct contact, they made themselves and their
staffs available 24/7, assisting in many ways. Governor Scott led from
the front. He along with his staff, the City of Miami Beach, Homestead
Police Department, Miami Dade Florida Task Force 1 and hundreds of
others, provided valuable support, responding to and assisting Marathon
and the entire Florida Keys. To all of these FL officials we are
indebted.
For the Florida Keys communities who rely on a tourism-based
economy, recovery is the key. Locally, we have plans to respond to
crises and that planning is being improved every day to prepare for the
next event. While we lacked some of the necessary tools, we made up for
this after IRMA with sheer willpower and resiliency. Moving forward, we
have identified what tools are needed and we are doing our best to
prepare requests to access the grant funding provided by Congress. From
advanced communication equipment to a hardened Emergency Operations
Center that would allow Emergency Personnel to remain safely sheltered
in place, we have identified our needs.
Recovery is the most crucial but also the hardest to achieve and
Marathon simply cannot do this alone. We know that for our families to
be encouraged to remain in the Keys, and to reboot our tourist economy,
marked improvement needed to happen continuously. Up until recently,
this progress was evident. Unfortunately, our progress has come to a
halt without movement in Federal reimbursement. This lack of initial
reimbursement is putting us at tremendous risk going into the 2018
season and has stopped further recovery operations due to lack of
funding.
In Marathon alone, 4,018 homes were impacted, 1,402 severely
damaged, and 392 were completely destroyed. Numerous businesses were
devastated and our commercial fishing industry got hit at their most
vulnerable time. Perhaps most impactful to our economy, IRMA struck
only months before the start of our main tourist season.
To date, Marathon has estimated over $30M in local storm-related
costs. This is six times what we had set aside for hurricane response,
requiring us to pull from all fund balances and utilizing FY 2018
revenue to stay solvent. In addition, Marathon had no choice but to
secure a $10M line of credit and costs are increasing every day.
We, like other Keys communities, immediately responded to
emergencies and crucial life safety needs. Essential services like
wastewater were restored in days and our Florida Keys Electric Co-op,
with the help of others throughout the country, assessed, cleared,
repaired, and replaced 834 miles of distribution/transmission lines and
replaced 175 distribution poles throughout the upper and middle Keys.
Their efforts miraculously restored power to the crucial 70-foot
transmission life line in 12 hours and provided power to many residents
in 10 days. In Marathon alone 300,000 yards of land debris were removed
in only a few months, and like our cities overall response, was done so
with local funding only, completely draining our reserves.
To date, Marathon and the Florida Keys communities have received no
Federal reimbursement! Within weeks of IRMA we depleted all our funds
set aside for hurricane response on the understanding that initial
reimbursement would come quickly. We were encouraged as the President
acted decisively, enacting a declaration and approving 100 percent
funding for the first 30-days and Congress, not hesitating, providing
it. However these funds remain frozen in the middle, somewhere between
you and us.
In addition, marine debris removal remains at a crisis level in our
canals and nearshore waters. The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and Florida
Fish and Wildlife Commission (FWC) both did an outstanding job
facilitating the removal of thousands of vessels. However, everything
else remains--cars, homes, recreation vehicles (RV's), and construction
debris still choke the canals, from the surface to the bottom.
At this time we estimate over 513 canals in Monroe County are
negatively impacted with estimated cleanup costs over $52.6M. Layers of
regulations and policy coupled by extreme costs make our waterways and
associated debris removal nearly impossible without adequate Federal
funding or an upfront commitment that costs will be quickly reimbursed.
The Keys are in a unique geographic location and all our waters (i.e.,
private, local, state and federal) affect our National Marine Sanctuary
in some manner.
As a small municipality in a very complex system it is impossible
to determine with any certainty why the reimbursement process has been
so slow. One thing we do know with full certainty is that 7 months
post-IRMA we are at risk with minimal disaster reserves and the 2018
hurricane season fast approaching. The forecasters suggest we are
facing an active season, already predicting 14 named storms for 2018.
Today, Marathon has over $28M in project worksheet (PWs)
submissions to FEMA and has received $0 in reimbursement. Locally, the
FEMA process appears to be intact. We have FEMA representation
reviewing and submitting our claims; we have contracted labor to
facilitate the difficult submission process; and the online portal,
providing transparency. However, without receiving reimbursement of our
Category A and Category B project worksheet submissions our recovery
efforts have all but stopped. Furthermore, the longer our canals and
waterways remain polluted the environmental risks increase, potentially
negating decades of hard work and the hundreds of millions of federal,
state, and local dollars spent improving nearshore water quality.
Unfortunately, this does not escape the purview of our potential
tourists.
When asked what we need to be prepared for the 2018 season--the
answers are simple: To respond and then recover from a Hurricane next
year we need the funds that were approved by Congress to make it on the
ground as quickly and efficiently as possible. I am not referring to
large complex claims to reimburse the design, engineering, and repair
of infrastructure such as a bridge or roadway. What I am referring to
here is Federal funding for marine debris and the reimbursement of
Category A and B projects that should come quickly to keep recovery
efforts moving and protect us financially going into this next
hurricane season. These are the funds we expended within the first 90-
days responding to life safety issues, initial debris removal, and
forced labor costs.
We need available Federal funding to begin removal of our extensive
marine debris, including muck and sand. This is polluting, reducing
flow, and creating life safety/environmental issues in our local
waters. Currently, different rules for different pots of Federal
funding along with FEMA reimbursement guidelines prohibit common sense
solutions to removing this debris from our waters. These regulations
make it cost prohibitive and nearly impossible for states and local
governments, especially in an environment like ours, to address our
debris removal
Currently, one potentially viable solution for Marathon and the
entire Florida Keys for debris removal resides within the Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). On behalf of
the entire Florida Keys, Monroe County has submitted a Damage Survey
Report and application to NRCS and the agency determined the 103 of the
513 canals to be eligible for $35.4M in reimbursable funds with a
$10.5M local match requirement. NOAA's Florida Keys National Marine
Sanctuary is supporting the Monroe County application. Now, we need
support for the NRCS to move quickly to award these funds to the County
so the local communities can access them.
When asked for overall process improvement recommendations for
subsequent years: we need policies and procedures to be streamlined and
improved with an eye on real-world scenarios. For example, FEMA's
online registration sounds great, but with no Internet in a disaster
situation, we had to develop local solutions to register residents.
We will need more case managers. Remarkably, within days, FEMA had
representation on the ground to assist but it was not close to
adequate. More FEMA case management personnel are needed to assist the
thousands of displaced residents and help navigate the numerous
available programs and track their assistance.
We will need to have predetermined plans in place and lines of pre-
approved reimbursable funding clearly defined. Staff from the USCG
volunteered to take the lead in removing vessels from our delicate
waters and along with FWC, did so with incredibly efficiency. But they
did as they always do: they got on scene, they evaluated, and they
executed. In the end, this approach works but it does so with added
cost and increased risk. Having processes like vessel removal and the
responsibilities for it predetermined with clear funding lines
established for such reimbursement would allow agencies like the USCG &
FWC to increase safety, efficiency and overall effectiveness.
We need better communication processes with clearly defined unified
goals for all levels of government across all agencies. This is not
just a FEMA issue, it is a national one. Increasing communication
allows transparency, it increases effectiveness, and it promotes entire
domain awareness.
As we move forward today we are challenged with navigating
difficult processes to prepare for the next season while at the same
time recover and support our displaced families and struggling
businesses from this last event. To FEMA's credit, I believe the agency
has accurately captured what is needed in its 2018 Strategic Plan. So,
one key question is how do we help them so we are all ready for the
next storm event?
I'd like to use FEMAs three strategic goals of ``Build a culture of
preparedness'', ``Ready the Nation for Catastrophic Disasters'', and
``Reduce the Complexity of FEMA'' as a framework to help begin to
answer the question. The City of Marathon has and is, continuing to
develop a culture of preparedness and is doing everything at our level
possible to ready ourselves for the 2018 season. We are developing
strategies based on best practices and lessons learned and implementing
those process improvements to our already developed Compressive
Emergency Management Plan. We have identified risks and we are doing
everything we can to mitigate them. We have identified gaps and are
doing everything in our power to fill them, however we cannot do this
alone.
To do so, we need help with what Administrator Long clearly lays
out in FEMA's 3rd goal of reducing complexity. While he is referring to
FEMA as a whole, we need all processes to be adaptable and flexible to
get the necessary funds back in our reserves and to adjust to the
incredibly unique challenges we face in the Florida Keys.
In Marathon, we are proud of our ``Keys Spirit'' of working
together. Following IRMAs destruction, it was more evident throughout
the entire Keys than ever before. Today we continue to prepare for the
2018 Hurricane season but our spirit and efforts alone will not get us
there. We have done our part with the tools we have been given and the
understanding we have of the processes. Marathon and the entire Keys
has responded too, and began recovery following the largest storm we've
seen in decades.
In closing, we need the Federal system to do its part and help
expedite the reimbursement of funds already approved by the President
and graciously provided by Congress; and for NRCS to award and release
funds to enable us to facilitate the removal of marine debris.
It is an honor to provide this testimony and to tell Marathon's
story. Chairman Thune, Senator Nelson and all the Members of this
Committee--thank you for this opportunity, and thank you for all of
your efforts supporting, advocating, and delivering assistance to our
wonderful City, State, and this great Nation.
Senator Nelson. Mr. Chairman, a point of personal
privilege. I just want to say the witness has told us that they
have not seen a single reimbursement from FEMA 6 months after a
major hurricane, and that just is inexcusable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Wicker. This is the very reason we're having this
hearing. Thank you very much for emphasizing that.
Ms. Pipa, we're thrilled to have you. Please proceed.
STATEMENT OF JENNIFER PIPA, REGIONAL CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CENTRAL FLORIDA REGION,
AMERICAN RED CROSS
Ms. Pipa. Thank you, Senator Wicker and Ranking Member
Nelson.
2017 was a challenging year when we talk about disaster
response for the American Red Cross. I unfortunately had the
opportunity to visit both Harvey, Irma, and Maria during the
disaster times. Harvey was a challenge in that people went to
work that morning, they went out to run errands that day in the
City of Houston, and discovered only late in the afternoon that
they could no longer return home and they needed a safe place
to stay.
That's where the American Red Cross, in concert with the
City of Houston and the Mayor of Houston, opened the George R.
Brown Resource Center. That's where I ended up spending 7 days
providing a safe haven for just over 11,000 members of the City
of Houston. It was an amazing opportunity for us to provide
those services, but clearly a very complicated response when
you talk about the infrastructure that's compromised and the
ability to move people and material resources into and out of
impacted areas.
I came back to Florida for Hurricane Irma, watched that
happen, watched us, as we worked with local and county
emergency management, open pre-landfall evacuation centers. We
saw historic numbers of people evacuate. We think that is in
part due to them watching people be stranded during Hurricane
Harvey, and so they took those watchings and warnings much more
seriously and chose to evacuate for the safety of their family.
And we saw unprecedented numbers in those centers.
Post-landfall, I had the opportunity to tour a lot of the
state. One of the places I ended up was Immokalee, which is a
small town in southern Florida. It is geographically isolated,
and it's in the Everglades area. This is a town that had no
access to power after Irma made landfall. That means their
grocery stores didn't work, their gas stations didn't work. And
they're an hour and a half from really any other viable
resource in the area. We kept a shelter open there for an
incredibly long period of time to make sure that the citizens
of Immokalee were supported until that they could restore power
and some infrastructure there. But that's just one town in many
in Florida.
Everglades City was another one, one of the southernmost
points of Florida State, absent the Keys, and they were heavily
impacted, not just by surge, but by wind as well. It became an
incredibly complicated area for us to get resources into, is
that they were so isolated.
And then Maria. You know, it's hard enough to get items in
when the infrastructure is compromised, but when you're talking
about an island where the airport and the seaport are both
impacted, the ability to move resources in becomes just that
more exponentially challenging.
I was in Maria in February. We were still delivering
generators to people without power. We're still delivering food
to people who don't have access to grocery stores that have
power so that they can sustain. We're still giving out water
filtration systems because there is no potable water there. So
there is still a long time to go.
And while we've spent a lot of time talking about response,
and it may fall out of the media's coverage, recovery is a
long-term gain, and that's where we sit at the table with all
of our local and Federal partners, and we'll be there for the
next 18, 24, 36 months with dedicated resources to help these
communities continue their recovery as they move forward.
One of the things our organization did was in the beginning
of 2017 was we took a nationwide readiness initiative. And in
Florida specifically, we met with every single county emergency
manager in the state, and we talked about what we could do, how
many people we had, how much stuff we had, how we could support
if Florida were impacted by a hurricane. Those open and honest
communications allowed us to form a basis of trust so that we
could both deliver services to the communities that were
impacted in Florida.
So now in 2018, we go back, we talk about what we talked
about at the beginning of 2017, we talk about our lessons
learned, and we try and figure out how we can now make that gap
even smaller working together.
But this was a historic season for us. People ask me time
and time again, ``How did the Red Cross do it?'' right? Harvey,
Irma, Maria, California wildfires. We do it because we rely on
mobilizing the power of volunteers and the generosity of
donors, and without those two things, our organization can't
deliver our services. We're a 90 percent volunteer-based
organization. And so we count on the generosity of the American
public and we count on the volunteers who raise their hands,
who leave their families in other places in the U.S., and come
down to help our impacted communities recover as we move on.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to share my stories
with you today, gentlemen.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pipa follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jennifer Pipa, Regional Executive Officer,
Central Florida Region, American Red Cross
Good Morning Senator Wicker, Ranking Member Nelson and
distinguished members of the Committee. Thank you for the privilege of
testifying before you today on behalf of the American Red Cross. We
applaud the Committee for holding this much-needed hearing ``Are We
Ready for the Next Hurricane Season? Status of Response Capabilities
for 2018.'' My name is Jennifer Pipa and I am Regional Chief Executive
Officer of Central Florida for the Red Cross. Our Central Florida
Region includes communities such as Orlando, Daytona Beach, Sarasota
and Winter Haven, among others. In my role, I am based in Tampa and
guide a team of staff and volunteers that serve 19 counties across five
chapters who work to fulfill the Red Cross mission, including
responding to a variety of natural disasters. I am pleased to share the
American Red Cross perspective on the extraordinary hurricane season of
2017 and the status of preparedness for 2018.
The Mission of the Red Cross and Our Role in Disaster Response
As you may know, the mission of the Red Cross is to prevent and
alleviate human suffering in the face of emergencies by mobilizing the
power of volunteers and the generosity of donors. As a leader in
preparedness, health and safety training, the American Red Cross works
every day across America to help individuals, families, businesses and
schools be better prepared for life's challenges. Our purpose is to
help people prevent, prepare for, and respond to disasters and other
emergencies. We shelter, feed, and counsel victims of disasters at home
and abroad; collect and distribute nearly half of the Nation's blood
supply; teach lifesaving skills; and support military members and
families. Whether the need is large or small, the Red Cross will be
there.
Each year the Red Cross responds to nearly 64,000 natural
disasters, including everything from single-home fires to large-scale
emergencies such as hurricanes. As you are aware, under a Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) signed in 2010, the American Red Cross is the co-lead
for mass care response, known as Emergency Support Function #6 (ESF-6)
with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) during large
emergencies in this country.
This agreement means that the Red Cross and FEMA work together to
help government agencies and community organizations plan, coordinate
and provide a breadth of mass care services for people affected by
disasters. Mass care services include opening shelters, feeding those
affected, distributing emergency supplies and reuniting families. ESF-6
is part of the National Response Framework, a Federal guide as to how
the country will respond to situations ranging from local emergencies
to large-scale terrorist attacks and catastrophic natural disasters.
The partnership between the Red Cross and FEMA has proven to be
extremely effective in helping Americans get through the initial
devastation of a hurricane and on the road back to self-sufficiency.
The dedication and hard work of the men and women of FEMA is very much
appreciated by the Red Cross. Throughout the 2017 hurricane season and
now, the Red Cross and FEMA are in constant communication and
coordination on issues such as damage assessments and addressing
shelter needs. In addition, any time the Red Cross responds to a
disaster, we also work closely with multiple partners in the
humanitarian community to ensure victims of natural disasters get the
services and resources they need to get back on their feet. Those
services encompass a wide variety of needs such as providing assistance
with mental health care, financial assistance to cover short term needs
and shelter for pets and service animals.
2017: A Look Back at a Precedent-Setting Hurricane Season
Every disaster is unique. It has its own set of challenges and
circumstances and the 2017 hurricane season was no exception. Hurricane
Harvey was the first major hurricane to make landfall in the U.S. in 12
years and it made landfall 3 separate times over 5 days after it
stalled on the Texas coast. The resulting inundation challenged all
first responders as parts of inland Texas were completely cut-off,
including the interstate highway system in and around
Houston. With its erratic, unpredictable track, Hurricane Irma left
almost the entire southern half of Florida under watches and warnings
that shifted from the East coast to the West coast and challenged
planners across the state. And then there was Hurricane Maria, which
compromised the logistics and infrastructure network of an entire
island. All points of entry into Puerto Rico were devastated and the
island was cut-off from the mainland. The time and distance required to
reopen the ports and reestablish a supply chain created a unique
situation for all responding agencies and organizations. Despite these
challenges, the American Red Cross was there, working alongside FEMA
and our partners to deliver the mission with compassion and quality to
more of those in need.
The Red Cross response to the hurricanes that made landfall in the
United States and its Territories was just as record setting as were
the Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, Maria and Nate. As of today, our numbers
show that across these hurricanes the Red Cross:
supported 782,592 shelter stays;
provided 11,619,021 meals;
delivered 7,401,854 relief items;
served 588,622 families through casework and recovery
planning.
We were able provide this momentous level of support by the
dedication and compassion of the more than 18,800 volunteers who
selflessly gave of their time to serve others. The level of service to
those impacted by each of these storms exemplified the Red Cross
mission.
And the work to address the needs of those affected by these storms
continues; the Red Cross is committed to helping those impacted by last
year's hurricanes get back on their feet. We continue to have long-term
recovery operations in each of the affected areas to ensure that we
address needs such as clean water, community health, livelihoods
restoration and access to power. In areas still experiencing difficulty
in getting back to at least pre-storm conditions, we will continue to
work with impacted individuals to create recovery plans, navigate
paperwork and determine eligibility for financial assistance. We have
provided reports to Congress as updated information becomes available
and we will continue to do so.
2018: Preparedness for the Upcoming Season
While the Red Cross has been able to meet needs that have arisen
due to last year's storms, as we prepare for the 2018 season, it is
important for us to identify areas of concern from last year's response
in order to develop a successful strategy for preparing for upcoming
disasters. Some top needs from 2017 which inform our 2018 planning
include:
Effectively communicating information about pre-landfall
evacuation centers;
Managing expectations about what people need to bring with
them to evacuation centers and making sure people understand
the difference between an evacuation center and a shelter, and;
Recruiting volunteers
To address these needs, we meet with and maintain ongoing
relationships with local and county emergency managers in order to
collaborate on public service announcements and education. We work with
local and county officials to identify resources currently on hand, as
well as any gaps that may exist between local and county government
resources and Red Cross resources and how to address those gaps. The
Red Cross also continuously develops and updates communications
materials that can be used in a variety of social and traditional media
and translated into other languages relevant to the local population,
that provide information about evacuation procedures and shelters.
An example of an ongoing Red Cross preparedness education campaign
that helps families know what to bring to evacuation centers is our
Pillowcase Project, which is our signature youth preparedness program
and is implemented in every Red Cross region. The Pillowcase Project is
for children in grades 3-5 and teaches them about personal and family
preparedness for local hazards and home fires. Students receive a
pillowcase to decorate and use as a personal emergency supplies kit.
Students are encouraged to fill the pillowcase with items they would
like to have if they need to be evacuated.
An example of a Red Cross initiative to strengthen volunteer
recruitment is our Regional Diversity Boards, which are designed to,
among other things, ensure that the Regional workforce (staff and
volunteers) mirrors the community it serves and increases the number of
volunteers and representation by key demographics.
Elements for Effectiveness: Readiness, Adaptability and Support from
the American People
In 2017 we kicked-off a multi-year nationwide initiative to
strengthen our Readiness. The Readiness Initiative was designed to
address recurring challenges by supporting regional teams in building
capacity to deliver our mission; better recruiting, engaging and
retaining our volunteers; being more efficient and effective in all of
our activities; and harnessing the power of technology and teamwork to
meet our mission in regions every day and for major disasters
nationwide. We defined readiness as ``the capacity and capability
needed to reliably accomplish our mission, which we do with our
partners.'' Our vision is to get ready, be ready, and stay ready to
reliably serve clients and communities impacted by the highest
probability disasters in communities around the country.
In addition, there is one overarching principle to responding to
disasters which is at the heart of every response strategy. At the Red
Cross and throughout the disaster response community, we know that our
capacity to react to natural disasters as we go forward is directly
connected to our ability to adapt and evolve. And technology is a
critical part of that evolution. A major aspect of the Red Cross's
technological innovation in the last couple of years is the development
of ``RC View''--a state of the art geographic information system (GIS)
and data visualization tool that provides the Red Cross and its
partners with a common disaster response capability. This technology
aids the Red Cross as we assess damage, formulate emergency response
and evacuation plans and identify and understand relationships between
areas affected by disasters and areas of social vulnerability. Because
of RC View, the Red Cross is able to speed up our response time, make
better resource decisions and improve our delivery of services to those
most in need. With increasingly accessible data, we are better able to
understand hazards and take necessary actions to mitigate, respond to,
and recover from disasters when they strike.
While data and technology are essential to responding to disasters,
the plain truth is that a successful disaster response operation can't
happen without money and volunteers. The Red Cross does not receive
Federal funding for disaster response operations, but relies on the
generosity of the American people to do so. Furthermore, our volunteers
are the backbone of our humanitarian efforts; nearly 90 percent of the
Red Cross workforce is volunteer. Americans who give of their time and
donations are why we have been able to respond to disasters for over a
hundred years. 2017 was truly an extraordinary year for natural
disasters. But because of the kindness of the American people,
including many of your constituents, in a 45-day period late last year,
the Red Cross was able to respond to back-to-back hurricanes--Harvey,
Irma, Maria and Nate--in addition to the devastating wildfires in
California and the deadliest mass shooting in recent U.S. history in
Las Vegas. We at the Red Cross are extremely grateful to the American
people for all they do to enable us to help those in need.
Conclusion
Again, thank you to this Committee for this important examination
of how well America is prepared for life-threatening storms and thank
you for allowing the Red Cross to share our perspective on the
hurricane season that just passed and the one coming soon. Hurricane
season for the Atlantic Basin runs from June 1 to November 30 and a
busier than average hurricane season is forecast, so many Americans
will be facing these threats again in the very near future. At the Red
Cross, we will continue to fulfill our mission of alleviating suffering
and meet our obligations to provide leadership with our Federal and
humanitarian partners to address whatever natural disasters occur. We
look forward to partnering with the United States Congress, other
branches of government, the faith-based community, non-profits and for-
profits in preparing for disasters and recovering from them. We are
happy to answer any questions you may have.
Senator Nelson. Mr. Chairman, may I make an additional
comment about----
Senator Wicker. Unless there's an objection from any member
of this----
[Laughter.]
Senator Nelson. Ms. Pipa talked about this little town of
Immokalee, and it's a poor town. They're trying to do a lot of
economic development out there. It's in one of the richest
counties of Florida, Collier County. And so the Red Cross--the
people had no place to go. There is a Catholic university, Ave
Maria, that's about 7 miles from this. They opened their
gymnasium, and then the Red Cross did the taking care of people
in the gymnasium. But it's worth noting that there were senior
citizens that were abandoned in their apartments by their
caretakers. The university students went and got them and took
them into their dorms with them to take care of them until
somebody could be provided after the hurricane. Now, that's a
good news story. That's a story about America at its best. And
I wanted to make that part of the record.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Nelson. And I really
appreciate you adding that to the record. There are hundreds of
stories like that.
And thank you, Ms. Pipa, for pointing out the volunteer
spirit of Americans and the donor community for making all of
this possible.
It's clear that this panel has had real life experience--
excuse me--and continue to experience the aftermath of these
storms, and we very much appreciate it.
By agreement, the Committee has decided not to grill you
with questions. And so we thank you very much. We'll bring on
the next panel. And if you'd like to stay and have discussions
with us on an individual basis after the hearing is over, we
welcome that, but you're not required to stay, and we do thank
you very much.
Now, as our staff is helping to set up the table for the
next panel, let me tell you what we have in store. And Ranking
Member Nelson has already mentioned the distinguished panel,
but one of those is Rear Admiral Tim Gallaudet, the Assistant
Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and the Acting
NOAA Administrator. He was previously a Rear Admiral in the
U.S. Navy, where most of his recent assignment was
Oceanographer of the Navy and commander of the Navy Meteorology
and Oceanography Command, and that is a mouthful for this
Mississippi boy. As you will hear today, Rear Admiral Gallaudet
personally experienced Hurricane Katrina on the Mississippi
Gulf Coast, and uses those personal lessons to inform his
leadership at NOAA.
Rear Admiral Gallaudet will be joined by Rear Admiral Linda
Fagan, who serves as U.S. Coast Guard Deputy Commandant for
Operations, Policy, and Capabilities. She is responsible there
for establishing and providing operational strategy, policy,
capability, and resources to meet national priorities for U.S.
Coast Guard missions, programs, and services.
And then we welcome Dr. T. Bella Dinh-Zarr, a member of the
National Transportation Safety Board in Washington, D.C. Dr.
Dinh-Zarr has dedicated her career to working to ensure that
transportation safety is a policy priority, and has been a
member of the National Transportation Safety Board since 2015.
So members of the panel, thank you very, very much for
joining us. And as we did at the last panel, we'll start at
this end with a five-minute verbal statement from Rear Admiral
Gallaudet.
STATEMENT OF RDML TIMOTHY GALLAUDET, Ph.D., USN
(RET.), ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR OCEANS
AND ATMOSPHERE; AND ACTING UNDER SECRETARY
OF COMMERCE FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE,
NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Admiral Gallaudet. Thank you, Senator Wicker and Mr.
Chairman, it's an honor to be here before you and the Committee
today to talk about the great work the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, has done and will continue
to do to improve our hurricane watches, warnings, and national
preparedness, and how all that work has saved lives and
accelerated recovery throughout the 2017 hurricane season.
I would especially like to thank the Committee for the
disaster supplemental funding in 2017 and the 2018-based
appropriations funding for NOAA. This combined funding will
help NOAA to continue implementation of the Weather Research
and Forecast Innovation Act of 2017, or Weather Act, as
championed by this Committee. We are working with the
administration and Congress to develop the detailed spend
plans, as requested, for these funds.
In the following, I will describe how NOAA is already
accomplishing much to implement the Weather Act and prepare our
Nation for the next hurricane season.
Let me begin with the 2017 hurricane season, which we all
know was extremely active with 17 named storms, including three
Category 4 hurricanes that made landfall in the U.S. Harvey,
Irma, and Maria were three of the top five most economically
damaging hurricanes in U.S. history. Despite this devastation,
communities were warned very far in advance by NOAA's reliable
forecasts, and the result was that five times fewer lives were
lost compared to the previous record-setting year of 2005. The
National Hurricane Center's Atlantic track predictions for 2017
set an all-time record for accuracy across all forecast hours,
which is a 25 percent improvement on the 5-year average before.
The State of Florida used National Weather Service
forecasts to declare a state of emergency 6 days before
Hurricane Irma made landfall. That is unprecedented, largely
due to the Weather Service efforts to improve their Impact-
based Decision Support Services, as codified in the Weather
Act. This long lead time allowed emergency managers to prepare
and evacuate well in advance of the storm.
Hurricane storm surge is the greatest threat to loss of
life and property, so NOAA began issuing storm surge watches
and warnings in 2017, and our preliminary information shows
that there were no storm surge-related deaths in the U.S. this
year.
The same can be said for NOAA's mitigation, response, and
recovery efforts. These include habitat restoration that
prevented storm surge damage in the Gulf of Mexico, navigation
response teams who opened dozens of ports in the Gulf, in the
Southeast, and NOAA hazardous material teams that continue to
assist with vessel and debris removal in the Florida Keys and
the Caribbean, and NOAA's Sea Grant program that is helping
local fishermen in Texas and Florida.
In your invitation letter, you asked how we are improving
preparations for the 2018 hurricane season. Beginning with
observations, we are advancing our satellites and
reconnaissance aircraft. In just the last 2 years, three of
NOAA's next-generation weather satellites have been
successfully deployed. Additionally, NOAA continues to rely on
U.S. Air Force C-130s out of Keesler Air Force Base in
Mississippi and NOAA's hurricane hunter aircraft based in
Lakeland, Florida.
One area we are rapidly advancing is using unmanned systems
for observations. We have already used aerial and underwater
drones to improve hurricane forecasts, and we are working with
the private sector and Federal partners to evaluate other
innovative and cost effective autonomous capabilities that meet
NOAA's requirements.
We are also making further improvements in modeling. NOAA
research is leading the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program
following the guidance of the Weather Act, with the impressive
result of extending hurricane forecast skill to 7 days. I am
particularly pleased with our experimental global weather
model, known as the GFS FV-3, which outperformed the European
models for both the three major hurricanes that struck the U.S.
last year, but also the four Nor'easters that slammed into the
eastern seaboard this year. We are transitioning this model to
the Weather Service now, and by 2020, NOAA will have the
world's leading weather model.
In conclusion, I want to thank the Committee for your
continued support and for passing the Weather Act, which was
the playbook we used for our truly tremendous teams to
dramatically improve NOAA's hurricane predictions and warnings.
The advancements NOAA has made over the last decade in
environmental observations and prediction, decision support,
risk mitigation, and response and recovery have saved countless
American lives, protected billion dollars of property, and
enabled continued growth in the national economy while
providing critical support to national and homeland security.
I'll be happy to take any questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Gallaudet follows:]
Prepared Statement of RDML Timothy Gallaudet, Ph.D., USN Ret.,
Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere; and Acting
Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce
Good morning Chairman Wicker, Ranking Member Nelson, and Members of
the Committee. It is my honor to testify before you today about the
work the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has
done to improve our hurricane watches and warnings, and how all that
work has saved lives and accelerated recovery throughout the 2017
hurricane season. The 2017 hurricane season--with 17 named storms,
including three Category 4 hurricanes that made landfall in the United
States--was one for the record books. Three of the top five most
economically damaging hurricanes in U.S. history occurred in 2017--
Harvey, Irma, and Maria.\1\ Despite the severity, communities were
warned far in advance by NOAA's reliable forecasts. Based on
preliminary data, the National Hurricane Center's (NHC) Atlantic track
predictions for 2017 set an all-time record low position error across
all forecast hours, which improved on the 5-year mean error by about 25
percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/news/UpdatedCostliest.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA's mission is to understand and predict changes in the Earth's
environment, from the depths of the ocean to the surface of the sun,
and to conserve and manage our coastal and marine resources. As a
mission-driven, science and operations agency, NOAA is responsible for
global satellite observations, atmospheric and oceanic research (both
in-house and collaborative research with our valued external and
government partners), operational weather and water forecasts, the
delivery of critical products and services, and the stewardship of our
marine resources. NOAA provides environmental information and forecasts
to American citizens, businesses, and all levels of government to
enable informed decisions on a range of issues and scales--local to
global and short-term to long-term. Through the National Weather
Service (NWS), NOAA has the sole Federal responsibility for issuing
weather and water warnings to protect lives and property in communities
across the country and in U.S. territories, and does so by working
closely with emergency management officials on the federal, state,
local, and tribal level.
This past hurricane season was ``all hands on deck'' for NOAA--
ranging from our well-known hurricane watches, warnings, and Hurricane
Hunters, to our response and recovery efforts to reopen Gulf and
Atlantic ports that are economic lifelines to coastal communities, to
conducting damage assessment overflights, and assisting fisheries
recovery. Before, during, and after these storms--as with all major
weather events that impact the United States--NOAA provides products,
tools, and services used by emergency mangers (EMs), emergency
responders, coastal planners, individuals, and businesses to help save
lives, protect property, and mitigate damage.
Hurricane Forecasts and Warnings
Track and intensity forecasts for this past hurricane season were
the best the NHC ever produced. The NHC official track forecast errors
have decreased every decade since the 1960s. The average position error
at 48 hours has been reduced from 260 nautical miles in the 1960s to
about 75 n mi in the 2010s. The 5-day forecasts (storm location) are
now better than day-and-a-half (36-hour) forecasts were in the 1970s.
There has also been a 25 percent reduction of intensity errors at day-5
in 2010-2016 as compared with 2000-2009. (See Figure 1)
Figure 1. Official Hurricane Track and Intensity Errors from 1970--
2017.
For Irma alone, the state of Florida used NWS forecasts to declare
a State of Emergency six days before landfall. That, in and of itself,
is amazing and is due largely to NWS efforts to provide Impact-based
Decision Support Services (IDSS), as codified in the Weather Act. The
storm was still east of the Lesser Antilles, yet the emergency managers
had enough confidence in our forecast track (Figure 2) and intensity to
begin evacuations and preparations nearly a week before the hurricane
made landfall. The long lead time allows EMs to evacuate and improve
preparation before the storm.
Figure 2. National Hurricane Center 5-day forecast for Irma issued
at 5 PM EDT September 4, 2017.
The accurate predictions are the culmination of the ongoing process
of transitioning model improvements made by the NWS Environmental
Modeling Center (EMC) and NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
Research (OAR) into production, where the sophisticated code is run
operationally on the upgraded NOAA supercomputers. These high-
resolution models, including multiple ensembles, provide our
forecasters with the detailed probabilistic guidance they need to make
accurate predictions.
Funding provided for the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program
(HFIP), and Disaster Relief Appropriations Act of 2013, referred to as
the ``Sandy Supplemental,'' along with our annual appropriation, has
afforded NOAA resources for ocean observing, hurricane-related
research, coastal monitoring, upgrades to the two NOAA Hurricane Hunter
aircraft, accelerating our hurricane-related storm surge prediction
capabilities, and providing a critical historic enhancement in
operational high-performance computing, enabling these models to be run
at higher resolutions with better dynamics and physics. With the Sandy
Supplemental funding and our base funding, our operational computing
capacity has increased from 1.6 Petaflops in 2015 to 8.4 Petaflops in
2018. We thank you for providing the resources to continue these
improvements.
NOAA's hurricane forecast improvement has resulted in a narrowing
of our ``cone of uncertainty,'' increasing the confidence of emergency
manager in deciding to evacuate. In addition to saving more lives, we
are taking advantage of several opportunities that now enable us to
take numerical weather prediction to a new level. HFIP activities were
conducted to: improve the prediction of rapid intensification and track
of hurricanes; improve the forecast and communication of storm surges
from hurricanes; and incorporate risk communication research to create
more effective watch and warning products. The research and development
in HFIP has been a joint effort between NOAA (primarily NWS and OAR)
and academic partners. The result is that NOAA is meeting the five-year
HFIP goal to reduce hurricane forecast track and intensity errors by 20
percent, and to extend the useful range of forecasts to seven days.
Storm surge poses the greatest threat for a large loss of life and
property in a single day from hurricanes. Consequently, NWS began
issuing storm surge watch and warnings in 2017 based on a collaborative
process between NHC, local forecast offices, numerical guidance, and an
ensemble-based probabilistic surge model. Preliminary information shows
there were no storm surge related deaths in the United States in 2017.
This is a significant contrast to 2012, when storm surge from Sandy
took 41 lives, more than half of all the fatalities in that storm.
There was considerable attention over the 10-year development time-
frame of the storm surge watch and warnings product. Storm surge
watches and warnings provide vital information about where and when
life-threatening inundation will occur. This includes easy-to-
understand graphics, co-developed with emergency managers and social
scientists, which clearly display the areas in harm's way. (Figure 3)
Figure 3. Hurricane Irma storm surge watch/warning graphic issued
for Florida on Sept. 9, 2017.
In the days leading up to all three major hurricanes, NOAA's
National Ocean Service (NOS) monitored and disseminated observations of
water levels, currents, and weather information through Storm Quick
Look. This product has been issued since 2004 and is initiated when NWS
issues a tropical storm or hurricane warning to provide scientists and
forecasters with reliable real-time observations from strategically
located water level stations along the coastline to validate or adjust
forecasts. Storm QuickLook ensures emergency responders and regional
decision makers have actionable water level information to make
critical safety decisions. (See Figure 4 depicting the paths of Harvey,
Irma, and Maria.)
Figure 4. Tracks and wind fields for Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and
Maria.
An important contributing factor behind NOAA's forecasting success
this hurricane season was our embedding with emergency managers at
federal, regional, state and local levels. For example, prior to
landfall of Harvey, Irma, and Maria, at the request of FEMA, NOAA (NOS)
was working on-site in the FEMA National Response Coordination Center
to provide critical connections between FEMA and NOS post-storm
response operations.
As the storms approached, NOAA's Regional Navigation Managers--who
work directly with pilots, mariners, port authorities, and recreational
boaters to help identify maritime navigational challenges--were on-site
at U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Incident Command Centers to coordinate post-
storm surveys, and Scientific Support Coordinators were present to
assist with hazardous materials response efforts. Such utilization of
NOAA by other agencies illustrate the unique value and expertise we
provide to the Nation's coastal safety and sustainability.
At the same time, the U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System
(IOOS), and the regional associations, collected data used by NWS
models, and provided information to inform communities before, during,
and after all three storms using shore stations, moorings, high
frequency radars and gliders.
Forecasting rainfall amounts from tropical systems is another area
of significant improvement. Hurricane Harvey dumped an unprecedented
five feet of rain over portions of East Texas. Our forecasters
recognized the potential and were working directly with local EMs by
providing IDSS to enable them to make evacuation decisions, and even
the decision to close Downtown Houston in anticipation of the record
setting rainfall. (Figure 5 is the observed 5-day rainfall from
Harvey.). Emergency managers have credited NOAA with saving numerous
lives. It is our dedicated workforce that makes all of this happen.
NOAA forecasters stayed on the job during all of the hurricanes,
working closely with EMs to provide life-saving forecasts and warnings,
with full recognition that their own homes and families were under
threat from the storms. Their dedication is unparalleled. Additional
forecasters were deployed to the affected offices from other locations
ahead of the storms, in anticipation of the work and decision support
services that would be needed during the storms.
Figure 5. Five-day observed rainfall totals from 7 a.m., Friday,
August 25 to August, 30.
NOAA's flood forecasting has also improved. The National Water
Model (NWM), which is run at the National Water Center, provided
information that was used by NOAA River Forecast Centers to issue the
flood forecasts that were used by EMs during the massive flood in Texas
caused by Harvey's unprecedented rainfall. It is equally important for
EMs to know what areas would not be flooded, so they could position
recovery assets in the right locations. This information allowed local
officials and teams on the ground to quickly determine where to deploy
limited resources, plan for evacuations, where to focus their recovery
efforts. Improvements to the NWM will continue with one focus being
inundation mapping.
NOAA Response and Recovery Efforts
NOAA has made significant advances in our response, recovery, and
restoration services as well. One example is NOS's capability to
rapidly survey coasts and ports to facilitate resumed operations as
soon as possible. Prior to each storm, Navigation Response Teams (NRTs)
from NOS mobilized immediately to provide emergency hydrographic
services to affected port areas. The NRTs rely on forecasts from NHC to
stage their operations close enough to be able to respond quickly, and
safe enough to not be impacted by the storm. When conditions are safe
again for operations, these emergency response teams conduct initial
rapid surveys to detect submerged obstructions and areas of shoaling,
then summarize the data into information that the USCG relies on to
make critical decisions to reopen ports. For example, within seven
hours of Irma's passage, a NOAA survey team traveled from Mobile,
Alabama, to Florida and was in the Port of Miami conducting survey
operations. Staff worked relentlessly to process and deliver data to
the USCG Captain of the Port, who then approved the reopening of both
the port's north and south shipping channels within 38 hours of Irma's
passage. Data from NOAA's work enabled emergency supplies to be
delivered, cruise ships to return to port, and for commerce to resume
in southern Florida, saving Port Miami approximately $69 million a day
in potential losses.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NOAA estimates based upon data published by https://
www.ustradenumbers.com/ports/port/port-of-corpuschristi-texas/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In total, NOAA helped reopen over 26 ports and approaches following
the three major hurricanes. Critical ports, such as Corpus Christi,
Galveston, Houston, Miami, Key West, Tampa, and San Juan provide
lifelines to communities for essential products like fuel, and serve as
these local communities' economic engines. The estimated cumulative
loss of trade for ports closed in 2017 was roughly $500 million per
day. These losses would have continued over many days if NOAA's
emergency response capabilities had not been available to enable the
USCG to reopen the waterways.\2\
NOAA aerial survey missions also assess damages to hurricane
affected areas and help guide the incident response. Since Sandy, NOAA
has made significant improvements in our ability to quickly,
efficiently, and reliably provide this information. NOS and the NOAA
Office of Marine and Aviation Operations (OMAO) have jointly advanced
our capability to capture high resolution mapping imagery to support
NOAA's emergency response and safety of navigation requirements. Aerial
survey teams process the data upon landing and quickly deliver it to
users, often within hours of their flying the mission. The emergency
responders and coastal managers use the imagery of coastal areas,
sensitive habitats, and navigation routes to help direct aid to where
it is most needed, facilitate search and rescue strategies, identify
navigation hazards and HAZMAT spills, locate errant vessels, and
provide documentation necessary for damage assessment. These publically
accessible images are typically the first views that evacuated
residents have of their property after the storm. For Harvey, Irma,
Maria, and Nate, NOAA aircraft flew nearly 40,000 miles for hurricane
recovery support missions collecting more than 65,000 images that
covered just shy of 10,000 square miles; roughly the area of the State
of Maryland.
In support of the removal of HAZMAT and vessels displaced by
Hurricane Irma, staff from the NOS Office of National Marine
Sanctuaries and Office of Response and Restoration served in support of
the Emergency Support Function 10 (ESF-10) Florida Incident Command
Post Environmental Unit. This NOAA team provided concise and consistent
guidance supporting pollution response and the removal of vessels/
debris in the Florida Keys, while considering impacts to sensitive
natural and cultural resources.
NOAA Shoreline and In-Water Restoration Efforts
According to a new study published by Nature in Scientific Reports
\3\, conserving and restoring coastal reefs, wetlands, and mangroves
can prevent flooding and abate hundreds of millions of dollars in storm
damage. This study reports that wetlands protected areas of the East
Coast from more than $625 million in direct flood damages from Sandy in
2012. Wetlands reduced damages by more than 22 percent in half of the
affected areas and by as much as 30 percent in some states. NOAA has an
extraordinary team of environmental engineers, conservation biologists,
and ecological experts who are running programs to rebuild marshes,
beaches, and breakwaters and I have seen the success of these efforts
first hand with NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
restoring a marsh in Bayou Dupont, Louisiana that is a very effective
hurricane storm surge barrier. This area was underwater four years ago.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-09269-z
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since 1995, NMFS and partners have implemented over 300 wetland and
coastal habitat restoration projects in the Caribbean, South Florida,
and Gulf of Mexico--all areas that were impacted by 2017 hurricanes.
When compared to adjacent sites that were not stabilized, NOAA
restoration sites mitigated further erosion which reduced additional
sedimentation of coral reef habitats while also protecting adjacent
infrastructure (i.e., roads). For example, Texas restoration projects
in the path of Hurricane Harvey generally sustained little to no
damage. In Louisiana, 10 recent large-scale coastal wetland protection
projects implemented through the Coastal Wetlands Planning, Protection
and Restoration Act Program sustained little or no damage during
Hurricanes Harvey and lesser known Hurricane Nate. The third landfall
of Harvey passed over the Louisiana Oyster Bayou project during
construction; however, only a small amount of material was lost and
construction was able to quickly resume.
In the Caribbean, the paths of both Hurricanes Irma and Maria
crossed nearly 100 watershed restoration projects located throughout
the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. These projects are focused on
stabilizing steep and eroding terrain to prevent sedimentation to
nearshore habitats and generally appear to have sustained minor to no
damage.
Data
The nation has made significant investments in developing,
launching, and operating satellites that support the Nation's weather
enterprise. For hurricanes, data from satellites and reconnaissance
aircraft are critical components of NOAA's observation network.
NOAA's National Environmental Satellite and Data Information
Service (NESDIS) has operated Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental
Satellites (POES) since 1966, and Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellites (GOES) since 1974. The Suomi National Polar-
orbiting Partnership (Suomi NPP) initiated NOAA's overall strategy for
providing improved and higher resolution data to support weather
forecasting. On November 18, 2017, NOAA launched the first of its four
Joint Polar-orbiting Satellite System (JPSS) series, JPSS-1 (now known
as NOAA-20). The substantial data collection from these satellites
allows us to more precisely analyze the oceans and atmosphere, which
greatly influence the development and track of hurricanes.
Data from GOES are essential for observing and forecasting the
formation and track of hurricanes. NOAA launched the first satellite in
the GOES-R Series, known as GOES-16, on November 19, 2016. These
satellites are the most sophisticated environmental satellites ever to
be launched. They collect three times more data at four times better
resolution, and scan the Earth five times faster than previous
geostationary environmental satellites over North America. The
technological advances of GOES-16 (now GOES-East) are absolutely
astounding. For decades, geostationary weather satellites have
supported weather and environmental monitoring programs that are relied
upon by users in the U.S. and around the world.
NWS forecasters in Corpus Christi, Texas, tracked the eye of
Hurricane Harvey using preoperational GOES-16 imagery in concert with
NEXRAD Doppler radar data. They worked closely with EMs who needed to
evacuate people from vulnerable areas, but could not risk exposing the
public to the harsh hurricane conditions. The forecasters used the
information to identify a short window of opportunity to evacuate as
the eye passed directly overhead. During Hurricane Maria, Puerto Rico's
only NEXRAD Doppler radar was destroyed by the storm as the eye made a
direct hit on the island. GOES-16 continued to provide detailed
information that remained available to our forecasters. With
information available every 60 seconds, forecasters could watch
thunderstorms develop and were able to issue accurate flash flood
warnings for the public.
On March 1, 2018, NOAA launched GOES-S (renamed to GOES-17 on March
12, 2018, when it reached geostationary orbit). Once GOES-17 becomes
operational in late 2018 as GOES-West, along with GOES-East will
provide superior coverage for the majority of the Western Hemisphere
from the west coast of Africa all the way to New Zealand. Each
satellite has six new, highly sophisticated instruments that will
provide faster, more accurate and more detailed data than legacy
satellites to track hurricanes and other potentially devastating
events. The Global Lightning Mapper sensor on each will provide our
forecasters and researchers with realtime in-situ lightning data for
the first time over remote areas, such as open waters. These lightning
data will help us better understand what is occurring within the
storms, and it will also improve our warning capability for severe
storms, including hurricanes.
NOAA continues to benefit from, and rely on, aircraft
reconnaissance. Ten WC-130J aircraft are specially configured and
operated by the U.S. Air Force Reserve from the 53rd Weather
Reconnaissance Squadron, 403rd Wing, located at Keesler Air Force Base
in Biloxi, Mississippi. The NOAA G-IV and two Lockheed WP-3D Orions (P-
3) are part of NOAA's fleet of highly specialized research and
operational aircraft. These aircraft are operated, managed, and
maintained by OMAO, based in Lakeland, Florida. The G-IV flies at high
altitudes around and ahead of a tropical cyclone, gathering critical
data that depict the atmospheric steering flow, and that data feed into
and result in improved accuracy from hurricane forecast models. The P-
3s are NOAA's hurricane research and reconnaissance aircraft. These
versatile turboprop aircraft are equipped with an unprecedented variety
of scientific instrumentation, radars and recording systems for both
in-situ and remote sensing measurements of the atmosphere, the earth
and its environment. These two aircraft have led NOAA's continuing
effort to monitor and study hurricanes and other severe storms, and
other non-hurricane-related missions in their ``off season.'' When
flying a hurricane mission, military and NOAA P-3 air crews fly
directly through the eye of the storm several times each flight. They
collect data and transmit it in near real time by satellite directly to
NHC so forecasters can analyze and predict changes to the hurricane's
path and strength. The data also are transmitted in real-time for
initializing the storms in operational numerical models for better
analysis and forecast guidance and then used by researchers to better
understand the processes contributing to intensity change.
NOAA, though NESDIS, leverages full and open exchanges of satellite
data with NASA and the Department of Defense, as well as foreign
National Meteorological Services to meet our observational data
requirements. With Congressional support, in recent years, NOAA has
been increasingly seeking opportunities for incorporating commercially
acquired data into our weather models.
Improved Observation through Unmanned Systems
NOAA is working with the private sector and other Federal agencies
to identify, evaluate, and transition innovative and cost-effective
Unmanned System (UxS) capabilities that meet NOAA's observing
requirements, and help form a comprehensive observing strategy for the
future. Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs), for example, have improved
Hurricane observation. This hurricane season, NOAA joined with NASA to
fly the unmanned NASA Global Hawk ahead of and above Hurricanes
Franklin and Harvey, launching dropsondes that collected data to be
assimilated into the operational Global Forecast System model and HWRF.
This year marked the first time that Global Hawk dropsondes were
assimilated in real-time into the GFS model. Scientists also launched
six small ``Coyote'' drones from a NOAA P-3 Hurricane Hunter during
Hurricane Maria to collect unique data from within the eyewall in the
lower part of the storm where it gains strength from the ocean. The
low-level observations of wind speed, wind direction, atmospheric
pressure, temperature, moisture, and sea surface temperature provide
more detail on hurricane strengthening than dropsondes that record a
single point of data. These observations can provide information needed
to improve intensity predictions.
NOAA researchers partnered with NOS IOOS regions to deploy
underwater gliders to better understand how the upper ocean contributes
to hurricane intensity. These gliders collect information in the
Atlantic Warm Pool, an area of the ocean commonly associated with
hurricane development and intensification that has been expanding over
the past two decades. Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, Jose, and Maria, passed
directly over, or very close to the gliders, providing valuable
information to NOAA researchers and forecasters. The ocean data
collected by the gliders totaled over 4,000 temperature and salinity
profiles. Correct representation of ocean conditions during a hurricane
has been shown to significantly reduce the error in intensity forecast.
We anticipate data from new UxS technologies, to include Unmanned
Surface Vehicles (USVs) will contribute significantly to improved
understanding of tropical cyclone processes and ultimately to
improvements in track and intensity predictions.
Further Improvements
In addition to continuing the improvement cited above, we will look
to transition other promising research and development work. For
example, experimental models being developed at NOAA Research labs
produced impressive results this hurricane season, holding out the
promise for important gains in future years. These models will be
further tested, refined and transitioned to day-to-day operations
within the NWS. NOAA's experimental global model, or fvGFS, exceeded
all other global models in forecasting the track of Hurricane Maria.
FvGFS is powered by the NOAA Research-developed FV-3, which is
transitioning to operations to become the heart of NOAA's next
generation Global Forecast System.
The experimental, basin-scale version of the operational HWRF
model, supported by HFIP, was run in real time for Hurricane Harvey.
Tail Doppler radar wind data collected from the NOAA P-3 aircraft was
assimilated into this system for the first time. Apart from near-
perfect track predictions, the basin-scale HWRF accurately captured the
rapid intensification of Harvey over several cycles in advance of the
system's landfall.
The NOAA Research experimental High Resolution Rapid Refresh model,
HRRRx, also showed great promise for future improvements to NOAA's only
high resolution, hourly updating forecast model that can resolve
weather down to the level of individual thunderstorms. Preliminary
evaluations showed that HRRRx, accurately predicted the path of
Hurricane Harvey, as well as the location and amount of rainfall from
the storm for its range of prediction out through 36 hours.
Improvements in NOAA's hurricane prediction will continue to follow
the guidelines outlined in the Weather Act. The Act expands on critical
NOAA mission areas, including improvements through HFIP, improved
modeling and computing capacity, working with the private and academic
sectors to obtain the best possible data, improving NWS Impact-based
Decision Support Services (IDSS) efforts, and using social science to
better communicate critical messages and information to the public and
our core partners.
Conclusion
The improvements NOAA has made over the last decade in
environmental observation, prediction, decision support, response and
recovery were clearly validated during the 2017 hurricane season.
Nevertheless, we can and will improve further by applying the FY18
Omnibus and Disaster Supplemental appropriations to continue
transitioning research to operations, strengthening our vast network of
partners, and implementing the Weather Research and Forecast Innovation
Act.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much.
Rear Admiral Fagan.
STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL LINDA L. FAGAN, DEPUTY COMMANDANT FOR
OPERATIONS POLICY AND CAPABILITY, U.S. COAST GUARD
Admiral Fagan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's a pleasure to
be here with the Committee this morning to focus on Coast Guard
preparations for the next hurricane season.
As the Federal Government's maritime first responder, the
Coast Guard's unique capability, capacity, and authorities
allow it to play a critical role in disaster response. When
responding, our primary missions are saving lives, providing
security for and reconstituting commercial waterways and
infrastructure, responding to environmental threats, and
providing support to other agencies.
As the lead Federal agency responsible for maritime
disaster response and an armed service within DHS, the Coast
Guard is uniquely positioned to operate across the response
spectrum and serve as a bridge between the military and
civilian responders.
Coast Guard efforts during, before, and after all four of
last season's hurricanes were sharply informed by our core
missions and authorities. We deployed nearly 5,000 personnel to
augment the permanently assigned Coast Guard persons in the
impacted areas. Working from helicopters, boats, cutters,
vehicles, and on foot, these dedicated professionals saved
nearly 12,000 lives.
At the height of our response, approximately one-quarter of
the helicopters in the service were forward-deployed. Ships
ranging from the newest national security cutter to 50-year-old
inland river tenders all took part in the response. We restored
the safety and security of the maritime transportation system
by addressing 1,200 aids to navigation discrepancies,
coordinating salvage of over 4,200 damaged or sunk vessels.
Today, there are Coast Guard forces still operating out of
temporary infrastructure as they continue to execute our day-
to-day missions. Recovery is ongoing in these communities, and
for many first response partners. Meanwhile, dozens of Coast
Guard families impacted by these storms remain displaced from
their homes.
We are thankful for the enduring support provided by
Congress, especially the recent supplemental funding, for our
hurricane response activities. This will allow us to rebuild
some of our damaged infrastructure and restore some of the
future readiness depleted in response to these devastating
back-to-back storms.
Over the past several months, the Coast Guard examined all
aspects of our response to these storms, where pre-arrival
preparations and immediate response actions were taken, and how
we worked to reconstitute ports and waterways in partnership
with local communities to recover from their devastating
effects.
Utilizing a well-established lessons-learned process, we
have accelerated the implementation of several key lessons to
improve future responses. We are updating policies and plans,
improving capabilities, sharing best practices, and
collaborating with partners to ensure the best possible whole-
of-government response to the next natural disaster.
Our lessons learned highlight a common theme. With the
right facilities, equipment, assets, and training, Coast Guard
men and women will save American lives and preserve economic
prosperity. Rebuilding our facilities in a way that make them
more storm resilient and survivable is key to enabling future
success. We need to continue to invest in our ongoing
recapitalization of our fleet of aircraft, vessels, and boats,
and we need to rebuild organizational infrastructure that
support the Coast Guard's greatest asset, our people.
Coastguardsmen are among the most dedicated, selfless, and
effective men and women you will find in government, and I'm
proud of their efforts and success. They must have a foundation
of sound training, capable equipment, which, when blended with
courage, discipline, and vigilance, creates a significant
benefit to the American public. They remain always ready and
will continue to risk their lives to save those in distress.
Thanks to the support of the Department of Homeland
Security, the administration, and Congress, we have made great
strides in replacing our aging aircraft vessels and rebuilding
and repairing infrastructure, and providing equipment to our
Coast Guard men and women as they answer the Nation's call
without fail time and time again.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Fagan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rear Admiral Linda L. Fagan, Deputy Commandant
for Operations Policy and Capability, U.S. Coast Guard
Introduction
Good morning Mr. Chairman and distinguished Members of the
Committee. It is my pleasure to be here today to discuss the Coast
Guard's preparations for the next Atlantic hurricane season, lessons
learned from the 2017 hurricane season, and the demands contingency
responses place on the Coast Guard.
First, let me thank you for the outstanding support this committee
has given the Coast Guard (Service), especially as it relates to the
supplemental funding for hurricane response activities. This critical
infusion allows the Service not only to rebuild damaged and destroyed
facilities, but also provides the ability to rebuild to modern
resiliency standards, ensuring the best chance of withstanding future
disasters.
The U.S. Coast Guard is the world's premier military, multi-
mission, maritime service responsible for the safety, security and
stewardship of U.S. waters and hundreds of miles seaward. At all times,
a military service and branch of the U.S. Armed Forces, a Federal law
enforcement agency, a regulatory body, a first responder, and a member
of the U.S. Intelligence Community, the Coast Guard stands the watch
and serves a nation whose economic prosperity and national security are
inextricably linked to broad maritime interests.
As the Nation's maritime first responder, the Coast Guard has
unique capabilities, capacity, and authorities that allow it to play a
critical role in disaster response. Today I would like to discuss the
Coast Guard's primary missions in disaster response, its strengths,
limitations, and some issues that demand our focus as we look toward
the 2018 hurricane season.
Primary Missions in Disaster Response
The Coast Guard's primary missions in domestic disaster response
are:
(1)
Saving lives in distress, and ensuring the safety and
survivability of its own forces and assets for immediate post-
disaster response operations;
(2)
Security and reconstitution of ports, waterways, and critical
maritime infrastructure;
(3)
Environmental response operations (oil, chemical and hazardous
material); and
(4)
Support to other agencies in a whole-of-government response
effort.
Saving lives in distress remains our first priority. During
Hurricanes HARVEY, IRMA, MARIA, and NATE, Coast Guard women and men in
vessels, aircraft, vehicles, and on foot rescued nearly 12,000 people
and over 1,500 pets.
For each of these storms and all natural disasters along our
coastline, Coast Guard crews are typically the first Federal responders
to enter an impacted area, right alongside our state, local, tribal,
and territorial responders, to conduct rescues and assess damage. I
should note that in an average year, the Coast Guard saves 3,600 lives.
The Coast Guard tripled that number during HARVEY alone in a matter of
days.
In addition to search and rescue operations, the Coast Guard flows
forces into the impacted regions to restore ports and waterways,
respond to pollution, provide security and additional law enforcement
capability where necessary, and protect offshore petrochemical
platforms. Within five weeks, Hurricanes HARVEY, IRMA, MARIA, and NATE
impacted over 2,500 miles of shoreline.\1\ The Coast Guard responded to
1,269 aids to navigation discrepancies, handled 290 pollution cases,
and targeted and assessed thousands of grounded vessels, with more than
4,200 removed to date. Coast Guard damage assessment teams were on-
scene within hours determining the status of ports and waterways,
documenting environmental hazards, assessing the impacts to Coast Guard
facilities and capabilities, and leveraging technology, such as the
employment of electronic aids to navigation, to facilitate the
reopening of key ports and waterways.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Using CRS method of Shoreline Measurement: Texas: 367 mi,
Louisiana: 397 mi, Florida: 1,350 mi, Puerto Rico: 311 mi, USVI: 117 mi
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Coast Guard response during the 2017 hurricane season was
historic and overwhelmingly successful. However, as an organization
dedicated to continuous improvement and increased resiliency the Coast
Guard inherently knows there are lessons to be learned, even after a
successful contingency response. The Coast Guard has identified several
strategic and over one hundred tactical-level lessons learned. The
Coast Guard is tracking, and will continue to track, these issues until
they have been resolved. The Service is updating policies and plans,
improving capabilities, sharing best practices, and working with FEMA
and state partners to improve processes. As we approach the start of
the Atlantic hurricane season on June 1, 2018, the Coast Guard will
conduct fifty-two natural disaster exercises at its District and Sector
Commands. In addition, the Coast Guard will participate in the 2018
Atlantic Fury National Level Exercise involving a National Capital
Region impact in order to test headquarters-level preparedness for
hurricane response.
Our Strengths
The Coast Guard has several key strengths that enable quick and
effective response to natural disasters. The first of these strengths
begins with its people, whose bias for action and adaptability to
rapidly changing circumstances and uncertainty never ceases to fill me
with pride and admiration.
Coast Guard cutters, aircraft, and boats are built to respond to a
variety of missions without the need for any significant
reconfiguration. Cutters conducting counter-drug patrols in the Transit
Zone can quickly divert to disaster areas to provide command and
control, deliver rotary wing air capability from the sea, conduct
refueling, and provide forward staging facilities. Coast Guard aircraft
that normally perform law enforcement surveillance to thwart
transnational maritime criminal activities can be dynamically
repositioned and re-tasked to deliver disaster relief supplies,
additional responders, and equipment to affected areas.
Additionally, Coast Guard forces are on station at key locations
around the Nation, most of them on short-notice recall, which can
respond quickly to emergent events. When a major catastrophe occurs or
is anticipated, the Service can reposition forces quickly to that area
to optimize the response.
The Coast Guard enjoys an agile and decentralized command and
control structure, which provides operational commanders the authority
to move forces quickly to respond to large contingencies. Two Area
Commanders, and their nine subordinate District Commanders, can shift
and reallocate forces from one region to another based on levels of
risk and anticipated demand for operational capabilities.
The Coast Guard has also developed and regularly exercises
Continuity of Operations Plans for relocating command and control
functions out of harm's way to strategically advantageous positions to
effectively conduct response and recovery operations. During the 2017
hurricanes, seven major shore commands and one District command shifted
out of the path of the storms to alternate facilities, resulting in
only minor disruptions and no loss of command and control.
In addition to fielding flexible, multi-mission forces and
effective command and control systems, the Coast Guard also benefits
from a unique mix of broad standing authorities, as well as extensive
experience operating within both military and other interagency
response organizations.
As a military service, the Coast Guard can be a supported or
supporting commander, and its forces are frequently integrated with
U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) services in Joint Task Force
organizations. The Service regularly provides forces in support of DOD
exercises, Combatant Commander contingency plans, and theater security
cooperation activities. This routinely exercised relationship develops
close cooperation at the service level, enabling Coast Guard and DOD
forces to integrate seamlessly during disaster response operations.
In addition to its military role, the Coast Guard routinely works
with other Federal agencies, state and local governments, non-
governmental agencies, and international organizations under its U.S.
Code, Title 14 law enforcement and regulatory responsibilities.
The Coast Guard is the Nation's ``maritime first responder'' and
has a leading role in executing the National Response Framework (NRF)
for disaster situations. Its personnel are well-trained and experienced
in response operations, which make them a sound choice to be designated
for key leadership positions in the NRF structure. This ability to
operate concurrently in both military Joint Task Force and civilian NRF
structures enhances unity of effort during whole-of-government
responses across organizations and dramatically improves the
effectiveness of disaster response, which makes the Coast Guard a truly
unique Federal agency.
Our Limitations
Despite the many strengths the Coast Guard brings to disaster
response, the Service has limitations that must be considered.
Across the 2017 hurricane response operations, more than 3,000
Coast Guard women and men, and 200 assets or platforms from across the
Service, from places as far away as Alaska, Hawaii, and Maine responded
to save nearly 12,000 citizens in distress. The hurricane response had
a significant impact on Coast Guard operations. The Coast Guard is
small in comparison to the other Armed Services. With only 40,600
active duty, 7,000 reserve, and 8,500 civilian personnel, responding to
a major natural disaster requires balancing risk in other geographic
regions and mission areas in order to flow forces and capabilities into
the major disaster response.
Residual risk was spread across the Coast Guard, with a keen eye
towards meeting minimal mission standards in most, but not all,
locations. Given the heavy demand for aviation capabilities following
each of the storms, all aviation training was stopped until the later
stages of recovery efforts were reached. The level of forces typically
allocated to performing counter-drug, fisheries enforcement, and
migrant interdiction operations in the Eastern Pacific Ocean, Caribbean
Sea, and Florida Straits was reduced as well.
The Service has a limited capacity to respond to prolonged and
sequential events. While the Coast Guard is well-positioned for
immediate and effective first response, plans to sustain operations and
hand-off responsibilities once a crisis has been stabilized are primary
considerations for Coast Guard commanders responding to natural
disasters. During 2017, the initial hurricane response spanned multiple
months, with some response operations continuing today. The Coast Guard
endured risk exposure across all 11 missions with service-wide impacts
to training, personnel readiness, and maintenance of equipment. To
sustain prolonged response operations, the Service had to sacrifice
preparedness for the next contingency response. When discussing
resiliency, infrastructure and assets immediately come to mind.
However, the resiliency of the Coast Guard as an organization is
equally critical to mitigating the secondary effects of responding to
emergent events. The Coast Guard must be able to meet the needs of the
Nation, through a resilient and well-trained workforce, while
simultaneously answering the call for help during a disaster.
The age and condition of the Coast Guard's assets is another
concern, and is one that the Administration, with the support of
Congress, is working hard to improve. The newest National Security
Cutter JAMES, working alongside several modern Fast Response Cutters,
showcased its abilities after hurricane MARIA by serving as a command
and control platform off of Puerto Rico. As more modern and capable
cutters repositioned for hurricane response, the Coast Guard Cutter
ALERT, a 48-year-old cutter, held the line in the Eastern Pacific
Ocean. The crew performed admirably, including a two-week period as the
only cutter operating in the Eastern Pacific.
Issues to Focus on Going Forward
Lastly, there are several areas that will require continued energy
and focus in the months and years ahead in order to enhance the Coast
Guard's national disaster response capacity and capability.
When the Coast Guard has the opportunity to recapitalize its
facilities, it needs to make them more storm-resilient and survivable.
In fact, several shore facilities that were rebuilt following Hurricane
IKE suffered minimal damages along the paths of HARVEY and IRMA, a
testament to modern building codes and standards.
Continued investment in recapitalizing Coast Guard resources is
paramount. The need for modernized assets, such as the Offshore Patrol
Cutter and Waterway Commerce Cutters, to replace an aging fleet is
highlighted by the National Security Cutter's superior ability to
coordinate and communicate with Coast Guard, Department of Defense, and
interagency resources during contingency responses.
Investing in the Coast Guard's infrastructure supports its greatest
resource: its people. Although the Service deployed approximately 3,000
additional Coast Guard women and men to support response operations,
many more Coast Guard personnel from within the impacted areas
responded to help those that were displaced and distressed, even as
they and their loved ones were also displaced. The Coast Guard had to
relocate over 700 Coast Guard members and dependents after their homes
were damaged to the point of being uninhabitable.
Many do not realize the residual risk associated with surging
resources to an incident. No amount of response capacity and capability
will be effective without a foundation of preparedness. Having enough
well-trained and properly equipped personnel, the right assets, and
adequate contingency infrastructure in place prior to an event is vital
to sustained success during a major disaster response, and to the
reconstitution of the impacted area. It is too late to train
responders, procure new equipment, or find alternate command posts when
a hurricane is barreling toward our coasts. As has been shown time and
again, investment in the Coast Guard pays dividends when they are
needed most.
Conclusion
The Coast Guard is well-positioned to respond to natural disasters
due to its unique blend of authorities, capabilities, and capacity.
Flexible, multi-mission forces and agile command and control systems
provide the solid foundation from which we can respond to major
catastrophes. When combined with broad authorities and extensive
experience operating with diverse partners, the Coast Guard provides a
vital service to our Nation. As an organization that strives to better
serve the Nation through continual improvement, the Coast Guard
evaluates its successes and failures to optimize performance through
applying both strategic and tactical-level lessons learned. The Coast
Guard's dedication to ongoing self-improvement will ensure that it is
best positioned to deliver the level of service the Nation expects and
deserves well into the future.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today and for
your ongoing support of the women and men of the Coast Guard. I look
forward to your questions.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much, Admiral.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr, we're delighted to have you with us.
STATEMENT OF HON. T. BELLA DINH-ZARR, Ph.D., MPH, BOARD MEMBER,
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Good morning, Chairman Wicker and members of
the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
When we investigate transportation accidents, the NTSB
tries to understand not only the human and mechanical factors,
but also environmental factors, including the weather. In 50
years of accident investigations, we've seen the importance of
having accurate weather information, adequate training and
equipment to understand and operate in adverse weather, and
suitable equipment to survive dangerous conditions. All of
these issues were raised in our recent investigation into the
sinking of El Faro.
As you know, on October 1, 2015, the cargo ship El Faro
sank in the Atlantic Ocean during Hurricane Joaquin claiming
the lives of all 33 crewmembers. I was the NTSB board member
on-scene.
Our investigation into the sinking identified several major
safety issues, but today I'll focus on the weather information,
the survival craft, and the related recommendations about these
issues. As we work to encourage adoption of our safety
recommendations, our thoughts continue to be with the families.
We worked jointly with the Coast Guard to investigate El
Faro's sinking. Other organizations, including NOAA, provided
support to recover El Faro's recorder from over 15,000 feet
below the surface of the ocean.
Recovering the recorder was critical to determining the
probable cause because it provided audio of conversations and
ambient sounds as well as parametric data, such as heading and
speed. On behalf of the NTSB, I would like to thank the Coast
Guard and NOAA for their support.
By all accounts, the storm was difficult to track as it
made its way through the Atlantic. Our investigation determined
that the forecast errors for Hurricane Joaquin and other
tropical cyclones suggests that hurricane forecasting needs to
be improved, and we made several recommendations to help ensure
that mariners at sea better understand and are able to respond
to severe weather.
In addition to the challenges of knowing where the storm
was headed, the captain of El Faro relied primarily on weather
information that was not as current as other sources of
information being reviewed by the crew. There are several
possible explanations for the captain's decision to continue on
course into the hurricane's path, but his training does not
appear to have prepared him for the conditions that the storm
presented. The ship also lacked functioning critical equipment
that would have helped the crew better understand their
position relative to the storm.
We recommended improvements to training for mariners in
heavy weather operations, including advanced meteorology and
bridge resource management. And we recommended that vessels in
ocean service be equipped with properly operating
meteorological instruments, such as barometers, barographs, and
anemometers. Once the ship had sailed into the hurricane and
lost propulsion, El Faro was listing heavily to port in high
seas and hurricane strength winds, leaving the crew with few
options. It's unlikely that the life rafts or open lifeboats on
board could be launched or boarded by the crewmembers, and they
would not have provided adequate protection even if they had
been launched.
Open lifeboats are not allowed on newly built vessels. The
NTSB's recommendation is that they should not be allowed on any
vessel. El Faro was 40 years old when it sank, and open
lifeboats had been outdated for 30 years. If open lifeboats on
all vessels in service are replaced with enclosed lifeboats
that adhere to the latest safety standards, as recommended in
our investigation, all mariners would have the same increased
chance of surviving should they need to abandon ship regardless
of the age of the vessel.
Finally, in recognition of continuous advances in
equipment, we recommend that lifesaving equipment on vessels be
reviewed at regular intervals. If enacted, this would
constitute, in both senses of the word, a living requirement.
The captain's insufficient action to avoid Hurricane
Joaquin due to his failure to use the current weather
information and the lack of appropriate survival craft for the
conditions were critical factors in this fatal accident. We
hope our investigation into El Faro's sinking will improve
mariners' awareness of and preparation for heavy weather as
well as prompt changes to improve weather forecasting and
dissemination. These changes, combined with updated technology
and equipment requirements, will help future mariners avoid
hurricanes and other significant weather events, and in the
event of extreme circumstances, will offer them the best chance
of survival.
We appreciate that both the Coast Guard and NOAA have been
responsive to our recommendations, and we look forward to
continuing to work with them.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. My written
testimony provides more details, and, of course, I'd be happy
to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dinh-Zarr follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. T. Bella Dinh-Zarr, Ph.D., MPH, Board
Member, National Transportation Safety Board
Good morning Chairman Thune, Ranking Member Nelson, and Members of
the Committee. Thank you for inviting the National Transportation
Safety Board (NTSB) to testify before you today.
The NTSB is an independent Federal agency charged by Congress with
investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and
significant accidents in other modes of transportation--highway, rail,
marine, and pipeline. We determine the probable cause of the accidents
we investigate and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing
future accidents. In addition, we conduct special transportation safety
studies and coordinate the resources of the Federal government and
other organizations to assist victims and their family members who have
been impacted by major transportation disasters.
When we investigate accidents, we try to understand not only the
human factors or the mechanical factors involved, but also the
environmental factors, including weather. In over 50 years of accident
investigations, we have seen the importance of having accurate weather
information, adequate training and equipment to understand adverse
weather conditions and how to operate in them, and suitable equipment
to survive dangerous conditions. All of these issues were raised in our
recent investigation into the sinking of the El Faro.
Investigating the Sinking of El Faro
On October 1, 2015, the US-flagged cargo ship El Faro, owned by
TOTE Maritime Puerto Rico and operated by TOTE Services, Inc., sank in
the Atlantic Ocean about 40 nautical miles northeast of Acklins and
Crooked Island, Bahamas, during Hurricane Joaquin, claiming the lives
of all 33 crew members. Our investigation into the sinking and the
subsequent loss of life identified several major safety issues,
including the captain's actions, currency of weather information,
bridge resource management, company oversight, damage control plans,
and survival craft suitability.
We served as the lead investigative agency and worked jointly with
the U.S. Coast Guard to investigate El Faro's sinking. Because the
sunken vessel could not be physically investigated, recovering El
Faro's voyage data recorder (VDR) from over 15,400 feet below the
surface of the ocean was critical to determining the probable cause of
its sinking. We want to thank the U.S. Coast Guard, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and all the other
organizations who provided tremendous support to recover El Faro's
recorder.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Organizations assisting in the VDR recovery included the
Department of the Navy, Supervisor of Salvage and Diving and Military
Sealift Command; U.S. Coast Guard; American Bureau of Shipping;
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; National Science
Foundation; Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution; TOTE Services, Inc.;
and University of Rhode Island, Inner Space Center.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recovered audio of conversations and ambient sounds from the
ship's bridge that began at 5:36 a.m. on September 30, two days before
the accident, and continued until El Faro sank. This data--as well as
parametric data from the VDR, such as the ship's heading and speed--
provided information about the captain's and crew's conversations and
actions throughout the voyage, the weather information available to
them, and the ship's performance as it sailed into the storm. On
December 12, 2017, following a 26-month investigation, we determined
the probable cause of the sinking and made 53 safety recommendations.
The final report and recommendations were published on February 7,
2018.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Transportation Safety Board, Sinking of U.S. Cargo
Vessel SS El Faro, Atlantic Ocean, Northeast of Acklins and Crooked
Island, Bahamas October 1, 2015, Rpt. No. MAR-17/01 (Washington, D.C.:
NTSB, 2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the purposes of this testimony, I will focus on the safety
issues regarding the weather information available to and used by the
crew, as well as the survival craft onboard the ship, and
recommendations that we made to address these issues.
Currency of Weather Information
On September 29, 2015, at 9:48 p.m., El Faro and its 33 crewmembers
departed its homeport in Jacksonville, Florida, on a 1,100-nautical-
mile (nm) planned voyage to San Juan, Puerto Rico, slated to arrive in
the early morning hours of October 2. However, the ship sailed directly
into the path of Hurricane Joaquin, a Category 3 storm that reached
Category 4 strength shortly after the sinking, at approximately 8:00
a.m. on October 1.
Approximately 3 hours before El Faro set sail on September 29, the
National Hurricane Center (NHC) issued the first marine hurricane
warning for Joaquin for a large area of the Atlantic east of the
Bahamas; however, we determined that the captain's decision to depart
Jacksonville was reasonable, considering the number of options he could
employ to avoid the storm. As they tracked the storm the next day, the
captain and chief mate diverted course slightly to the south to try to
distance themselves from the storm. However, as it continued to
intensify, Joaquin also tracked further south than originally
predicted.
The crew onboard El Faro relied on two primary sources of weather
information to remain aware of Joaquin's changing position, forecast
intensity, and predicted track: Inmarsat-C SafetyNET (SAT-C) and the
Bon Voyage System (BVS). These sources used different methods and
formats to deliver weather guidance. SAT-C provided text broadcasts of
NHC weather products, which were delivered to the vessel's bridge. This
includes near-real-time information on Joaquin's position, forecast
intensity, and predicted track, and is issued four times a day for
active tropical cyclones.
BVS is a commercially available software program that provides
graphic depictions of weather information via e-mail or broadband. BVS
weather files were e-mailed to El Faro's captain, who primarily relied
on this information for storm location and forecast track. Seven BVS
files were e-mailed to El Faro during the accident voyage. At the times
the BVS weather files were e-mailed, the storm location and forecast
track were not current with the information then available through SAT-
C; rather, due to a delay in processing and preparing the data for
distribution, BVS provided a storm position and forecast track 6 hours
behind SAT-C. BVS can also send updates with current forecasts if a
user specifically requests them, but during the accident voyage, El
Faro did not request any.
The VDR audio recording from the bridge made clear that the crew
had access to other weather information as well, including the Weather
Channel, satellite radio, and broadcasts from U.S. Coast Guard
aircraft. We found that El Faro was receiving sufficient weather
information for the captain to make educated decisions regarding the
vessel's route, but the captain did not use it. Several times
throughout the night of September 30 and into the early morning of
October 1, the bridge crew noted their concerns about the ship's
advancement toward a strengthening storm based on information from SAT-
C and other sources; however, the captain may have felt confident about
the ship's route and proximity to the storm. However, he was relying on
BVS weather information that was many hours older than what the bridge
crew was reviewing. Based on the information obtained from the VDR, it
seems most likely that the captain did not realize that SAT-C was
providing more current information than BVS.
At 4:45 a.m., on October 1, the captain downloaded a BVS weather
file that had been sent to him at 11:04 p.m. the night before.
Joaquin's position, forecast track, and intensity given in the file
were consistent with the data in the advisory that had been delivered
to the bridge via SAT-C almost 12 hours before, at 4:54 p.m. the
previous afternoon. At 4:46 a.m., El Faro's SAT-C terminal received an
advisory indicating that El Faro was 11 nm northwest of the storm
center (Figure 1). By that time, the ship was experiencing a starboard
list caused by increasing wind on the vessel's port side. As the ship
continued to sail into the storm, the crew struggled to deal with a
cascading series of events, including flooding and loss of propulsion,
any one of which could have endangered the ship on its own.
Figure 1. El Faro's location in relation to available weather
forecasts and poststorm analysis at 4:46 a.m. on October 1.
Once under way on the accident voyage, the captain had
opportunities to take other actions to avoid Hurricane Joaquin. There
are several possible explanations for the captain's decision to
continue on course into the hurricane's direct path, but his training
does not appear to have prepared him for the conditions Hurricane
Joaquin presented.
El Faro's captain graduated from Maine Maritime Academy in 1988,
and he obtained his master's credential in 2001. Mariners who obtained
their initial credential before 1998 were not required to take an
advanced meteorology training course approved by the U.S. Coast Guard;
thus, the captain was not required to have completed the advanced
meteorology or advanced shiphandling courses. The same was true for El
Faro's chief mate. According to their most recent certificates, none of
the bridge officers had attended the advanced meteorology or advanced
shiphandling courses. We concluded that training in heavy-weather
operations, including advanced meteorology and advanced shiphandling,
might have provided the captain with additional information to consider
while evaluating options, and may have resulted in a different course
of action. We recommended that the U.S. Coast Guard require that all
deck officers, at both operational and management levels, take a U.S.
Coast Guard-approved advanced meteorology course to close the gap for
mariners initially credentialed before 1998.\3\ The recommendation is
currently classified ``Open--Await Response.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Safety Recommendation M-17-33.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also recommended that the U.S. Coast Guard publish policy
guidance to approved maritime training schools offering management-
level training in advanced meteorology, to ensure that the curriculum
includes the following topics: characteristics of weather systems,
including tropical revolving storms; advanced meteorological concepts;
importance of sending weather observations; ship maneuvering using
advanced simulators in heavy weather; heavy-weather vessel
preparations; use of technology to transmit and receive weather
forecasts (such as navigational telex or weather-routing providers);
ship-routing services (capabilities and limitations); and launching of
lifeboats and liferafts in heavy weather.\4\ The recommendation is
currently classified ``Open--Await Response.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Safety Recommendation M-17-34.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We further recommended that the U.S. Coast Guard provide policy
guidance to approved maritime training schools offering operational-
level training in meteorology to ensure that the curriculum includes
the following topics: characteristics of weather systems, weather
charting and reporting, importance of sending weather observations,
sources of weather information, and interpreting weather forecast
products.\5\ The recommendation is currently classified ``Open--Await
Response.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Safety Recommendation M-17-35.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
An accurate determination of wind speed and wind direction onboard
El Faro would have allowed the crew to resolve the conflicting weather
reports. El Faro was not required to carry an anemometer but did have
one installed. The vessel's anemometer displayed wind data on the
bridge, which was also recorded by the VDR; however, according to
interviews with former crewmembers and crew discussions and wind data
obtained from the VDR, the anemometer was not properly functioning. A
properly working anemometer would have allowed the ship's crew to
compute the true wind direction and speed. With that information, the
captain would have had additional tools to use to determine the
vessel's position in relation to Hurricane Joaquin. We concluded that
TOTE did not ensure that El Faro had a properly functioning anemometer,
which deprived the captain of a vital tool for understanding his ship's
position relative to the storm. To ensure that vessels are equipped
with properly functioning weather equipment, we recommended that the
U.S. Coast Guard require that vessels in ocean service (500 gross tons
or over) be equipped with properly operating meteorological
instruments, including functioning barometers, barographs, and
anemometers.\6\ The recommendation is currently classified ``Open--
Await Response.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Safety Recommendation M-17-36.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the course of our investigation, the factual information
indicated that Joaquin's track was difficult to forecast because of its
moderate wind shear. The forecast errors for Hurricane Joaquin and
other tropical cyclones suggest that hurricane forecasting needs to be
improved. Further, our investigation revealed that critical tropical
cyclone information issued by the National Weather Service (NWS) is not
always available to mariners via well-established broadcast methods.
The data also suggest that modifying the way the NWS develops certain
tropical cyclone forecasts and advisories could help mariners at sea
better understand and respond to tropical cyclones. As a result, we
adopted a safety recommendation report on June 20, 2017, making ten
recommendations to address these safety issues--two addressed to NOAA,
seven to the NWS, and one to the U.S. Coast Guard.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ National Transportation Safety Board, Tropical Cyclone
Information for Mariners, Rpt. No. MSR-17/02 (Washington, D.C.: NTSB,
2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Among these, we recommended that NOAA develop and implement a plan
specifically designed to emphasize improved model performance in
forecasting tropical cyclone track and intensity in moderate-shear
environments. We also recommended that NOAA develop and implement
technology that would allow NWS forecasters to quickly sort through
large numbers of tropical cyclone forecast model ensembles, identify
clusters of solutions among ensemble members, and allow correlation of
those clusters against a set of standard parameters.\8\ Both
recommendations are classified ``Open--Await Response,'' although we
recently received information from NOAA that these recommendations
aligned with work that is in progress or planned as part of the
Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Safety Recommendations M-17-8 and M-17-9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Collecting and disseminating meteorological and oceanographic data
in near real-time is vital to supporting global meteorological
authorities who aim to produce the best possible weather forecasts and
advisories. Although surface-based data collection networks on land are
geographically extensive and, in many cases, provide good temporal
coverage, no such network exists over the world's oceans. Satellites
retrieve valuable data from the ocean surface; yet, they have
limitations. We found that increased reporting and improved
transmission of meteorological and oceanographic data from vessels at
sea would significantly improve the availability of vital information
to enhance weather awareness, forecasting, and advisory services aimed
at improving mariner safety.
We recommended that NOAA coordinate with the NWS, vessel operators,
automatic identification system (AIS) service providers, and required
onboard technology vendors to perform a ``proof-of-concept'' project to
establish whether AIS, or another suitable alternative, can practically
deliver, in a single message, meteorological and oceanographic data
obtained directly from automated instrumentation and manual observation
onboard vessels at sea, vessel position and time of observation, and
other important metadata by satellite and land-based receivers to
global meteorological authorities via the Global Telecommunication
System with acceptable time delay.\9\ On March 15, 2018, the NWS
responded that it is establishing a proof-of-concept project under its
Office of Observations to evaluate the feasibility of transmitting
weather information through AIS. Preliminary discussions have been
conducted among the NWS, NOAA, potential contributors to this project,
and key stakeholders. This recommendation is classified ``Open--Initial
Response Received.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Safety Recommendation M-17-52.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Suitability of Survival Craft
According to data from El Faro's VDR, at 7:27 a.m. on October 1,
after struggling to address the flooding and propulsion loss
experienced on the vessel, the captain rang the ship's general alarm,
and one minute later, the chief mate gave a radio command for the crew
to muster on the starboard side of the ship. At 7:29 a.m., the captain
ordered abandon ship, and two minutes later, he ordered that inflatable
liferafts be thrown overboard and that the crew enter them. The VDR
ceased recording at 7:39 a.m., with the captain and able seaman still
on the bridge.
A transmission from El Faro's emergency position indicating radio
beacon (EPIRB) was detected by geostationary satellite at 7:36 a.m. and
received by the U.S. Coast Guard. The transmission was forwarded as an
``unlocated first alert'' because El Faro's EPIRB was not GPS-equipped,
which would have allowed the unit to transmit its current position. No
further communications were received by either the U.S. Coast Guard or
TOTE. El Faro's last known position, according to VDR data, was 20 nm
north of Samana Cay, about 17 nm north of Joaquin's center.
El Faro carried five liferafts: four 25-person liferafts and a 6-
person liferaft. In addition, El Faro was equipped with two 43-person
open lifeboats, which were original equipment from when the ship was
built. El Faro's starboard lifeboat was discovered during the search-
and-rescue operation, damaged and swamped. The damaged port lifeboat
was discovered on the seafloor during the second mission to recover the
VDR. There was no indication that the lifeboats had been launched. A
partially inflated liferaft was discovered during the search-and-rescue
operation and confirmed to be from El Faro. None of the remaining five
El Faro liferafts was recovered, and none was observed in a stowed
position on the wreckage.
We found that the captain's decision to muster the crew and abandon
ship was late and may have reduced the crew's chances of survival.
However, the severe weather, combined with El Faro's list, made it
unlikely that the liferafts or lifeboats could be launched manually or
boarded by crewmembers once in the water, and they would not have
provided adequate protection even if they had been launched. Open
lifeboats, such as those El Faro carried, are not allowed on newly
built vessels. El Faro's lifeboats were inspected and surveyed in
accordance with the regulations applicable to its delivery date of
January 1975. A vessel is surveyed under the same regulations as long
as it is in service or until it undergoes a major modification; in the
latter case, the vessel must comply with the requirements current at
the time of modification as far as is reasonable and practicable. In
1993, El Faro, then named Northern Lights, underwent a major
modification, but the lifeboats were not required to be upgraded at
that time because the lifeboats themselves were not modified in the
conversion. The vessel was again substantially modified in 2005-2006 to
carry load-on/load-off containers, but the U.S. Coast Guard did not
classify this change as a major modification. We concluded that the
2005-2006 conversion should have been designated a major modification,
which may have required the vessel to meet newer safety standards for
lifeboats.
The average life of international merchant ships is roughly 20 to
30 years. The El Faro was 40 years old when it sank, and open lifeboats
had been superseded for 30 years. Therefore, considering the average
service life of these vessels, we recommended that all lifesaving
appliances on inspected vessels, which would include lifeboats and
liferafts, be reviewed at a maximum 20-year interval to current
standards and be upgraded as required.\10\ This recommendation is
classified ``Open--Await Response.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Safety Recommendation M-17-042.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Survivability would be enhanced if open lifeboats on all vessels
remaining in service were replaced with enclosed lifeboats that adhered
to the latest safety standards, and if new cargo vessels were equipped
with stern-launched freefall lifeboats where practicable. We
recommended that the U.S. Coast Guard require open lifeboats on all US-
inspected vessels to be replaced with enclosed lifeboats that meet
current regulatory standards and freefall lifeboats, where
practicable.\11\ This recommendation is classified ``Open--Await
Response.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Safety Recommendation M-17-043.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
The captain's insufficient action to avoid Hurricane Joaquin due to
his failure to use the most current weather information and the lack of
appropriate survival craft for the conditions were critical factors in
the probable cause of El Faro's sinking and the loss of 33 lives.
Although the ship and its crew should never have found themselves
sailing into the storm, many other factors, including ineffective
bridge resource management, inadequate company oversight and safety
management, flooding, propulsion loss, and the lack of an approved
damage control plans also contributed to the sinking, and there are
many other lessons to learn.
As with all of our investigations, our aim is to learn from this
tragedy to improve safety for current and future generations of
mariners. We hope that our investigation into El Faro's sinking will
improve mariners' awareness of and preparation for heavy weather as
well as prompt changes to improve weather forecasting and
dissemination. These changes, combined with updated technology and
equipment requirements, will help future mariners make better decisions
in the face of hurricanes and other significant weather events. We
appreciate that both the U.S. Coast Guard and NOAA have been responsive
to our recommendations and we look forward to continuing to work with
them.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to
take your questions.
Attachment--Report
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Wicker. Well, thank you to all members of the
panel.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr, the report really points to human error on
board the ship, is that correct?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Yes, Chairman, Chairman Wicker. The report
points that--to the fact that the captain did not use the most
currently available weather information, and because of that,
he made errors in not removing the ship from a course that led
to this disaster.
Senator Wicker. He should have turned the ship in a
different direction.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Correct. He could have made a different
route had he made the decision earlier. But once he had
realized the situation, it was too late to avoid the hurricane.
Senator Wicker. Was there a minority view in that regard,
or was this unanimous, that particular conclusion?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Among the crew, sir?
Senator Wicker. No, on the Board, among the people who
wrote the report.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Oh, among--among our investigators, among
the----
Senator Wicker. Yes.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Yes, there was a--we analyzed the factual
information. We reviewed many hours of the voyage data
recorder, which showed the conversation of the crew, including
the captain, who was part of the crew, and it was determined
that----
Senator Wicker. The investigators were unanimous in this
conclusion.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. That is correct.
Senator Wicker. And I think you said the--that this
particular captain's training at Maine Maritime Academy could--
if it had been--if he had been trained in the more modern
procedures, a different conclusion might have been reached by
the captain earlier on, is that correct?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. The captain was--obtained his initial
credentialing before 1998, and they were not required to take
an advanced meteorology course. And so our report found that
perhaps had he been required to take that, he might have had
more knowledge and been able to make a better decision. So one
of our recommendations is actually to close that gap among
those who did not receive that training who are still in
service.
Senator Wicker. Are there people still out there who don't
have that training----
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Yes, there are.
Senator Wicker.--as captains of ships? OK. Well, it's just
an awful tragedy. And you hate to bring up these matters of
human error, but we might as well talk about them.
Thank you all for your testimony.
Let me see. Admiral Fagan, let's talk about the national
security cutters. Is that OK? We've got some in service that
have yielded record results in drug interdiction, but I'm told
the modernized versions of the cutters can do a lot more and
help us in the subject matter that we're talking about today.
So would you explain that to members of the Committee and to
the public who are listening to us today?
Admiral Fagan. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The national
security cutters are incredible, incredibly capable, new assets
that we've been thankful for the support that we've been able
to deploy into multimission sets, and you talked about the
counternarcotic mission set. Specific to the topic at hand, the
National Security Cutter JAMES was forward-deployed to provide
secure interoperable communications and assist in bringing the
whole-of-government response to the hurricanes. The JAMES was
sailed--sailed to Puerto Rico, provided command and control and
communications for the multitude of first responders and local
responders that flowed into that event. It serves as an afloat
command, known interoperable coms, it has exceptional
capabilities with regard to just intelligence and other
communicating, and was really a force multiplier and critical
to the success----
Senator Wicker. When was it built, the JAMES? Do you know?
Admiral Fagan. When--when was it built, sir?
Senator Wicker. Yes. How new is the----
Admiral Fagan. It's a year, no more than 2 years. But
it's--they're quite new, sir.
Senator Wicker. OK. And so how many of those are we going
to have altogether? Can you tell us?
Admiral Fagan. So the program of record was originally
eight. We are--we currently again appreciate the support of
Congress and our overseers, and look to be moving toward a
tenth national security cutter, sir.
Senator Wicker. Thank you. And I'm going to go a minute or
two over my time just to say this. Rear Admiral Gallaudet,
thank you for your service. You mentioned your appreciation to
Congress for helping with some deficiencies we previously had
with funding. What department did this funding come through? Do
you know?
Admiral Gallaudet. Are you talking about the supplemental--
--
Senator Wicker. Yes.
Admiral Gallaudet.--or the appropriations, sir?
Senator Wicker. Well, the appropriations.
Admiral Gallaudet. Well, ours, of course, will be the
Department of Commerce.
Senator Wicker. OK. You know, the point I want to make is
sequestration had not only been devastating to DoD, but it had
been devastating to programs like this, that really are also
very much involved in the security of Americans, safety of
Americans. And so I just wanted to--I wanted to drive that
point home. Thank you for acknowledging that we did something
that was much more adequate to get the job done this year, but
there is much in the so-called non-defense discretionary budget
that has everything to do with making Americans safe abroad and
making Americans safe at home. So thank you for making that
point.
And I have filibustered--yes, you can--someone asked to be
recognized? I have filibustered long enough that Senator Nelson
has returned and can be recognized for the next question.
Senator Nelson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Both the Coast
Guard and the National Transportation Safety Board have made a
number of recommendations to address the El Faro sinking.
Obviously, as I said earlier this morning, it traveled right
into the path of an oncoming hurricane. From the
recommendations, what do you believe are the most important
issues to address? Any one of you.
Admiral Gallaudet. I'll start off, Senator Nelson. Thank
you for your question and your support of NOAA. As we discussed
yesterday, part of it is improving our hurricane forecasts and
our predictions of intensity and tracks, and we have been--
we've made great strides, as I made--said in my opening
statement, at NOAA and the National Weather Service in doing
that. And I recall about our track accuracy being the most
accurate for hurricane track forecasts by about 25 percent over
the last 5 years.
So since the El Faro went down in 2015, we've really looked
hard at our forecast--Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program,
that is codified in the Weather Act, and we're going to
continue to move forward and improve in that lane.
Senator Nelson. Ms. Dinh-Zarr, tell me, the problem with El
Faro, as I understand your report, is that it didn't get the
most up-to-date weather information, and it certainly didn't
have the best safety equipment, which I guess would involve the
Coast Guard. I mentioned earlier the enclosed lifeboats. They
were not there. So what do you think?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. Thank you, Senator Nelson, for that
question. Yes, one of our recommendations from the NTSB is that
all lifeboats--all seafaring vessels of this size be equipped
with enclosed lifeboats. These--the El Faro was 40 years old,
and the lifeboats that were on it were already out of date as
of 30 years prior. But because there was not regular review of
that part of the vessel, they were not able to make use of the
latest lifeboat equipment that was required by the Coast Guard.
Senator Nelson. Well, either you or Admiral Fagan, what
about the fact that the El Faro was getting dated weather
reports? They were not up-to-date reports. What do we do about
that?
Admiral?
Admiral Fagan. So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
just compliment the NTSB with regard to how thorough and
transparent the investigation into the El Faro was. It's
certainly a tragedy for the families who lost--lost their
family members.
The lifeboats on the El Faro, while dated, were in
compliance with the regulation that applied to the vessel.
Because of the age of the vessel, the lifeboats would have been
grandfathered. Lifeboats are, as other safety equipment, are
very much a part of the inspection and oversight that the Coast
Guard oversees with regard to U.S. vessels.
The totality of the report and the recommendations, there
are a number of key recommendations in the report. The Coast
Guard and NTSB and others are taking that report seriously and
moving to ensure that we've increased--we've implemented
recommendations and then ensured safety for our dedicated
mariners at sea.
Senator Nelson. What about the up-to-date? How are we going
to ensure that ships that sail when there's a storm brewing are
getting the up-to-date information, unlike the El Faro, which
did not?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. May I, Senator Nelson?
Senator Nelson. Please.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. The information that the Captain--our
investigation found that the Captain actually had the
information when he set sail, and his decision was reasonable.
Where the problem came into play was that as he was
progressing, he was using a certain weather forecasting, the
BVS, and it was several--it was hours behind, up to 6 hours
behind. And the way it is transmitted is not done immediately.
So we did make recommendations to encourage this type of
weather forecasting to be transmitted in a more regular and
timely manner.
I think that the important point here is that the Captain
made a decision based on old weather information, and that's
why he sailed into the path of the storm.
Senator Nelson. And the avoidance of that in the future is?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. To ensure that there is more timely and
accurate weather information and that it's provided in a way
that cannot be missed by the crew.
Senator Nelson. OK. Admiral Gallaudet, you are now getting
the second jet that can fly above the hurricanes so that we can
get more accurate data. NOAA didn't do that last year. The
aging Gulfstream was grounded for emergency repairs, so we were
able to get millions for the aircraft recapitalization in the
omnibus appropriations to require a replacement and a backup.
And so the question is, when are you getting this new jet now
that the funds have been appropriated?
Admiral Gallaudet. Well, thank you for your support,
Senator Nelson. We're very excited to get that new aircraft
aloft. We will be contracting or doing a request for proposals
this year, and we'll be applying that 2018 money as quickly as
we can.
Senator Nelson. Will it be in time for this hurricane
season?
Admiral Gallaudet. It might not be aloft by the hurricane
season starts, but we think we can execute it sometime
midcourse this year.
Senator Nelson. OK. The big boys usually come in August and
September, so see if you can get it by then.
Admiral Gallaudet. Yes, sir.
Senator Nelson. And when is NOAA going to release its
spending plans for supplemental appropriations?
Admiral Gallaudet. We have two in the works, sir. We have
already completed both, one for fisheries disasters and one for
the weather-related disasters and requirements to improve our
forecasting. Both the weather-related pieces for $200 million
is at OMB right now, and they're chewing through it. We hope
that will be released in the next week or two to the Congress.
And then the fisheries disaster spend plan is under review
right now at the Department of Commerce, and we are hopeful
that that will be sent to OMB fairly soon, possibly next week.
Senator Nelson. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Thank you.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr, just to see, make sure that Senator Nelson
and I understand exactly the information, your report concluded
that there was adequate information being made available to the
captain, but he was really focused in on the wrong information.
The SAT-C and the Weather Channel were giving information that
was more accurate and more timely, is that correct?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. That is correct. The crew was looking at the
SAT-C information. The captain was focused primarily on BVS,
which was delayed. And the way it's transmitted to the captain,
the BVS information was out of date by many hours by the time
he received it. But the--in answer to Senator Nelson's
question, when the captain left port, the information that he
had, he made a reasonable decision based on the weather at that
time to leave port.
Senator Wicker. Indeed. And are you saying there was a
discussion onboard the ship among crewmembers and between them
and the captain as to which service to be more mindful of?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. There was a discussion about the weather,
sir, but the captain ultimately makes the decisions.
Senator Wicker. Crewmembers were recommending the SAT-C.
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. They were asking the captain to make a
decision about--or asked him whether the ship should be taking
an alternate route.
Senator Wicker. But did they----
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. I don't know if they were specific----
Senator Wicker. Did they mention that they were listening
to other information?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. He--they did talk about other sources of
information. I don't know if they said specifically the word
``SAT-C'' or the names of the sources.
Senator Wicker. OK. Well, thank you for----
Senator Nelson. That sounds like a communication problem
between the captain and the crew. Is that what you thought, Ms.
Dinh-Zarr?
Dr. Dinh-Zarr. It's a choice of the crew to use different
sources of information. And one of our recommendations is that
because SAT-C comes directly to the bridge, the BVS information
has to be e-mailed, and if you would like it more regularly,
you have to make that request to have more rapid information,
which the captain did not do. So, yes, there was a discrepancy
in the type of weather information that they received, and when
they communicated about it, the captain chose an alternate
course.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much.
Senator Nelson. I think that's tragic. I think that's just
very tragic.
Senator Wicker. Senator Hassan.
STATEMENT OF HON. MAGGIE HASSAN,
U.S. SENATOR FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member Nelson, for holding this hearing.
And thank you to all of the witnesses, not only for being
here today, but for what you do for our country. We are very,
very grateful.
I come from a state with a relatively short shoreline,
approximately 18 miles, but it is used for a range of important
and often competing interests, such as residential areas,
agriculture, tourism, recreation, fisheries, and harbors. The
need to both improve and conserve these areas is naturally
high. With the increasing severity and number of storms,
there's a growing consensus that climate change plays a pivotal
role.
So, Admiral Gallaudet, I wanted to start with you. Have you
been directed to eliminate or adjust the mention of climate
change from reports? And do you believe climate change needs to
be considered in hurricane preparedness?
Admiral Gallaudet. Thank you, Senator Hassan, for your
question and interest and support of NOAA. And I should mention
that the University of New Hampshire is the world leader in
hydrographic studies. And we have a great partnership with that
institution, and I hope to be visiting sometime soon.
Senator Hassan. Great.
Admiral Gallaudet. Regarding climate change and direction
to remove or eliminate mention of that, no, I've been given no
such direction. And, in fact, I testified yesterday about the
fact that I am working with the White House's Office of Science
and Technology Policy, and they're supporting much of our
Arctic-related research that is driven primarily by climate
forcing and changes.
Senator Hassan. And do you believe that climate change
needs to be considered in hurricane preparedness?
Admiral Gallaudet. Yes, sir--yes, ma'am. Pardon me.
Senator Hassan. That's fine.
Admiral Gallaudet. I do. I do. In fact, I have experience
about this in the Navy----
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Admiral Gallaudet.--where I directed the Navy's Climate
Change Task Force. And so--and we are continuing to do active
climate research and climate support. If you go to climate.gov,
you'll see, and drought.gov, that NOAA maintains a fairly
robust climate services mission, and I do believe that needs to
be factored into any kind of weather-related preparedness.
Senator Hassan. Thank you. Along the same lines, as we
think about the impact of climate change, what are some of the
best practices for coastal cities to strengthen their
infrastructure to combat these mounting risks?
Admiral Gallaudet. There are a range of activities, and
NOAA is involved in them. We work closely with communities for
resilient type of efforts. I'll give you one example. It's not
New Hampshire, but I happened to visit Bayou Dupont in
Louisiana this last year, and this is a marsh that we restored
that had been under water for 4 years. And so working with
Louisiana, we diverted some of the sediment from the
Mississippi, and I walked on this--I walked on this marsh at
low tide and I didn't get wet. So that served as a very
effective storm surge barrier during the hurricanes that hit
the Gulf Coast this year.
Senator Hassan. Excellent. So I wanted to give you the
opportunity, too, just to let us know if there are Federal
obstacles that may hinder your ability to prepare for and
respond to challenges that our coastal communities are facing
and their need to be resilient.
Admiral Gallaudet. There are some obstacles, but we're
overcoming them. For example, I think one of the
administration's priorities is regulatory reform. And so, for
example, permitting has been and Endangered Species Act
consultation has always been very difficult for people on
coasts who either want to develop or conduct resiliency type
projects.
A case in point is Department of Energy's--Department of
Energy--pardon me--Department of Interior and us, and we both--
we both have recently--we are in the final stages of revising
our joint regulations on the consultation of Sections 4 and 7
of the Endangered Species Act. It was difficult for any given
customer, if you will, because we kind of had one
interpretation, and Interior had another, and so it was sort of
like in a computer, a do loop, where no one was ever getting
work done.
Senator Hassan. Yes.
Admiral Gallaudet. We now are on the same page. I told my--
the Deputy Secretary of Interior, we will have no daylight
between our agencies, and that's what this new rule will
effect.
Senator Hassan. Excellent. Thank you for that. We will also
give you an opportunity to elaborate if there are other things
you think of on the record.
Rear Admiral Fagan, I wanted to ask you, the 2017 Atlantic
hurricane season was by far the most expensive season on record
with a preliminary total of over $206 billion in damages. It
included 17 named storms and 10 hurricanes. We know how
important it is to make critical investments in coastal- and
ocean-observing infrastructure in order to protect our families
and mariners, whether they're on land or sea.
The wind and wave observations that are conducted by the
buoys off the New Hampshire coast help mariners know the
conditions that they're going to face before they go out to
sea. How important is ocean information in predicting
hurricanes and other storms? And how does information from
tools like buoys help you provide information to mariners and
respond to emergencies?
Admiral Fagan. Thank you, Senator. Predictive tools that
allow mariners to manage risk and the environment that they're
operating in are absolutely essential to the safety and well-
being of our maritime commerce as it trades and applies to the
waters of the United States. And, you know, the Coast Guard
operates a navigation role in working with NOAA and others to
ensure that we've got those best tools and information flows
out there are, again, just absolutely critical to ensuring
mariners have a safe experience at sea.
Senator Hassan. Well, thank you.
And I appreciate the Chair letting me go over. I'll have
some additional questions in follow up for you on the record.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much, Senator Hassan.
Senator Peters.
STATEMENT OF HON. GARY PETERS,
U.S. SENATOR FROM MICHIGAN
Senator Peters. Thank you, Chairman Wicker. And thank you
for holding this hearing. I would like to thank both you and
Ranking Member Nelson. Your states certainly have endured some
pretty tough storms, and you both have been real leaders in
trying to improve our preparedness and resilience to these
storms, and I appreciate your leadership in that area.
Senator Wicker. Thank you.
Senator Peters. And also to our witnesses, I would also
like to thank you for your service and for your testimony
today. And while today's hearing appropriately focuses on
hurricane preparation, given that we're at the start of the
season, the very same disaster response machinery from NOAA's
scientific modeling to the Coast Guard's emergency authorities
all too often must be employed to respond to human-caused risk
and disasters as well, and, in particular, oil spills.
Rear Admiral Fagan, I'm going to ask you a few questions
related to the Coast Guard's ongoing investigation and
leadership of the unified command around a recent Straits of
Mackinac oil spill that has many of us in my state very, very
concerned. On April 1, a suspected vessel anchor-drag in the
Straits of Mackinaw damaged two 138-kilovolt American
Transmission Company cables and also dented the Line 5 pipeline
owned and operated by Enbridge. Line 5, as you know, is an
aging pipeline that would never be built today. The 65-year-old
Line 5 is a major oil pipeline conveying upwards of a half a
million barrels of oil per day through the Straits. It is known
to be corroded and it has been previously compromised.
From a human health and ecological perspective, the rupture
of this line would be absolutely catastrophic in the Great
Lakes. Modeling from Michigan Tech and the University of
Michigan, based on NOAA's data, shows the oil would quickly
spread, given the swift currents in the Straits, and the harsh
reality is that these waters are currently under one and a half
feet of ice, rendering any kind of recovery efforts difficult
at best. The waters of the Great Lakes also provide drinking
water to over 40 million Americans and empower billions of
economic revenue as well. So the threat of an oil spill from
Line 5 is exactly why I have worked in this Committee with the
help of my colleagues to pass some improved pipeline safety
regulation, and we need to do more.
But just 3 weeks ago I met with Commander--Commandant
Nominee Admiral Schultz in my office to press him on improving
the Nation's freshwater oil spill response capabilities. I
certainly stressed that it was a top priority of mine, and I
asked for his personal commitment to focus on this issue as
well.
So, Admiral Fagan, my question is, Under the current
unified command that has been established for the Straits
spill, the Coast Guard has informed our office that the State
and PHMSA have decided to keep Enbridge Line 5 operational for
now while the ongoing inspection of damage continues. Is that
accurate?
Admiral Fagan. I believe it is; yes, sir.
Senator Peters. As the lead for the unified command, is the
Coast Guard fully confident in the State and PHMSA's judgment
that the pipeline presents no risk as a result of the recent
breach?
Admiral Fagan. So thank you, Senator. The pipeline
oversight is in the State's and PHMSA's purview. You mentioned
the ongoing investigation which the Coast Guard is conducting
into the cause of the--the cause of the incident. Our role in
the unified command, you know, focuses on the response and the
oil spill, spill mitigation, to ensure that we've got
appropriate entities and resources brought to bear in this
spill and should other spills occur. The Coast Guard takes oil
spill response, frankly, disaster or just response in general,
quite seriously. We've got very extensive training, planning,
exercising programs that are designed to ensure we've got the
most effective means to support the state and other entities in
a spill such as the dielectric spill that you're referring to,
sir.
Senator Peters. So you're the lead in the unified command.
But, so please explain to me why the Coast Guard would defer to
the State's judgment to reopen Line 5 in advance of any visual
underwater inspection?
Admiral Fagan. So, sir, I don't have specifics on what--
what the--what information the Coast Guard has that they're
using to make that determination in conjunction with PHMSA. I'm
not privy to it. I'll have to get back to you, sir.
Senator Peters. So we're 11 days into this investigation
and we still don't have any visual confirmation of the damage,
is that correct? Do you know?
Admiral Fagan. I don't know, sir. I know visual
verification is key in a response such as this. I'm certain the
team is working to do that, but I don't know the timeframe that
that's on, sir.
Senator Peters. It would be my belief that the Coast Guard
would want to know, is that correct? You'd want to know exactly
what's happening? You will be responsible for coordinating a
spill should it occur, and if there has been damage to this
pipeline that leads to that spill, you're going to be
intimately involved, I would hope----
Admiral Fagan. Yes, sir, we----
Senator Peters.--that the Coast Guard has been monitoring
this closely. Is that accurate?
Admiral Fagan. Yes, sir. A unified command is indication of
how closely we are monitoring and how seriously we are taking
the threat and concern with regard to a spill. Having
situational awareness, eyes on-scene, are a key part. It's one
of our main operating doctrine. Again, in this case, I just
don't have the timeline or know what the challenge is or why
that may not have happened at this point with regard to this
particular incident, sir.
Senator Peters. But someone at the Coast Guard would have
that information?
Admiral Fagan. Certainly, the local unified command, the
local commander, who has purview over the spill, all of the
resources that are brought to bear, would have that specific. I
just don't have it, sir.
Senator Peters. So I would like those answers today. Is it
possible to get those today, those answers?
Admiral Fagan. Yes, sir, we will. We will provide that to
you, sir.
Senator Peters. Because this has gone on for a number of
days, and not to have visual inspections to have any kind of
understanding of what happened and to be relying on the State
and PHMSA without knowing exactly what they have looked at I
think is irresponsible, that we need to get to the bottom. I'm
not saying you haven't done that, but I want to know whether or
not that's occurred. We need to know.
A lot of people in Michigan are asking questions. Folks are
very concerned. As you know, the Straits of Mackinac are
vitally important, as I mentioned earlier in my comments. The
amount of water that goes through there is equal to 10 times
that of Niagara Falls, and it's right next to our number one
tourist attraction, Mackinac Island. The economic environmental
impact would be devastating.
So I'm going to be seeking another meeting with Admiral
Schultz in the next few days. I also hope that we might have an
oversight hearing of this. But I would certainly appreciate if
the Coast Guard get back to my office as early as possible, by
today at some point, so that we can get a full accounting of
where we are. I'd appreciate that, Admiral.
Admiral Fagan. Absolutely. Yes, sir; we will do that.
Senator Peters. I appreciate it. Thank you.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much, Senator Peters.
Senator Cantwell.
STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA CANTWELL,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WASHINGTON
Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for
holding this hearing today. I notice that we are not having a
NOAA budget hearing this Congress, and so a lot of questions to
ask. So I might have to file some for the record as it relates
to various issues. Thank you for bringing up the discussion you
and your colleague--did you want to say something?
Senator Wicker. No, no.
Senator Cantwell. OK--you and your colleague on the El
Faro, and I appreciate the questions being asked. I think it
points to the fact that we need to make more investment in our
weather information. No one should die because someone didn't
read an e-mail. I have long thought that our investment from
NOAA lags behind what we often get from our European
counterparts. People will routinely on the news say, ``Well,
this is what we're predicting in the U.S., but here is what the
European model predicts for the U.S.'' Why do they even comment
on it? Because they think that we're further ahead.
So as weather changes, I want to make sure that we have the
latest and greatest technology and that that technology is
being deployed and used in a way that is cost effective. So I
appreciate everyone's comments so far and questions on that.
And I definitely think the fact that the NOAA budget would be
cut from both the forecasting and the programming, and larger
cuts on the weather data, is something that we need to revisit.
It is very, very important that we keep moving forward on
important technology information here.
Rear Admiral Gallaudet, I wanted to talk to you about the
halibut fishery in Washington. A number of Tribes in the
Pacific have sent letters to the Department of Commerce
requesting a formal government-to-government consultation
regarding halibut cuts. Are you aware of Executive Order 13175?
Admiral Gallaudet. Yes, I am, Senator.
Senator Cantwell. So you know that it means that you're
supposed to have regular consultation with Tribes and
collaboration with them on the Federal implications of policy.
Admiral Gallaudet. Yes, I am. I'm well aware of that,
Senator.
Senator Cantwell. OK. So have you done that?
Admiral Gallaudet. Well, I had a great discussion with
Congressman Kilmer on this, and I've done quite a bit of
homework. And here's the issue. Six of the seven Tribes for
this Area 2A are the ones that requested formal consultation 2
weeks prior to the opening of the season. And as I looked into
the matter, what they're concerned about is not allocation, but
the catch limit that the Fisheries Management Council--or
Commission--pardon me--the International Pacific Halibut
Commission had proposed. And it's only 11 percent lower than
the previous year. The science--the Commission report that they
issued was recommending a 65 percent catch limit decrease. So I
really feel the Commission is yielding quite a bit to the
Tribes, and not--not--and that--this--if you----
Senator Cantwell. I'm not interested in what you're saying.
I'm interested in you complying by talking directly to the
Tribes.
Admiral Gallaudet. OK.
Senator Cantwell. I'm interested----
Admiral Gallaudet. In fact, we had consulted with them at
least 18 times, not formally, prior to their letter. And the
time--and the process is typically for the Tribes to ask for
formal consultation after the November midyear meeting where we
announce--propose the draft catch limits.
Senator Cantwell. They've asked for consultation, correct?
Admiral Gallaudet. They have.
Senator Cantwell. OK. And you haven't met that yet.
Admiral Gallaudet. We--we--they asked for formal
consultation 2 weeks prior to the season, Senator, and we
didn't want to have--we didn't want to delay opening the
season. And so I fully welcome conducting formal consultation
with them now for next year's season, 2018--or 2019, pardon me.
We've communicated with them as often as they wanted to
informally.
Senator Cantwell. My guess is no. My guess is that didn't
happen. Formally, you should have told them, ``This is what
we're proposing,'' and have that conversation. You're right,
people want science to win the day and people want seasons to
be open and based on science.
I think the issue here is you have to talk a lot sooner
about your proposal and give people the ability--the one thing
that holds the Northwest together, I guarantee you, is science.
I guarantee you we don't agree on a lot of things, but out
there, we agree on science, and people will live up to that
science. So please make sure that you're living up to the
Executive order on consultation.
Admiral Gallaudet. Thank you, Senator. We are. I visited
our science centers in your great state, and we certainly agree
with you on that.
Senator Cantwell. Thank you.
Can I ask, Rear Admiral Fagan, about derelict vessels and
what more we need to do to coordinate with State and local
governments on removing of derelict vessels? I feel like we
have a process, but yet at the same time, you have the
authority to remove substantial oil spill risks from the
vessels before it happens. And, you know, we have this ``Davy
Crockett'' situation where spills continue to happen. So how do
we prevent--how do we prevent that in derelict vessels? How do
we get better coordination?
Admiral Fagan. So derelict vessels that propose a risk of
oil spills are--you know, the Coast Guard does have authority
to remove that spill risk from the vessel. We are involved in
the port communities where these vessels, you know, are found,
and continue to collaborate and coordinate to ensure that that
authority is initiated and acted on when appropriate with
regard to oil spill risk.
Senator Cantwell. And so who's in charge?
Admiral Fagan. If it is a threat--if it's an oil spill
threat from a derelict vessel, the Coast Guard oversees or
works to mitigate the threat of the oil spill, but in a lot--
it's very situational, dependent where the vessel is, but,
again, the Coast Guard oversees the mitigation or elimination
of the threat of a spill from a derelict vessel.
Senator Cantwell. Well, in that instance, we had $22
million and took 10 months to clean up the spill. And so what I
think we're looking for is, are we missing something here on
the coordination between the State and local and Feds on how to
respond and prioritize?
Admiral Fagan. So the State, Federal, and local interplay
and discussion are critical in oil spill mitigation. I know the
area maritime committees and the forums there were used to
bring all those key stakeholders together are very much alive
and well and well collaborated and communicated in your state
and in all of the states in the country, and it's that
collaboration that brings the greatest strength to ensure that
we're as effective and efficient in mitigating spill threat as
possible.
Senator Cantwell. Well, I think what we should do is go
back and review the recommendations from the GAO report and
think about better ways to improve coordination and timing.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Wicker. Thank you, Senator Cantwell.
Admiral Gallaudet, let me talk about my legislation that
was enacted in 2012, the COASTAL Act, which dealt with the
question of whether hurricane damage was caused by wind or
water, whether it is, therefore, covered by wind insurance or
flood insurance.
Storm data currently collected by NOAA, academic
institutions, and private entities to allocate property damage
following storms is the subject matter here. During the storm
event model developed through my COASTAL Act, damage would be
determined by its source and attributed to either wind or water
peril. NOAA would certify the accuracy of its data and provide
a highly detailed post-event assessment to the Secretary of
Homeland Security for every named storm. The Secretary would
then establish a formula to allocate losses, wind or water, for
total-loss properties.
NOAA was kind enough to come forward and give some
technical assistance regarding amendments to actually make this
work when it's fully implemented. And so, as such, I have
introduced S. 2242, the COASTAL Implementation Act of 2017.
Admiral Gallaudet, I hope this is something you've paid
attention to.
Admiral Gallaudet. Yes, sir.
Senator Wicker. And so, if you could, give us your take on
whether this COASTAL Implementation Act would provide the
necessary simple technical changes to actually make this work
and accelerate the implementation.
Admiral Gallaudet. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I'd be happy to
comment on that. And as you know, I very much applaud your
intent to make it easier for Americans who have total losses of
their homes to get the right answer in terms of the insurance
claims, whether wind or water damage was the cause of loss of
property.
You know, myself, I was one of those ``just a slab'' type
of people after Hurricane Katrina, and so I think--I applaud
your efforts and have been very happy that NOAA has contributed
technical drafting assistance to your staff.
I think we're already underway in many things to implement
the intent of that Act. We have updated what they call
``vertical elevation models.'' We have established a protocol
with the USGS and the Army Corps of Engineers on data
collection so that we can all have, see, the same thing on our
data bases, and there's not going to be confusion whenever
given someone who suffers from damage is trying to make a
claim. And so those databases are set.
The models for local area storm surge and wave inundation,
we've advanced those.
And then, as required by the Act, there is also a named
storm event model that we are developing and we'll be
validating soon as well as a database for wind and water. And
so we've made great strides already, and I believe--I have not
reviewed the draft legislation, but I know our support to it
has been such that, if passed, we'll be--we'll already have
results underway to ensure that our data allows the Act to
achieve its effect.
Senator Wicker. Thank you very much.
Now, are there certain words I have to say to close this
hearing out? How long are we supposed to leave the----
Voice. Two weeks for questions.
Senator Wicker. We're going to leave--we're going to allow
members two weeks to submit questions for the record.
And unless my expert staff tells me to say something else,
I think we can----
Voice. ``This hearing is adjourned.''
Senator Wicker. Oh, OK. I'm advised that I should announce
that the hearing is adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:49 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Roger F. Wicker to
RDML Timothy Gallaudet
Question 1. How vital is the U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System
(IOOS) for obtaining accurate forecasts? What is NOAA doing to enhance
IOOS and its observing capacities to improve forecasts for storms?
After a hurricane, does NOAA have the ability to quickly replace lost
or damaged IOOS assets?
Answer. The U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS) is
essential for providing real-time and historic physical oceanographic
data to inform weather forecasts. As a national-regional partnership,
U.S. IOOS works to provide new tools and forecasts to improve safety,
enhance the economy, and protect our environment. Easier and better
access to this information is improving our ability to understand and
predict coastal events--such as storms, wave heights, and sea level
change. For example, U.S. IOOS partners with the National Weather
Service (NWS) to make surface current data from High Frequency radars
accessible through the NWS Advanced Weather Interactive Processing
System (AWIPS) and National Centers for Environmental Prediction data
tanks to inform forecasts.
NOAA enhancing IOOS
With FY18 funding and hurricane supplemental funding, the U.S. IOOS
program is working with NOAA and regional partners to deploy additional
gliders in the Atlantic to improve hurricane forecasting. U.S. IOOS
also is working with the National Data Buoy Center to make glider data
more accessible so that they can be used to validate forecasting
models. Finally, U.S. IOOS is working with Navy to facilitate sharing
glider data from their unclassified deployments around the coastal
United States. This would substantially increase the amount of
subsurface glider data available to the NWS for use in its forecasting
models.
Post-storm recovery
U.S. IOOS constantly monitors observing assets; before storms, to
the extent it is safe to do so during storms, and after storms. The
Regional Associations leverage resources to the greatest extent
possible to maintain the services their stakeholders rely on.
U.S. IOOS is preparing a report to Congress pursuant to Departments
of Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations
Bill, 2018 Senate Report (115-139) accompanying the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2018 (P.L. 115-141) that assesses the regional
spending practices for resources that became damaged or unworkable, as
a result of hurricanes of other significant storms, using a cost-
benefit analysis. This report will provide a better understanding of
the U.S. IOOS regional component's contribution, laying out the value
chain of observations in storm forecasting, providing an analysis of
asset maintenance/protection practices across the U.S. IOOS regions and
examples of how the Nation benefits by this information.
Question 2. With an authorizing provision enacted in the FY18
budget along with appropriations to support it, what is NOAA's strategy
for recapitalizing and acquiring a backup Hurricane Hunter aircraft, as
per the Congressional intent?
Answer. NOAA is developing a plan to acquire an aircraft to
supplement our current hurricane surveillance capabilities. Upon
approval of that plan, NOAA will follow the Federal acquisition process
to acquire a new high-altitude aircraft to meet the requirements of the
Weather Research and Forecasting Innovation Act of 2017.
Question 3. How important is the need for more research using
supercomputing for protecting our coastal communities and improving our
future storm resiliency, and how important are university partnerships
for advancing this technology and creating new developments?
Answer. NOAA relies on High Performance Computing (HPC) to meet its
mission and drives its innovation. NOAA's work is highly sophisticated
and resource-intensive because it includes the complex interactions of
the atmosphere, ocean, land surface, cryosphere, chemically active
atmospheric constituents, biogeochemical cycles on land and in the
ocean, and terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems. The applications must
address local to global spatial scales and timescales from seconds to
centuries.
NOAA's mission requirements will continue to require additional HPC
research and capacity. Higher resolution and more complex models that
capture the realism of the Earth System combined with the use of
ensembles (a set of computer models working together) will require
significantly enhanced HPC capabilities. These capabilities will also
require new approaches in data management, transmission, and storage.
University partnerships have proven valuable to NOAA in the past as
a source of HPC innovation and skill. NOAA received $15 million above
the President's budget request for HPC resources in FY18. NOAA will
make those funds available to university partners through a follow-on
grant to the Northern Gulf Institute (NGI) in Mississippi. This will
provide HPC capacity to run larger, more complex, and more detailed
environmental models, while advancing the historical and ongoing
relationships between NGI scientists and personnel in NOAA Labs and
other Cooperative Institutes.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Dan Sullivan to
RDML Timothy Gallaudet
Question 1. Is NWS going to stop reporting the weather via weather
radio?
Answer. The NWS has no plans to stop any NOAA Weather Radio All-
Hazards (NWR) broadcasts, which provides Very High Frequency broadcasts
to Alaskan communities. These broadcasts will continue to provide
continuous 24x7 forecasts, warnings, and observations. In October 2017,
two additional transmitters were installed, in partnership with U.S.
Coast Guard (USCG), for expanded NWR coverage of the Duffield Peninsula
and Middle Cape in Alaska. However, the NWS did stop providing High
Frequency broadcasts in November 2017 because this service was
redundant to the service already provided by the USCG. The USCG
broadcasts NWS weather information on High Frequency radio to meet the
United States' obligation under the Safety of Life at Sea Convention.
Question 2. If so, what is the rationale associated with this
decision, and what will replace this service? Does this decision take
into account that in remote and rural areas of Alaska--where many
Alaskans live and subsistence hunt--there is no access to broadband and
alternative sources of weather information, and residents depend on the
weather reports to know when it is safe to travel?
Answer. The NWS will continue to provide weather information via
the NWR, which provides Very High Frequency broadcasts to Alaskan
communities. As stated above, the NWS did stop providing High Frequency
radio broadcasts in November 2017 because it was a redundant service
duplicating the High Frequency broadcasts from the USCG.
Question 3. My office understands that NWS removed all of the
associated equipment for weather radio broadcasts in the Fall of 2017.
What is the status of these radio reports and the capability for the
reports to be reinstated?
Answer. There have been no removals of NWR transmitter sites in
Alaska. As stated above, there have been two additional NWR sites
added, in partnership with USCG, for expanded coverage of the Duffield
Peninsula and Middle Cape. There is a total of 52 NWR transmitters in
Alaska. The equipment in question serves High Frequency weather
broadcasts. The NWS High Frequency broadcast was a redundant service
duplicating the High Frequency broadcasts from the USCG.
Question 4. Does the National Weather Service plan on consolidating
its Tsunami Warning Centers in Hawaii and Alaska? If so, where and how
would this occur?
Answer. The NWS does not plan to consolidate the Tsunami Warning
Centers in FY18, in accordance with Congressional direction. The
President's FY19 Budget prioritizes rebuilding the military and making
critical investments in the Nation's security. It also identifies
savings and efficiencies needed to keep the Nation on a responsible
fiscal path. To meet these goals, some difficult decisions needed to be
made, including a reduction to the Tsunami Warning Program. However,
NOAA would continue to fund critical tsunami program components to
ensure high-quality tsunami watches, warnings, and advisories. Should
the FY19 proposal be approved, NOAA would seek to merge the Tsunami
Warning Centers or co-locate them with other institutions/centers.
Question 5. Alaska has very localized weather systems. How does an
auto-launcher, or remotely monitored video device effect NWS' ability
to deliver accurate, up-to-date weather information for all rural
Alaskans? How does this benefit an Alaskan bush pilot's ability to get
critically important, area accurate weather information when flying
into a remote airport with no one on the ground?
Answer. Autolaunchers will not degrade NOAA services in Alaska. To
the contrary, autolaunchers would allow NWS to improve our science and
service delivery to the whole state. In fact, autolaunchers are a
proven technology used at more than 70 locations around the world over
the last 10-15 years. It uses the same sensors used in manual launches.
Initial assessments done through a demonstration project in Kodiak and
Fairbanks, Alaska are showing launch success rates on par with manual
launches. If fully implemented, autolaunchers would improve launch
success rates. Harsh conditions and vast distances between sites make
manual radiosonde releases particularly difficult and time-consuming in
Alaska.
Question 6. What is NWS doing to alleviate the 30 percent staffing
shortage in rural Alaska? And is it true that many of these positions
have been downgraded from GS-10 positions to GS-7 thus making it all
the more difficult to attract applicants to these rural areas?
Answer. As of June 4, 2018, there were eight Weather Service
Offices (WSO) across rural Alaska with staffing deficiencies (i.e.,
offices with empty billets that the region does not have sufficient
personnel available to temporarily detail qualified employees into).
Assuming no additional attrition occurs prior to summer's end, staffing
deficiencies at each of the eight WSOs will be resolved via a
combination of hiring actions and the demonstration project automation
of weather balloon launches at five of the 11 WSO locations. Automation
of weather balloon launches would allow for the reallocation of mobile
meteorological technicians that were hired explicitly to allow the NWS
to fill staffing gaps frequently experienced in rural Alaska.
Reallocation would provide greater opportunities for these employees
and allow them to be employed to provide enhanced services to customers
in Alaska.
Due to advances in technology and science, the major duties and
responsibilities at rural Alaska WSO locations have changed
dramatically over the past five years. As a result, NOAA Workforce
Management reclassified WSO positions to appropriately reflect current
duties and responsibilities. For Meteorological Technicians hired after
May 2015, NOAA Workforce Management reduced the grade of those
positions from GS-10 to GS-7 pay plus Cost-of-Living Adjustment and
Locality Pay.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Nelson to
RDML Timothy Gallaudet
Forecasting Hurricanes
Significant advances in hurricane forecasting in recent decades
allowed for a state of emergency to be declared in Florida a record six
days before landfall of Hurricane Irma. But accurately forecasting
hurricane intensity remains a challenge. One of my priorities, along
with Senator Rubio, in the 2017 Weather Act was to direct NOAA to
improve hurricane forecasting including the prediction of rapid
intensification and track of hurricanes.
Question 1. How is the NOAA budget reflective of the need to
improve hurricane tracking and intensity forecasts? Can you
specifically give us an update on progress regarding breakthrough
hurricane tracking technologies like Airborne Phased Array Radar
(APAR), and is it possible to find more resources in the future to
support this critical initiative?
Answer. The President's FY 2019 budget request prioritizes reducing
the impacts of extreme weather and water events. This budget includes
providing the observational infrastructure and personnel to develop
timely and accurate weather forecasts. The budget would also invest
more than $1.1 billion in weather forecasting capabilities, including
an increase to the Advanced Weather Interactive Processing System,
which is the cornerstone of our field operations at the National
Weather Service. Finally, this budget would invest $878 million in our
polar orbiting satellites, and $408 million in our geostationary
weather satellites that are essential for our weather forecasts and
warnings. Furthermore, using FY 2018 Supplemental Appropriations for
Disaster Relief, NOAA will support activities to move toward meeting
the goals of the next generation Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program
(HFIP).
In FY18 and FY19 NOAA will continue to partner with the National
Science Foundation to advance the understanding of high-impact weather
events by supporting the development of an Airborne Phased Array Radar
(APAR). APAR is being developed to study weather and related hazards,
especially over rugged terrain or the open ocean, where ground-based
radars can have major limitations. Because APAR will gather much-
improved observations of dynamics and microphysics from within storms,
its development holds the potential to make significant improvements in
understanding, tracking, and forecasting many types of high impact
weather. The development of this technology is supported jointly
through NSF base funding and NOAA grant funding provided to the
National Center for Atmospheric Research Earth Observing Laboratory.
The currently funded APAR project has focused on critical tasks that
will have major positive impacts on clarifying radar system design and
reducing key risk factors already identified in the development. One
significant deliverable will be the design and implementation of the
64-element Line Replaceable Units (LRUs) demonstrator that will serve
as the heart of the eventual fast scanning radar array. Given the
unique operating environment, another key deliverable is the suite of
studies that will assess the vibrations that the APAR will be subjected
to in flight on the C-130 aircraft.
Question 2. The Weather Act of 2017 also contained an April 18,
2018 deadline for NOAA to submit a plan to implement the Hurricane
Forecast Improvement Program. Will NOAA meet that deadline?
Answer. The Weather Act requires development of a project plan for
the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program (HFIP), with focus on
improving prediction of rapid intensification and track of hurricanes,
forecast and communication of storm surges, and incorporating risk
communication research. NOAA did not meet the deadline, but the plan
has been drafted and is in the clearance process. Extensive planning
and coordination with the HFIP community was conducted to update the
program plan, while remaining consistent with goals outlined in
previously developed HFIP plan. A preliminary strategic plan was shared
at the Annual HFIP Community Workshop in November 2017. Community
feedback was collected through December 2017.
Hurricane Hunter
I helped secure a requirement in the Weather Act that NOAA maintain
reliable backup capabilities for its Hurricane Hunters--both the P3 and
the jet. NOAA didn't do that last year, and the aging Gulfstream was
frighteningly grounded for emergency repairs on several occasions. So I
worked to secure $133 million for aircraft recapitalization in the FY
18 omnibus spending bill, including $121 million to acquire a
replacement and backup for NOAA's aging Gulfstream-IV hurricane hunter
jet, which is over 20 years old.
Question 3. How will having two hurricane hunter jets improve
forecasting capabilities?
Answer. Two Hurricane Hunter jets provide redundancy and
reliability necessary to ensure critical hurricane data collection and
mission accomplishment. Pending the availability of funding for
operating and maintaining the second hurricane hunter jet, two high
altitude jet aircraft could also enable NOAA to increase the sampling
of storms both temporally and spatially, leading to improved track and
intensity forecasts.
GPRSO Gap
At this past year's American Meteorological Society meeting in
Austin, TX, the head of the NOAA satellites office, Dr. Stephen Volz,
told colleagues that private sector GPS Radio Occultation data was not
of sufficient quality to go into NOAA's weather models. He said this
after he had cancelled NOAA's participation in the deployment of the
polar constellation that would have provided data over the United
States--called COSMIC 2B. He was then asked what NOAA's plan was to
address the ``GPSRO gap,'' to which he had no answer. And the Weather
Act required NOAA to complete this important mission.
Question 4. Does NOAA have a plan to close the GPSRO gap and if
not, when will you have a plan?
Answer. NOAA is actively working with its interagency partners, the
international community, and the commercial sector to source radio
occultation (RO) data sets needed to meet the National Weather Service
numerical weather prediction modelling requirements. Furthermore, NOAA
is also assessing the feasibility of RO payloads as part of future NOAA
satellite constellations.
Weather Forecasting
The Weather Act is also intended to help restore and maintain U.S.
leadership in numerical weather prediction and forecasting. But in 2017
the U.S. model did not fare as well against the European model in
predicting Irma's track.
Question 5. What areas will you be focusing on in this regard when
it comes to improving hurricane prediction? Are you considering re-
organizing NOAA research's approach and bringing in more extramural
partners to improve hurricane forecasts by creating a ``European-like''
approach?
Answer. NOAA is implementing the Next Generation Global Prediction
System (NGGPS), based on the finite volume cubed sphere dynamical core
(FV3), which was developed at NOAA's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory and selected via open competition. The FV3 is designed to
upgrade the current operational Global Forecast System (GFS) to run as
a unified, fully-coupled system in NOAA's Environmental Modeling System
infrastructure. With this decision, NOAA has changed the way it
develops and improves the weather forecasting computer models by
actively involving not only NOAA research efforts, but leveraging the
full research community--other Federal agencies, universities, and the
private sector, in building the Unified Forecast System under NGGPS.
Experimental runs with a new version of the GFS developed under this
program using FV3 dynamic core have been promising, and provided track
forecasts for Hurricane Maria that performed better than the European
model. NOAA will continue to improve the representation of physical
processes in the model as well as operational data assimilation and
data processing system to provide more quality controlled observations
to be used by the forecast models. We believe this approach will lead
to further integration of extramural research partners' efforts.
The Weather Act of 2017 also directs the NWS to improve risk
communication research to create more effective watch and warning
products.
Question 6. Has the National Weather Service provided improved
watch and warning products, and how will these products be used in the
upcoming hurricane season?
Answer. NWS continues to work with social, behavioral and economic
scientists to refine our communication approach for all NWS products.
For the hurricane program, there are new operational products that
directly address improved communication of the storm surge threat.
These products include the Potential Storm Surge Flooding map and the
Storm Surge Watch and Warning products. These products help to more
effectively communicate the potential impact from storm surge, and we
believe had a very positive impact on reducing the loss of life during
both the 2017 hurricane season as well as the ongoing 2018 hurricane
season. By request, NWS provided an update briefing on our work in this
area to Committee staff on June 27. We will continue to keep the
Committee updated as we implement these provisions of the Weather Act.
Public Consumption of Warnings
Research by Baker and Lindell has shown that most people get their
news about hurricanes and other weather emergencies from local news
sources as opposed to national services like the NWS.
Question 7. What is NOAA doing to work with local meteorologists
and emergency officials to ensure accurate and timely warnings be
issued?
Answer. The NWS provides test guidance and participates in numerous
state hurricane table top exercises annually. These exercises are
important training for decision makers and provide them a preview of
improvements to NWS tropical products and services for the upcoming
hurricane season. The NWS was also engaged in the planning and
execution of the FEMA National Level Exercise which was focused on a
tropical cyclone landfall scenario for 2018.
In addition, as codified in the Weather Act, there are Warning
Coordination Meteorologists in every NWS Weather Forecast Office. These
individuals reach out to the local media and emergency managers to
improve message communication. Building these relationships is key to
the successful communication of potentially life-saving watches and
warnings.
National Weather Service
The dedicated employees of the National Weather Service provided
quality forecasts and decision support services during the hurricanes
and wildfires of 2017. And yet, the Administration's Fiscal Year 2019
Budget dangerously proposes slashing positions at the agency.
Question 8. What is the reasoning behind the proposed cuts to the
NWS staff positions and how does the NWS plan to continue delivering
quality and timely forecasts and services?
Answer. The funding levels provided in the 2018 Consolidated
Appropriations Act did not require cuts in NWS staff positions.
Climate Change and Hurricanes
Science shows there are links between global warming and increased
storm intensity.
Question 9. How does a warming climate affect hurricanes and what
can we expect future seasons to look like?
Answer. There have been several studies and reports that have
assessed the impact of a warming climate on hurricanes, including the
United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Assessment
Report Five (2013) as well as Chapter 9 of the U.S. Global Change
Research Program's Climate Science Special Report (2017).
Florida is ground zero for the impacts of climate change such as
sea level rise.
Question 10. You assured me during your confirmation process that
you would take any effort to politically interfere with NOAA scientists
seriously. Since you've been at NOAA, what steps are you taking to make
sure the employees know they can continue their work free from
censorship or undue pressure?
Answer. I am committed to promoting scientific integrity within
NOAA. NOAA already has a strong Scientific Integrity Policy (NOAA
Administrative Order NAO 202-735D) that provides best practices to
promote a continuing culture of scientific excellence and integrity.
Disaster Supplemental Funds
In October 2017, I joined the Florida delegation in a bipartisan,
bicameral letter to the House and Senate Appropriations Committee
leadership requesting $27 billion in emergency funding following
Hurricanes Irma and Maria to address the significant impact that the
hurricanes left on our Nation. The Supplemental Appropriations for
Disaster Relief and Recovery provided $200 million for fishery
disasters, $18 million for NOAA marine debris removal, and $40 million
for mapping and charting at NOAA.
Question 11. When is NOAA going to release its spend plans for
supplemental appropriations?
Answer. DOC provided the spend plan for supplemental funding within
the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 for Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and
Maria to appropriations staff for non-fishery disaster funding on April
20, 2018, and the fishery disaster allocation plan on May 10, 2018.
Question 12. How is NOAA going to use the $200 million appropriated
for the declared fisheries disasters? More than a dozen declared
fishery disasters qualify for the supplemental funding.
Answer. DOC provided the fishery disaster allocation plan to
appropriations staff on May 10, 2018. The plan includes funding for all
fishery disasters declared by the Secretary of Commerce in calendar
year 2017 and for fishery disasters declared in Florida, U.S. Virgin
Islands, Puerto Rico, and Texas resulting from Hurricanes Maria, Irma,
and Harvey. NOAA is working expeditiously with the constituents to
develop detailed proposals tailored to priority needs in accordance
with the Magnuson Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act and
the Interjurisdictional Fisheries Act.
Question 13. How does NOAA plan to use the disaster supplemental
funds for marine debris removal?
Answer. The NOAA Marine Debris Program will work with partners to
identify marine debris hot-spots through assessment of debris abundance
and distribution using satellite and airborne imagery, sonar, and
partner agency reports. NOAA will use spatial data portals, in person
meetings and local partner engagement to prioritize objects for
removal. NOAA will provide staff support to assist with assessment,
removal, disposal and environmental compliance. NOAA will ensure
agencies and groups conducting removal operations have access to the
most up-to-date locations, descriptions and priority of debris objects.
Finally, to the extent feasible, the NOAA Marine Debris Program will
fund marine debris removal and disposal activities through cooperative
agreements with state partners. These funds will fill an important
niche for restoring economic activities and protecting economically
significant natural resources where other funds, such as FEMA disaster
assistance, have not been available for debris removal.
Coastal Resilience
Florida has natural defenses against hurricane damage, including
mangroves and coral reefs, which significantly reduce storm surge and
wave action from hurricanes. Florida has the third largest barrier reef
in the world, but it is facing significant threats: warming waters,
bleaching, climate change, and coral disease.
Question 14. How can NOAA help to build resiliency of natural
systems like beaches, coral reefs, and mangroves as well as coastlines
and coastal communities?
Answer. NOAA is taking a comprehensive approach to strengthen the
Nation's coastal communities, ecosystems, and economies to minimize
current and future impacts from natural hazards. NOAA provides funding
and technical assistance to implement coastal resilience and habitat
restoration projects that reduce the vulnerability of coastal
communities and infrastructure from the impacts of extreme weather
events, climate hazards, and changing ocean conditions. NOAA helps
identify sites where restoration of coral reef, mangroves, beaches, and
marshes can be successful and where options that integrate hybrid
natural and build infrastructure may be required in order to offer
protection. NOAA also offers opportunities for planners and decision-
makers to connect with natural infrastructure experts, learn about
different types of natural infrastructure projects Finally, NOAA
supports state planning, policies, and trainings to minimize risks from
coastal hazards such as storms, flooding, erosion, and sea level rise.
For example, through the Digital Coast, users have access to a range of
data and decision-support tools, such as the Coastal Flood Exposure
Mapper and the Sea Level Rise Viewer, and trainings, such as those
focused on adaptation planning.
Proposed Offshore Oil Drilling
As you know, the Gulf Coast of Florida is off limits to oil
drilling by law. And there are good reasons not to drill in the Florida
Straits and the Atlantic Coast, too. You've got the Florida Keys
National Marine Sanctuary, NASA launches, DOD launches, threatened and
endangered corals, manatees, and sea turtles, not to mention the
calving grounds of the critically endangered North Atlantic Right
Whale.
Question 15. Can I have your word that you will act in the best
interest of the resources in NOAA's trust in considering proposals by
this Administration to ease restrictions on offshore drilling?
Answer. Our country has a strong record of facilitating offshore
energy development while ensuring sustainable populations of marine
life. I assure you that NOAA will continue to fulfill its legal
obligations with respect to all its statutory authorities while
continuing to facilitate offshore energy development and maintain
marine life.
El Faro Recommendations
Both the Coast Guard and the National Transportation Safety Board
have made a number of recommendations to address the El Faro cargo
ship, which sunk after traveling into the path of Hurricane Joaquin.
Question 16. From the recommendations, what do you believe are the
most important issues to address?
Answer. The NWS is working closely with the National Transportation
Safety Board (NTSB) and the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) on the safety
recommendations in the aftermath of the El Faro incident. NWS staff met
with NTSB principals on May 24, 2018, and discussed some of the most
important safety improvements which include increasing the number of
hurricane advisories when forecasts significantly deviate from
predicted track or intensity--and to make these products available via
satellite communications for ocean going vessels. Status on the
progress on recommendations can be found at the NTSB site: https://
www.ntsb.gov/investigations/Pages/2015_elfaro_jax.aspx.
Question 17. How can we make sure that all vessels are getting the
most up-to-date weather information and have the best safety
equipment--like enclosed lifeboats--onboard?
Answer. International standards and requirements exist for
shipboard communications equipment \1\ to ensure the receipt of weather
warning and forecast text bulletins from authoritative sources. The NWS
contributes to maritime safety by providing the authoritative weather
warnings and forecasts for the western North Atlantic and eastern and
central North Pacific. Text warning bulletins are supplemented with
graphical and digital products. In addition to preparing graphical
charts for USCG weather radiofacsimile broadcasts, NOAA is working with
international partners to develop the standards for the display of
critical weather information in shipboard Electronic Chart Display and
Information System (ECDIS).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) Chapter IV, Regulation 7--Radio
equipment: General--.4 and .5 and SOLAS Chapter V, Regulation 5--
Meteorological Services and Warnings 2.1 and 2.2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Timing to Complete Recommendations
The NTSB made dozens of recommendations to the Coast Guard and
NOAA.
Question 18. Which of those recommendations have been completed?
What is your plan to make sure all of the recommendations are
completed?
Answer. NWS staff met with the NTSB El Faro investigation team at
NTSB HQ on May 24, 2018. All of the El Faro safety recommendations were
reviewed. Progress on all recommendations can be viewed at https://
www.ntsb.gov/investigations/Pages/2015_elfaro_jax.aspx.
NWS has concurred and is implementing recommendations M-17-12, 13,
16 and 52. The remainder of the recommendations will be implemented
during the 2018 and 2019 hurricane seasons. One exception includes M-
17-008 and 009, which involves improving model predictions of hurricane
intensity and track. These NTSB recommendations have been specifically
included in the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Project implementation
plan.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Blumenthal to
RDML Timothy Gallaudet
As you know, on March 23, 2018, the President signed into law
omnibus appropriations legislation for Fiscal Year 2018, securing vital
funding for NOAA, U.S. Coast Guard, and NTSB.
Reports have shown President Trump and congressional leaders have
discussed legislation to give rescission authority to the president for
investments included in the omnibus. These rescissions would create
tremendous financial uncertainty for programs dedicated for
safeguarding our coasts, bodies of water, and transportation systems.
Even the threat of rescissions are enough to disrupt efforts to carry
out Agency directives.
The power to propose budget rescissions is essentially the power to
conduct line-item vetoes, an act deemed unconstitutional in 1998.
Attempting a do-over on the Fiscal Year 2018 omnibus should not be
prioritized over more pressing matters.
Question 1. Has the White House contacted you about a rescission
package?
Answer. The Administration continues to explore its rescissions
authority under the Impoundment Control Act of 1974 (ICA) to see what
can be done to control unnecessary and wasteful spending. NOAA has been
informed by the Office of Management and Budget that a rescission
package could include NOAA programs.
Question 2. Has anyone at your Agency contemplated what a
rescission would look like for your Agency?
Answer. The impacts of a rescission would be highly variable
depending on the programs and expiration dates of the affected funds.
NOAA is critical in the response and recovery of hurricane
disasters. Yet, the President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget proposes to cut
NOAA funding by more than one billion dollars. Two important programs
on the chopping block include grants for coastal zone management and
grants for coastal resilience, both critical for development of
adaptation strategies and bolstering hurricane resiliency.
Additional cuts include programs that support forecasting and
observation technology. Cuts to these programs will decrease accuracy
of hurricane path prediction and potential flooding impacts caused by
storm surge.
In other words, it will now be even harder to predict and protect
the Nation from catastrophic hurricane damage.
There has been great advancement in the technology used in
predicting and tracking hurricanes, and I am concerned that these cuts
may halt additional progress.
Question 3. Would you agree that bad forecasts cost us far more
than investments these programs require?
Answer. NOAA does not provide ``bad'' forecasts. The NWS uses the
best, most actionable data and information to generate the most
accurate, consistent weather forecasts possible. The President's FY
2019 Budget provided adequate funding to ensure that that the NWS'
forecasts would not be impacted and the 2018 Consolidated
Appropriations Act provided further funding to ensure the continued
excellence of NWS forecasts.
Question 4. Do these proposed cuts harm the Nation's ability to be
hurricane-ready?
Answer. There are many aspects for the public to be hurricane-
ready. Each year NOAA conducts extensive public outreach and education
to ensure that people are aware of the potential impact of hurricanes
and tropical systems and that they know how to respond and take action,
should a storm be headed their way. We do not expect an impact to this
effort.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Edward Markey to
RDML Timothy Gallaudet
According to hazard mitigation experts, every single dollar
invested in pre-disaster resilience saves $4 in rebuilding costs in the
aftermath of a storm. It is clear that we need to rebuild smarter,
stronger, and better equipped to adapt to the demands of a changing
climate.
Question 1. How can NOAA help local and state planners invest in
pre-disaster resilience?
Answer. NOAA appropriations support several programs to assist
local and state planners with pre-disaster planning. For example, NOAA
provides comprehensive evaluation mapping data, observations, modeling,
and prediction services for communities to conduct pre-disaster
planning. By maintaining these historical data sets, NOAA is able to
advise planners about environmental trends and impacts of hazard
mitigation efforts. Through the NOAA's Digital Coast, planners have
access to a range of data and decision-support tools, such as the
Coastal Flood Exposure Mapper which creates user-defined maps to show
the people, places and natural resources exposed to coastal flooding,
and Coastal County Snapshots, which provide easy to understand charts
and graphs to understand flood exposure at the county level.
Question 2. Could an interagency oversight council help NOAA and
the Federal government be more prepared and resilient for the next
natural disaster? How?
Answer. The National Planning Frameworks under FEMA's National
Preparedness System are existing interagency forums to help NOAA and
the Federal government be more prepared and resilient for the next
natural disaster. Specifically, the National Mitigation Framework and
National Disaster Recovery Framework establish a common platform and
forum for federal, state, and local agencies, plus private sector
organizations, to coordinate delivery of mitigation and recovery
capabilities.
Question 3. What percentage of the Promote and Develop Fisheries
Product Account was directed towards the Operations, Research and
Facilities Account? Please describe how these monies are used, and
include a list of all specific programs and amounts allocated to each.
Answer. The Congressionally directed $144 million transfer to the
Operations, Research, and Facilities (ORF) account is approximately 93
percent of the $155 million available from the transfer from the
Department of Agriculture into the NOAA Promote and Develop Fisheries
Account (P&D). NOAA will use the funds transferred to ORF in accordance
with the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018 (Public Law 115-141)
language:
``Provided further, that in addition, $144,000,000 shall be
derived by transfer from the fund entitled ``Promote and
Develop Fishery Products and Research Pertaining to American
Fisheries,'' which shall only be used for fishery activities
related to the Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant Program, Cooperative
Research, Annual Stock Assessments, Survey and Monitoring
Projects, Interjurisdictional Fisheries Grants, and Fish
Information Networks. . .''
NMFS will use $141.0 million to support Fisheries Data Collections,
Surveys, and Assessments. Funding within this budget line includes
Expand Annual Stock Assessments, Fisheries Statistics, Fish Information
Networks, Survey and Monitoring Projects, and Cooperative Research.
Funds support data collection, data management, and fisheries stock
assessment production. NMFS will use $3.0 million for
Interjurisdictional Fisheries Grants, a formula-based financial
assistance program provided to coastal states to support science and
management of interjurisdictional fisheries resources.
Question 4. What percentage of the Promote and Develop Fisheries
Product Account was directed towards the Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant
Program?
Answer. After the Congressionally directed $144 million is
transferred to the Operations, Research and Facilities Account, the
remaining funds of approximately $10.7 million, will be available for
the Saltonstall-Kennedy Grant Program.
______
Response to Written Questions Submitted by Hon. Catherine Cortez Masto
to RDML Timothy Gallaudet
Issues with Health Care Ships
After the devastation on Puerto Rico, there were many news reports
of a Navy medical ship, known as the USNS Comfort, sitting on the
island ready to help but only treating a small number of patients. I
actually had heard some concern from Nevadans about friends not being
able to reach the ship and access the medical care it provided.
Question 1. Can you give examples of any similar experiences you
had during your time at the Navy and what can be done to overcome them?
Answer. I am not familiar with the circumstances regarding the USNS
Comfort off of Puerto Rico, and defer to the U.S. Navy.
Question 2. How is medical care coordinated with local and state
agencies?
Answer. I am not familiar with the circumstances regarding the USNS
Comfort off of Puerto Rico, and defer to the U.S. Navy.
New Technology in Response and Preparation
Some really exciting things are happening in Nevada with drones and
the state is quickly emerging as a leader in this technology. The
Nevada Institute for Autonomous Systems is working with UAV companies
to develop new applications for these exciting machines. These have a
number of potentially lifesaving applications during disasters as well,
including being used to help prepare for and respond to hurricanes.
Question 3. Is NOAA using UAV technology in any way for disaster
response and if so, how?
Answer. NOAA is using unmanned aircraft in a variety of ways
related to disaster response, including post-storm surveys and oil
spill response.
The National Weather Service (NWS) is exploring the utility of
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) for post-severe storm damage surveys to
determine cause, intensity, and extent. Rapidly accessible aerial
imagery has been shown to increase survey accuracy and save on time,
especially when coordinated with local emergency management partners.
This innovative data acquisition strategy supports NOAA's Weather-Ready
Nation and is readily applicable to other regional hazards, such as
flooding, wildfire burn scar assessment, oil spill response, ice jam
detection, and many others.
NOAA's UAS Program and U.S. Coast Guard Research and Development
Center teamed up to evaluate several airborne systems as part of an
Arctic Technology Evaluation conducted during the warm seasons of 2013-
2016. NOAA's Office of National Marine Sanctuaries, the Office of
Response and Restoration, and the UAS Program have continued inter-
agency research, development and operational assessments for UAS oil
spill testing with industry partners, including this month in the Gulf
of Mexico with Chevron. UAS deployment evaluations have focused on
increased situational awareness in hard to access areas, target
identification, and near real time image processing to assist in
response operations.
NOAA is investigating use of UAS for oil slick identification, oil
thickness measurements, and for obtaining aerial imagery for emergency
response. Most promising has been the ability to collect and process
georeferenced imagery of a 30-minute flight onsite within hours. This
capability would be immensely useful for response and assessment
requirements for tornadoes, minor flooding events, minor hazmat events,
focused areas of a larger event (critical infrastructure, dams,
bridges, etc.), and clearing roadways.
Question 4. How is drone technology advancing to help predict the
impact of storms and identify vulnerabilities?
Answer. NOAA is investigating how data obtained with unmanned
systems can be used to better predict storms and their impacts. For
example: NOAA's National Severe Storms Laboratory has been
investigating the utility of small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) to
obtain meteorological observations in the lower atmosphere for enhanced
operational forecasting of severe weather. Additionally, this group
also seeks to address a number of issues concerning deployment
logistics, utilization, and coordination of multiple drones that might
eventually operate in a semi-autonomous manner. A recent project funded
by the UAS Program showed that UASs launched frequently prior to severe
storm development can obtain highly accurate profiles and horizontal
transects of temperature, moisture, and wind speed/direction. Initial
results look promising, yet much work remains to retrieve some
observations, which will require enhanced coordination with the Federal
Aviation Administration and advanced testing and integration of Sense
and Avoid safety mitigation applications during UAS operations.
Climate Change
Western Regional Climate Center in Reno, Nevada, is one of six
regional climate centers in the United States that delivers high-
quality climate data services in conjunction with NOAA and national
climate and weather partners. We don't deal with hurricanes but climate
change impacts us through fires and droughts.
Question 5. How well is it understood from current scientific
research the potential future changes in hurricane frequency and
intensity?
Answer. There have been several studies and reports that have
assessed the impact of a warming climate on hurricanes, including the
United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Assessment
Report Five (2013), as well as Chapter 9 of the U.S. Global Change
Research Program's Climate Science Special Report (2017).
Question 6. Storms can impact roads and other modes of
transportation, how well can we predict where vulnerabilities are with
respect to transportation?
Answer. It is outside the scope of NOAA's mission to predict
vulnerabilities in transportation infrastructure. However, NOAA
contributes to a variety of tools and resources that can aid other
Federal agencies, state and local governments, and private parties in
understanding vulnerabilities and planning for the future. The NWS
provides weather, hydrologic, and climate forecasts and warnings that
support those entities in charge of infrastructure, such as
transportation, and for them to make informed decisions. For example,
the NWS routinely provides impact-based decision support services for
hazardous weather events to state Departments of Transportation (DOTs).
It also has partnered with the Federal Highway Administration on a
project called Pathfinder. Pathfinder is a collaborative effort between
the NWS, state DOTs, and state DOTs' support contractors who provide
road weather information to share and translate weather forecasts into
consistent transportation impact statements for the public.
There are also a variety of tools available to help with
transportation impact analysis at www.data.gov. NOAA programs such as
the Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments program conduct
targeted research and collaborate with regional stakeholders to
understand current and future risk to infrastructure, including
transportation networks. High profile examples of this NOAA-supported
research include coastal flood vulnerability assessments for the Port
of Houston, Texas, and the City of Beaufort, South Carolina. NOAA-
supported research is underway in the Southwest on the relationship
between drought, monsoon season winds, and dust storms and impacts
particularly for the trucking industry in areas frequented for freight
transportation.
In another example, NOAA's National Integrated Drought Information
Service supports research focused on reliably transporting the
approximately 650 million tons of cargo valued at over $75 billion in
U.S. inland waterways annually. The researchers are using the lens of
drought and its impact on moving agricultural goods along the
Mississippi River.
Question 7. How well can we predict vulnerabilities for ``cascading
failures,'' when modes of transportation are disrupted, causing
responders and victims to be stranded?
Answer. It is outside the scope of NOAA's mission to predict
vulnerabilities in transportation infrastructure. The NWS does provide
weather, hydrologic, and climate forecasts and warnings that support
those entities in charge of infrastructure, such as transportation, and
for them to make informed decisions.
Telecommunication Systems
As you know Puerto Rico's power grid and communications systems
were completely devastated by the storms there. In the modern world,
almost everyone is completely reliant on these networks for
communication with loved ones and to access government services. One of
the challenges is rebuilding this infrastructure in the aftermath of a
storm, because you essentially have to start from scratch. We have
testing being done in Nevada on projects to extend telecommunication
service via launching balloons, including in Puerto Rico.
Question 8. How well can we predict vulnerabilities in our
telecommunications systems?
Answer. It is outside the scope of NOAA's mission to predict
vulnerabilities in telecommunications systems. However, the NWS
provides weather, hydrologic, and climate forecasts and warnings that
support those entities in charge of infrastructure like
telecommunications systems. NWS does plan for any telecommunications
outages by implementing mitigating solutions such as geographically and
physically diverse circuits for high impact sites.
______
Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. Maggie Hassan to
RDML Timothy Gallaudet
Question. Will you commit to advocating for NOAA's budget to
continue to cover cost of at-sea monitors?
Answer. NOAA recognizes that an effective and affordable monitoring
program is essential to the success and sustainability of the New
England groundfish fishery, and we appreciate Congress' funding support
in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018. NOAA is funding at-sea
monitoring costs for the groundfish fishery for the 2018 fishing
season. We will continue to keep Congress apprised of monitoring needs
for the 2019 fishing season, and anticipate supporting these costs.
______
Response to Written Question Submitted by Hon. John Thune to
Hon. T. Bella Dinh-Zarr
Question. One of your recommendations from the Board's report on El
Faro is for the American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) to enhance their
training of surveyors to ensure they are properly qualified and
supported to perform effective, accurate, and transparent vessel
surveys, meeting all statutory and regulatory requirements.
a. Do the Board's finding support that ABS could have conducted
more thorough inspections and surveys of vessels?
Answer. Yes. The NTSB's final report recommended a complete review
of the Alternate Compliance Program (ACP) program to assess the
adequacy and effectiveness of the program, and that the American Bureau
of Shipping (ABS) should enhance its training for their surveyors to
ensure that they are properly qualified and supported to perform
effective, accurate, and transparent vessel surveys, meeting all
statutory and regulatory requirements.
b. What role did ABS's failure to properly assess the vessel's
stability booklet play in the safety of the El Faro?
Answer. The stability booklet carried on El Faro at the time of the
accident was dated February 14, 2007 and was approved by ABS on behalf
of the Coast Guard on May 31, 2007. ABS representatives stated that
they reviewed and approved the stability booklet based on guidance in
the Coast Guard regulations and navigation and vessel inspection
circular (NVIC) 3-89, but that the items listed in the Code of Federal
Regulations directing the development of stability books (46 CFR
170.110) were considerations only and not required to be included in
the booklet.
As stated in NTSB's final report, a more comprehensive stability
booklet may have changed the course of events. El Faro's stability
booklet did not contain any information on down flooding angles and
lacked information of the effects of wind-driven heel. If the vessel's
stability booklet had contained this specific information the captain
might not have taken the route that brought him close to strong winds
or taken the actions that placed the vessel in danger.
[all]
This page intentionally left blank.