- PROTECTING WORKERS' RIGHT TO ORGANIZE: THE NEED FOR LABOR LAW REFORM
[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
PROTECTING WORKERS' RIGHT TO ORGANIZE:
THE NEED FOR LABOR LAW REFORM
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
__________
HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, MARCH 26, 2019
__________
Serial No. 116-11
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: https://edlabor.house.gov
_________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
36-586 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR
ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman
Susan A. Davis, California
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina,
Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona
Ranking Member
Joe Courtney, Connecticut
David P. Roe, Tennessee
Marcia L. Fudge, Ohio
Glenn Thompson, Pennsylvania
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tim Walberg, Michigan
Northern Mariana Islands
Brett Guthrie, Kentucky
Frederica S. Wilson, Florida
Bradley Byrne, Alabama
Suzanne Bonamici, Oregon
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark Takano, California
Elise M. Stefanik, New York
Alma S. Adams, North Carolina
Rick W. Allen, Georgia
Mark DeSaulnier, California
Francis Rooney, Florida
Donald Norcross, New Jersey
Lloyd Smucker, Pennsylvania
Pramila Jayapal, Washington
Jim Banks, Indiana
Joseph D. Morelle, New York
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania
James Comer, Kentucky
Josh Harder, California
Ben Cline, Virginia
Lucy McBath, Georgia
Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Kim Schrier, Washington
Van Taylor, Texas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Steve Watkins, Kansas
Jahana Hayes, Connecticut
Ron Wright, Texas
Donna E. Shalala, Florida
Daniel Meuser, Pennsylvania
Andy Levin, Michigan*
William R. Timmons, IV, South
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota
Carolina
David J. Trone, Maryland
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
Susie Lee, Nevada
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts
Joaquin Castro, Texas
* Vice-Chair
Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EMPLOYMENT, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida, Chairwoman
Donald Norcross, New Jersey
Tim Walberg, Michigan
Joseph D. Morelle, New York
Ranking Member
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania
David P. Roe, Tennessee
Lucy McBath, Georgia
Rick W. Allen, Georgia
Lauren Underwood, Illinois
Francis Rooney, Florida
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
Jim Banks, Indiana
Joe Courtney, Connecticut
Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Marcia L. Fudge, Ohio
Van Taylor, Texas
Josh Harder, California
Steve C. Watkins, Jr., Kansas
Donna E. Shalala, Florida
Ron Wright, Texas
Andy Levin, Michigan
Dan Meuser, Pennsylvania
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts
Dusty Johnson, South Dakota
(VACANT)
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Hearing held on March 26, 2019...................................
1
Statement of Members:
Walberg, Hon. Tim, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor, and Pensions............................
4
Prepared statement of....................................
5
Wilson, Hon. Frederica S., Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions....................
1
Prepared statement of....................................
3
Statement of Witnesses:
Harper, Ms. Cynthia, Englewood, OH...........................
11
Prepared statement of....................................
13
Rosenfeld, Dr. Jake, Ph.D., Associate Professor of Sociology,
Washington University, St. Louis, MO.......................
7
Prepared statement of....................................
9
Taubman, Mr. Glenn M., Staff Attorney National Right to Work
Defense Foundation, Springfield, VA........................
16
Prepared statement of....................................
18
Virk, Ms. Devki K., J.D., Member Bredhoff and Kaiser, PLLC,
Washington, DC.............................................
25
Prepared statement of....................................
27
Additional Submissions:
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
Prepared statement.......................................
72
Chairwoman Wilson:
Letter dated March 25, 2019, from the International Union
of Painters and Allied Trades (IUPAT)..................
66
Prepared statement from Douglas, Bettie..................
75
Prepared statement from Poole, Earvie....................
77
Questions submitted for the record by:
Stevens, Hon. Haley M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Michigan..................................
79
Morelle, Hon. Joseph D., a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York

Rooney, Hon. Francis, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida...................................
83
Responses to questions submitted for the record by:
Ms. Harper...............................................
86
Dr. Rosenfeld............................................
89
Mr. Taubman..............................................
90
PROTECTING WORKERS' RIGHT TO
ORGANIZE: THE NEED FOR LABOR
LAW REFORM
----------
Tuesday, March 26, 2019
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health,
Employment, Labor, and Pensions,
Committee on Education and Labor,
Washington, DC.
----------
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frederica Wilson
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Wilson, Norcross, Morelle, Wild,
McBath, Underwood, Courtney, Fudge, Harder, Shalala, Levin,
Scott, Walberg, Roe, Allen, Banks, Taylor, Watkins, Wright,
Johnson, and Foxx.
Staff present: Tylease Alli, Chief Clerk; Jordan Barab,
Senior Labor Policy Advisor; Nekea Brown, Deputy Clerk; Ilana
Brunner, General Counsel--Health and Labor; Kyle deCant, Labor
Policy Counsel; Emma Eatman, Press Aide; Mishawn Freeman, Staff
Assistant; Sheila Havenner, Director of Information Technology;
Eli Hovland, Staff Assistant; Stephanie Lalle, Deputy
Communications Director; Bertram Lee, Policy Counsel; Richard
Miller, Director of Labor Policy; Max Moore, Office Aide;
Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director; Banyon Vassar, Deputy
Director of Information Technology; Katelyn Walker, Counsel;
Cyrus Artz, Minority Parliamentarian; Marty Boughton, Minority
Press Secretary; Courtney Butcher, Minority Coalitions and
Members Services Coordinator; Akash Chougule, Minority
Professional Staff Member; Rob Green, Minority Director of
Workforce Policy; Hannah Matesic, Minority Director of
Operations; Kelley McNabb, Minority Communications Director;
Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director; Ben Ridder, Minority
Legislative Assistant; Meredith Schellin, Minority Deputy Press
Secretary and Digital Advisor; and Heather Wadyka, Minority
Staff Assistant.
Chairwoman Wilson. The Subcommittee on Health, Employment,
Labor, and Pensions will come to order.
Welcome, everyone. I note that a quorum is present.
The subcommittee is meeting today in a hearing to receive
testimony on ``Protecting Workers' Rights to Organize: the Need
for Labor Law Reform.''
Pursuant to committee rule 7(c), opening statements are
limited to the chair and the ranking member. This allows us to
hear from our witnesses sooner and provides all members with
adequate time to ask questions.
I recognize myself now for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Today's hearing is an important opportunity to examine the
threats to workers' rights and explore proposals that will
improve the quality of life for millions of workers and their
families.
America's unions are engines of economic mobility. For
generations, they have fueled our Nation's prosperity,
protected the health and safety of American workers, and
supported a strong middle class.
Beyond fighting for better wages and benefits, unions
safeguard equal pay for equal work. They advocate well beyond
their membership to ensure that all workers can achieve
economic mobility. As Congress considers measures to close the
wage gap for women and people of color, unions play an
essential role in fostering pay equity.
Strong unions played a central role in building a robust
middle class in this country, and they are essential to
rebuilding it again.
Simply put, if you claim to back the interests of working
people, you must also be pro-union.
The right to join a union is an internationally recognized
human right. Unfortunately, the combination of weak labor laws,
intensification of employer opposition to unions, and
relentless political attacks have driven union membership to
historic lows.
Roughly a third of American workers were in a union in
1956. Today, just 1 in 10 workers is in a union. This shift has
had widespread consequences for working families and the middle
class. I call your attention to the charts.
As union membership decreased from 27.1 percent to 11.1
percent between 1973 and 2015, the share of income going to the
top 10 percent skyrocketed from 31.9 percent to 47.8 percent.
Over the past decades, wages for the typical worker have
stagnated. The link between rising productivity and higher pay
has been broken.
When union membership hovered around 30 percent between the
end of World War II and 1973, wage growth was in lockstep with
increased productivity by over 90 percent. However, between
1973 and 2017, productivity increased by 73 percent, but wages
have only grown by 12.3 percent, adjusting for inflation.
Let me underscore this important point: The decline in
union membership has eroded the link between growing
productivity and rising pay. It has stagnated wages for
American workers.
Inequality and wage stagnation are not natural products of
a functioning economy. They are the result of policy choices
that have stripped workers of the power to stand together and
bargain for fairer wages, benefits, and working conditions.
We have seen this consistently in the Trump
administration's policy decisions as President Trump has sided
with big corporations at the expense of workers and unions.
Under this administration, the National Labor Relations
Board has empowered employers to gerrymander and interfere in
union representation elections, misclassify employees as
contractors to deny them their rights, and retaliate against
workers who exercise their First Amendment rights. This is
simply unacceptable.
That is why during the last Congress, committee Democrats
introduced legislation to ensure that workers have strong
bargaining rights and protections from unscrupulous employers.
This Congress, the committee will continue the effort to
strengthen labor laws so that workers can stand together and
negotiate for a fair return on their work.
Today, we will explore the strengths and weaknesses in the
current State of labor law and identify proposals that hold
employers that violate the law accountable, protect collective
action, and modernize labor laws for a changing economy.
If Congress is truly on the side of American workers, then
we must protect their right to bargain for better wages and
better working conditions. This hearing is an important step
toward that goal.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being with us
today, and I look forward to your testimony to enlighten us.
I will now recognize the distinguished ranking member for
the purpose of making an opening statement.
Ranking Member Walberg.
[The statement of Chairwoman Wilson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Frederica S. Wilson, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions
Today's hearing is an important opportunity to examine the threats
to workers' rights and explore proposals that will improve the quality
of life for millions of workers and their families.
America's unions are engines of economic mobility. For generations,
they have fueled our Nation's prosperity, protected the health and
safety of American workers, and supported a strong middle class.
Beyond fighting for better wages and benefits, unions safeguard
equal pay for equal work. They advocate well beyond their membership to
ensure that all workers can achieve economic mobility. As Congress
considers measures to close the wage gaps for women and people of
color, unions play an essential role in fostering pay equity.
Strong unions played a central role in building a robust middle
class in this country, and they are essential to rebuilding it again.
Simply put, if you claim to back the interests of working people,
you must also be pro-union.
The right to join a union is an internationally recognized human
right. Unfortunately, the combination of weak labor laws,
intensification of employer opposition to unions, and relentless
political attacks have driven union membership to historic lows.
Roughly a third of American workers were in a union in 1956. Today,
just one in 10 workers is in a union. This shift has had widespread
consequences for working families and the middle class. As union
membership decreased from 27.1 percent to 11.1 percent between 1973 and
2015, the share of income going to the top 10 percent skyrocketed from
31.9 percent to 47.8 percent.
Over the past 4 decades, wages for the typical worker have
stagnated. The link between rising productivity and higher pay has been
broken. When union membership hovered around 30 percent between the end
of World War II and 1973, wage growth was in lockstep with increased
productivity by over 90 percent.
However, between 1973 and 2017, productivity increased by 73
percent, but wages have only grown by 12.3 percent, adjusting for
inflation. Let me underscore this important point: the decline in union
membership has eroded the link between growing productivity and rising
pay. It has stagnated wages for American workers. Inequality and wage
stagnation are not natural products of a functioning economy. They are
the result of policy choices that have stripped workers of the power to
stand together and bargain for fairer wages, benefits and working
conditions.
We have seen this consistently in the Trump administration's policy
decisions as President Trump has sided with big corporations at the
expense of workers and unions. Under this administration, the National
Labor Relations Board has empowered employers to:
* Gerrymander and interfere in union representation elections,
* Misclassify employees as contractors to deny them their rights,
and
* Retaliate against workers who exercise their First Amendment
rights.
This is simply unacceptable.
That is why, during the last Congress, Committee Democrats
introduced legislation to ensure that workers have strong bargaining
rights and protections from unscrupulous employers.
This Congress, the Committee will continue the effort to strengthen
labor laws so that workers can stand together and negotiate for a fair
return on their work.
Today we will explore the strengths and weaknesses in the current
State of labor law, and identify proposals that:
* Hold employers that violate the law accountable,
* Protect collective action, and
* Modernize labor laws for a changing economy.
If Congress is truly on the side of American workers, then we must
protect their right to bargain for better wages and better working
conditions.
This hearing is an important step toward that goal.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being with us today and I
look forward to your testimony.
______
Mr. Walberg. I thank the Chairwoman and appreciate the
opportunity to make the statement and be part of this hearing
today.
While we agree that Federal labor law is in need of reform,
the title of today's hearing, with all due respect, is premised
on a fallacy: that workers' right to organize and join a union
is in some way in jeopardy.
Federal law protects workers' rights to unionize, point
blank. Becoming a union member is an important and personal
decision, and Republicans and Democrats alike respect the right
of employees to decide for themselves--to decide for
themselves--whether union membership is right for them.
It is personal for me, too. I grew up in a union household.
My father was a machinist and tool and die maker who spent part
of his working career as a union organizer. When I graduated
from high school, I went to work at the same steel mill on the
south side of Chicago.
It is important that we have a level playing field and
workers receive good pay for a good day's work. But times have
changed since my father was organizing in the workplace.
Since 1983, union membership has steadily fallen from over
20 percent to just 10.5 percent in 2018, and less than 7
percent in the private sector.
Of the workers that are still represented by unions today,
almost none, like me when I was a member of the union, ever
actually voted for the union that represents them. This is
America.
It seems straightforward that the best way to reverse the
downward trend would be through increased transparency and
working to better serve their members. Instead, we have seen
calls for labor laws that would empower union interests and
allow those at the top--at the top--to further consolidate
power.
There is no question that the National Labor Relations Act,
NLRA, and Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, LMRDA,
are in need of targeted reform. However, the answer should not
be to alter these laws in a way that tilts the balance of power
toward special interests at the expense of the hardworking men
and women who drive our economy.
Let's not forget, the last time Democrats held a majority
in the House, they voted to deny workers the right to a secret
ballot in union elections. In 2015, the Obama NLRB implemented
a rule that gives workers as few as 11 days to decide whether
or not to join a union and do the research necessary, for their
best interest.
The Obama board also ruled that employers must hand over
employees'--and get this, none of us like this--hand over
employees' private information, like home addresses, phone
numbers, and work schedules, aiding well-documented efforts to
harass, intimidate, and pressure workers into supporting the
union. Private information.
Workers deserve the right to make free and informed
decisions about joining a union. And reforms to the NLRA and
LMRDA should put workers, not union leaders, first.
That is why Republicans have introduced numerous pieces of
legislation in recent years that would protect and expand
workers' rights within their union, and increase financial
transparency, so workers can see with greater detail how unions
are spending the dues taken from the workers' hard-earned
paychecks.
American workers have greater opportunities today than they
have in decades. Wages are rising. That is a fact. Unemployment
is at near record lows, back to the days that I worked at U.S.
Steel. Millions of jobs have been created since President Trump
took office. There are ``help wanted'' signs everywhere I go
across Michigan.
With so many good-paying jobs waiting to be filled, we need
to develop a skilled work force and equip our people with on-
the-job experience.
As this economy continues to thrive, our focus should be on
expanding pro-growth economic policies that create the best
path forward for union and nonunion workers alike.
And I yield back.
[The statement of Mr. Walberg follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Tim Walberg, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions
Thank you for yielding.
While we agree that Federal labor law is in need of reform, the
title of today's hearing is premised on a fallacy: that workers' right
to organize and join a union is, in some way, in jeopardy. Federal law
protects workers' right to unionize, point blank. Becoming a union
member is an important personal decision and Republicans and Democrats
alike respect the right of employees to decide for themselves whether
union membership is right for them.
It's personal for me, too. I grew up in a union household. My
father was a machinist and tool and die maker who spent part of his
working career as a union organizer. When I graduated from high school,
I went to work at a steel mill on the south side of Chicago. It's
important that we have a level playing field and workers receive good
pay for a good day's work.
But times have changed since my father was organizing his
workplace. Since 1983, union membership has steadily fallen from over
20 percent to just 110.5 percent in 2018, and less than 7 percent in
the private sector. Of the workers that are still represented by unions
today, almost none have ever actually voted for the union that
represents them.
It seems straightforward that the best way to reverse the downward
trend would be through increased transparency and working to better
serve their members. Instead, we've seen calls for labor laws that
would empower union interests and allow those at the top to further
consolidate power.
There's no question that the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA)
and Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) are in need
of targeted reforms. However, the answer should not be to alter these
laws in a way that tilts the balance of power toward special interests
at the expense of the hardworking men and women who drive our economy.
Let's not forget, the last time Democrats held the majority in the
House, they voted to deny workers the right to a secret ballot in union
elections. In 2015, the Obama NLRB implemented a rule that gives
workers as few as 11 days to decide whether or not to join a union. The
Obama Board also ruled that employers must hand over employees' private
information like home addresses, phone numbers, and work schedules,
aiding well-documented efforts to harass, intimidate, and pressure
workers into supporting the union.
Workers deserve the right to make free and informed decisions about
joining a union, and reforms to the NLRA and LMRDA should put workers,
not union leaders, first. That is why Republicans have introduced
numerous pieces of legislation in recent years that would protect and
expand workers' rights within their union and increase financial
transparency, so workers can see with greater detail how unions are
spending the dues taken from workers' hard-earned paychecks.
American workers have greater opportunities today than they have in
decades. Wages are rising, unemployment is at near-record lows, and
millions of jobs have been created since President Trump took office.
There are ``Help Wanted'' signs everywhere I go across Michigan. With
so many good-paying jobs waiting to be filled, we need to develop a
skilled work force and equip our people with on-the-job experience.
As this economy continues to thrive, our focus should be on
expanding pro-growth economic policies that create the best path
forward for union and non-union workers alike.
______
Chairwoman Wilson. Without objection, all other members who
wish to insert written statements into the record may do so by
submitting them to the committee clerk electronically in
Microsoft Word format by 5 p.m. on April 9, 2019.
I will now introduce our witnesses.
Dr. Jake Rosenfeld is an assistant professor at Washington
University in St. Louis, Missouri.
Welcome.
Ms. Cynthia Harper is a lamination specialist, formerly
employed in an automotive glass plant, and she is from
Englewood, Ohio.
Welcome.
Mr. Glenn Taubman is a staff attorney at the National Right
to Work Legal Defense Foundation.
Welcome.
Ms. Devki Virk is a member of the law firm Bredhoff &
Kaiser.
Welcome.
We appreciate all of the witnesses for being here today,
and we look forward to your testimony. Let me remind the
witnesses that we have read your written statements. They will
appear in full in the hearing record. Pursuant to committee
rule 7(d) and committee practice, each of you is asked to limit
your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary of your written
statement.
Let me also remind the witnesses that pursuant to Title 18
of the U.S. Code, Section 1001, it is illegal to knowingly and
willfully falsify any statement, representation, writing,
document, or material fact presented to Congress, or otherwise
conceal or cover up material fact.
Before you begin your testimony, please remember to press
the button on the microphone in front of you so that it will
turn on and the members can hear you. As you begin to speak,
the light in front of you will turn green. After 4 minutes, the
light will turn yellow to signal that you have 1 minute
remaining. With that, when the light turns red, your 5 minutes
have expired and we ask that you please wrap up.
We will let the entire panel make their presentations
before we move to member questions. When answering a question,
please remember to once again turn your microphone on.
I will first recognize Dr. Rosenfeld.
STATEMENT OF MR. JAKE ROSENFELD, PH.D., ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF
SOCIOLOGY, WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY IN ST. LOUIS, ST. LOUIS, MO
Dr. Rosenfeld. Madam Chair Wilson, Ranking Member Walberg,
and all members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about the benefits collective
bargaining has on our work force.
My name is Jake Rosenfeld. I am an associate professor of
sociology at Washington University in St. Louis, and for the
past 15 years I have conducted quantitative research on the
linkages between strong unions and economic equality in the
U.S. and how union decline has contributed to widening income
disparities in our economy today.
The unionization rate today is at its lowest point in over
a century. It is as low as it was prior to passage of the
National Labor Relations Act, a law intended to guarantee
workers the right to bargain collectively with their employers.
This dramatic decline has far-reaching implications for our
work force. From my own and related research, I wanted to share
four key findings with you today.
First, there is an accumulating body of research from
across the social sciences that finds that strong unions were a
key factor in delivering widespread gains to millions of
working and middle class Americans during the post-World War II
decades. Their decline explains much of the subsequent rise in
income inequality.
One influential study I co-authored with Bruce Western
finds that the fall in union membership explains about a third
of the rise of income inequality among men and about a fifth of
the rise among women.
A recent study by economists at the International Monetary
Fund links diminished union power to rising incomes at the very
top of the distribution. The implication from the IMF report is
that union decline has allowed the rich to get richer and
contributed to stagnant and falling incomes for nearly everyone
else.
And this includes nonunion workers. The second finding I
want to share with you today stems from new studies that reveal
just how important unions were to the economic standing of
nonunion workers.
In a 2016 study with Patrick Denice and Jennifer Laird, we
examined over three decades of data on millions of American
workers who do not belong to a union and found that weekly
wages for nonunion men would be about $50 higher if unions
today remained as strong as they were in the late 1970's. For a
year-round worker, this translates to an annual wage loss of
about $2,700.
In a followup study, we found that the effects of union
decline on nonunion pay remained after adjusting statistically
for other key determinates of wages in the modern economy,
including rising skill demands, demanufacturing, and
automation.
Third, when and where they were strong, unions were
especially important for the economic standing of racial and
ethnic minorities and women workers. Nationally, union
representation rates for African American men in the private
sector rose to nearly 40 percent by the early 1970's. And by
the end of the 1970's, nearly one out of every four African
American women in the private sector belonged to a union.
In this country, we had nearly closed the racial wage gap
among women by 1980. The destruction of private sector unions
from the 1980's onward widened it once again. My research
indicates that had union membership rates for women remained at
late 1970's levels, racial wage inequality among women in
private sector jobs today would be lowered by as much as a
third. Other research has established that gender pay gaps are
much smaller in the unionized sector.
The labor movement's upsurge between the Great Depression
and World War II relied heavily on immigrants and their
children. Echoing this historical pattern, my research reveals
that more recent arrivals are joining unions at high rates in
those sectors where organized labor remains powerful.
But those sectors are obviously shrinking. Unlike past
generations of immigrants who once swelled the ranks of the
organized work force, recent immigrants face an economic and
political context that is now largely hostile to unions. As a
result, contemporary immigrants and their children enter labor
markets largely lacking a proven pathway to the middle class
that unions had established.
Fourth and finally, it is time to dispel the myth that U.S.
workers have turned away from unions. In 2017, researchers at
MIT surveyed nearly 4,000 U.S. workers. They asked the nonunion
workers whether they would vote for a union if given the
opportunity, and nearly half replied yes.
If the private sector unionization rate were simply a
function of workers' desire, it would be much closer to 50
percent than its current rate of just above 5 percent. And a
recent Gallup poll found that support for labor unions is at a
15-year high with nearly two-thirds of Americans expressing
approval.
This is what makes strengthening the National Labor
Relations Act so important. Today workers are often blocked
from exercising their legally guaranteed freedom to negotiate.
Inequality has reached heights unscaled since the first Gilded
Age. These two trends are intimately tied, and if we are
serious about combating the latter, it is past time to do
something about the former.
Thank you.
[The statement of Dr. Rosenfeld follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Dr. Rosenfeld.
We will now recognize Ms. Harper.
STATEMENT OF MS. CYNTHIA HARPER, ENGLEWOOD, OH
Ms. Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair Wilson, Ranking Member
Walberg, and members of the committee, for the opportunity to
testify today. My name is Cynthia Harper. I live in Englewood,
Ohio.
I worked as a lamination specialist at Fuyao Glass of
America in Moraine, Ohio, from May 2015, to October 2017, where
we made automotive glass. I also worked at that same plant for
General Motors Truck and Bus for 14 years.
My job was strenuous and dangerous. I worked in the stretch
room, loading polyvinyl butryal lamination into a machine and
then putting measurements in the computer. There was no
lockout, tagout policy in place, which is a step that shuts
down the computer when maintenance needs to be done. Not only
is this dangerous for workers, not having this policy, it is
illegal.
There were no overhead mirrors in the aisles or pedestrian
lanes. Forklifts, golf carts, and people were also using the
same lanes, causing mass confusion and fear that someone would
be killed accidentally. Numerous of occasions I have witnessed
people almost getting hit by forklifts because they were not
properly designated.
Workers were also handling hazardous material with no
safety equipment. When I cut PVB, I worked with a homemade
knife that consists of a blade and some leftover PVB. We were
not allowed to wear gloves and someone was cut almost every
day. Management said they didn't use gloves and we needed no
gloves because our hands could properly line the glass.
There was no emergency exit in the room, and if there was a
fire, we would have no way to get out.
Our safety concerns were not being addressed. I believe if
we had a union, the plant would be safer and more fair across
the board.
At the end of the day, we all wanted Fuyao to be a better
and safer workplace for everyone. A union would have given us a
voice on the job, and also a say in our safety and health
improvements.
When the company found out we were trying to organize a
union, some workers were fired. Workers on the VOC committee
were prime targets of the company and were fired. In meetings,
management would threaten that if we had a union, they would
move their business elsewhere.
Fuyao also paid an outside company to come in and hold
small mandatory group meetings. They told us in these meetings
negative things about the UAW. They told us if we signed a UAW
union card we would be signing our life away. I found out later
that Fuyao hired LRI, an outside company, and paid them almost
$800,000. But our starting pay was only $12 an hour.
I was a strong supporter of the union and management knew
it. They saw me handing out handbills at the front door,
inviting people to come to our meetings. I wore my pro-union
shirt. I was in the media. And this is all within my right,
according to the NLRB.
I also was identified as one of the people that filed the
complaint against Fuyao with OSHA. OSHA cited them on numerous
of those violations and they were fined on the violations.
The company retaliated against me. In April of 2017, they
demoted me to a lower-paying job that was more physically
demanding, and they told me that I had to do the job by myself
when it was previously a two-man job or either get fired.
My new job was a bubble repair job where I had to check for
buttons. I had to lift glass that weighed almost up to a
hundred pounds and the glass was taller and bigger than I was.
It was physically tough.
In June of 2017, I hurt my back on the job. I was fired
after going out on medical leave because they allegedly said
that I used my available time. I was fired days before the UAW
filed a petition to unionize.
Unfortunately, the anti-union campaign worked. The people
feared losing their jobs, and at the end of the day we did not
get a union.
My story and experience is not isolated or unique. The
system is unfairly stacked against workers like myself trying
to organize a union. I just wanted a fair shake and a voice on
the job. I feared that I would die or not see my family because
of the major health and safety issues that were not being
addressed by the company.
I believe that workers should have the freedom to form a
union and not fear losing their jobs for support of a union.
More enforcement needs to be done. The current law is not
working. Workers need more protection.
I look forward to responding to your questions. Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Harper follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Ms. Harper.
We will now recognize Mr. Taubman.
STATEMENT OF MR. GLENN M. TAUBMAN, STAFF ATTORNEY, NATIONAL
RIGHT TO WORK DEFENSE FOUNDATION, SPRINGFIELD, VA
Mr. Taubman. Chairwoman Wilson, Ranking Member Walberg, and
distinguished Committee members, thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you today.
I have been practicing labor and constitutional law for
over 35 years for individual employees only at the National
Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation. I believe I have a
unique perspective that comes from over three decades of
representing thousands of private sector employees covered by
the National Labor Relations Act.
The announced topic of this hearing is the need for labor
law reform, and I agree that Federal labor law should be
reformed to better protect individual liberty and safeguard
individual workers' free choice concerning unionization.
No worker in America should be threatened with discharge
from his or her workplace for refusing to pay dues and fees to
a private organization he or she may despise.
No worker should be forced to be represented by a private
organization and its officials who perform poorly in the
workplace, who place their own interests above those they
purport to represent, or who act corruptly to steal from the
very employees they claim to represent.
No worker should be forced to subsidize, as a condition of
employment, the political schemes and candidates of a private
organization of which they disapprove. Yet this is the reality
for millions of private sector workers today under the
compulsory dues and monopoly bargaining regimes of the National
Labor Relations Act.
Because labor unions under the NLRA do not have to stand
for periodic recertification, authoritative estimates show that
94 percent of workers unionized under the NLRA have never voted
for the union representing their workplace. Perpetually
encrusting a labor union onto a workplace with no showing of
current employee support does not lead to workplace stability
and does not protect individual employees' freedoms of speech
and association.
There are several other current problems with the State of
American labor law.
First, current law makes it far easier for employees to
form and join a union than it is for those same employees to
choose to decertify the union. For example, the National Labor
Relations Board maintains a startling array of nonstatutory
election blocks and bars that prevent employees from obtaining
a decertification election. The Board's current blocking charge
rules effectively halt decertifications in at least one third
of the cases.
Although all of these bars apply to prevent employees from
decertifying the union, none of them apply to prevent employees
from certifying the union under the 2014 Obama NLRB's ambush
election rules.
No. 2, another major problem with the labor law is that of
forced dues and forced exclusive representation. It is neither
fair nor constitutional to force employees into paying dues to
a private organization upon pain of discharge, as the Supreme
Court held just last term in Janus v. AFSCME. Similarly,
forcing an individual to be represented by a private
organization is antithetical to American values of free speech
and association.
Just as few on this committee would approve of being forced
to be represented against their will by a lawyer or accountant
purporting to serve as their exclusive representative for
purposes of dealing with the government, few employees want to
be forced into an exclusive agency relationship with a labor
union for purposes of negotiating their wages and working
conditions.
Three, even in right-to-work States where employees have
free choice to refrain from union membership or dues, it is
usually very difficult for employees to stop paying dues. Union
officials write dues checkoff cards in microscopic fonts and in
language designed to be as confusing as possible. They make it
difficult for employees to exercise their free choice.
Four, 30 years after the Beck decision, union officials
continue to thumb their nose at that decision and continue to
force employees to pay for political advocacy and candidates
over the objections of nonmembers. This leaves nonmembers, like
registered nurse Jeanette Geary, little choice but to fight
decade-long legal battles to protect their legal rights.
In closing, I wish to reiterate that the NLRA needs serious
and prompt reform to protect employee free choice and increase
union transparency. For too long, union officials have been
empowered by Federal law to gain representational rights
without a secret ballot election and force employees to accept
union representation and pay unwanted dues or be discharged
from their jobs.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to answering
your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Taubman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Taubman.
We will now recognize Ms. Virk.
STATEMENT OF MS. DEVKI K. VIRK, J.D., MEMBER, BREDHOFF &
KAISER, PLLC, WASHINGTON, DC
Ms. Virk. Good morning, Chairperson Wilson, Ranking Member
Walberg, members of the committee. I appreciate your inviting
me to appear here before you today to address the need for
reform of the National Labor Relations Act, and in particular,
protecting workers' rights to organize.
The purpose of the act, as declared by the Congress that
passed it, is to actively encourage the practice and procedure
of collective bargaining by protecting the exercise by workers
of full freedom of association, self-organization, and
designation of representatives of their own choosing, for the
purpose of negotiating the terms and conditions of their
employment, or for other mutual aid or protection.
That is a direct quote from the preamble of the statute.
And the drafters of the NLRA were well aware that meaningful
self-organization and collective bargaining could not take
place within a system where, as Congress put it, there existed
substantial inequality of bargaining power between workers and
employers.
The act addresses this problem procedurally by creating a
framework, a set of ground rules essentially, that Congress
thought would allow workers and their employers to engage on
more equal footing.
In the American system of at-will employment, an employer
enjoys substantial unilateral power to set the conditions of
employment. Employers offer jobs on particular terms. Workers
decide whether to accept those terms or to move on and find a
different job.
Few workers have real ability to negotiate terms one-on-one
with a potential employer. Further, if the employer changes the
terms, workers can choose to stay and work under those terms or
leave and find another job.
But what the NLRA envisions and what it creates is a third
option: entitling workers to choose to have a meaningful voice
in setting their own working conditions.
Unfortunately, in the decades since the NLRA was passed,
this promise has not been kept. Interpretations of the law have
diminished, burdened, and severely undermined the fundamental
rights of workers--the right to self-organization and self-
determination, the right to bargain collectively, the right to
insist on better conditions, to publicize disputes, and to
strike in support of what the workers believe that they
deserve.
For many workers and unions, far from being a source of
rights, the NLRA is a legal minefield that they would rather
avoid. Indeed, one could argue that much of the statute's
remaining potency lies in its enforcement of employer rights
and its protection of employer prerogatives.
In fact, in my experience as a labor law practitioner,
representing workers and their organizations, even when the
current NLRA scheme works as well as it can, it falls
dramatically short of the promise of the act.
In one case I handled, workers voted for the union by a
two-to-one margin, but due to post-election objections and
appeals, certification was not issued until almost 9 months
later. And the employer stalled, refused to come to the table,
and finally bribed employees to sign a petition saying they no
longer wanted the union to represent them, and withdrew
recognition exactly 1 year after certification had been issued.
We filed charges. There was a complaint. The board even
authorized an injunction and won in court. Of course, the order
issued by that court, which was the only order that it could
issue, was an order directing the company to recognize and
bargain with the union. No penalty, no damages, nothing else.
And even under that expedited process, the order didn't issue
until 2-1/2 years after the workers had voted overwhelmingly
for the union.
In another case, workers at a manufacturing facility had a
stable bargaining relationship that had lasted for decades,
then the employer changed hands. The new spokesperson began
bargaining by telling workers that in his eyes and the eyes of
the employer, there was no contract and bargaining would begin
from scratch.
They rejected the union's proposals with no explanation,
took irrational positions, and insisted on concessions,
including big cuts to employee healthcare. And when the union
refused to agree, the company simply implemented its proposal.
Some workers, faced with huge premium increases and copays,
were forced to forego office visits and ration medication for
their children.
The board issued a complaint, a hearing was held, and a
year after the company forced its offer on the workers, charges
were sustained. But the company appealed. And faced with a
choice between waiting for justice, likely years away, and
addressing the urgent needs of members, the union returned to
the bargaining table and reached an agreement.
These are examples of the system working.
It is time to rebuild the NLRA in the image that Congress
first conceived. Workers should be able to decide promptly if
they want a union to represent them. They should not have to be
subject to employer anti-union captive meetings as a condition
of employment, and they should not have to wait years to obtain
an order of reinstatement if they are fired.
Employers who violate the act should face meaningful
penalties and to comply with the board's orders promptly. The
importance of a right is measured, at least in part, by how
simple it is to exercise and how seriously we take its
violation. The signal has been sent to workers and employers
that workers' rights to organize and act collectively are not
worth very much.
That, decidedly, was not the message that Congress meant to
send when it enacted the NLRA. But at this point, if we want to
change that message, we need to change the law so that workers
who want representation on the job have an effective procedure
to obtain that representation and an effective system to
enforce the rights that the law provides.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Ms. Virk follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Ms. Virk.
We will now proceed to member questions. Under committee
rule 8(a), we will now question witnesses under the 5-minute
rule. I will now yield myself 5 minutes.
Ms. Harper, I understand that you worked at the plant
before it was bought by Fuyao, and during that time you had a
union. Can you compare what it was like working at the plant
when you had a union and what it was like without a union?
Ms. Harper. When I worked at General Motors Truck and Bus
with the union, we had a safety committee, we had an ergonomic
committee. We also had a seniority rule, that if you had time
in, that you could bid for jobs and then get the jobs.
It was a nice environment because we had a suggestion
process where we could make suggestions on how the job--the
person that was actually operating the job could make the
suggestion on how to improve that job. That was the benefit of
having a union.
At Fuyao, not having the union, we had a lot of safety
issues, which I listed in my testimony, and it was pretty much
a fear going in every day on whether you were going to go home
safe or see your family because of all of the things that were
out of place in there. They would put you on whatever job they
wanted to, take you off of the job even if you were the senior
person.
But the most important thing, at the end of the day, we
wanted to go home to our families and make that place a better
place. So not having a union was very unfortunate. And I know
that it still persists because in 2018 one of the coworkers we
had there was crushed in between a ton of glass. And that was
one of our safety concerns, that we feared the way they had us
loading that glass, and the forklift drivers getting off and
then standing between the glass.
So that was the difference.
Chairwoman Wilson. I want to thank you for being here
today, Ms. Harper, and for telling us that story. And believe
me, we, on this committee, will fight for you and all Americans
who exercise their rights to negotiate for better pay, safety,
and better working conditions. Thank you.
Dr. Rosenfeld, your testimony cites 2018 polling data from
Gallup indicating that 62 percent of Americans approve of
unions. An MIT survey found that almost 50 percent of nonunion
workers would vote for a union if given the opportunity.
How do you explain the gap between the large percentage of
workers who would like to be in a union and the fact that
around only 6 percent of private sector workers have a union
today?
Dr. Rosenfeld. That is a great question. Thank you for it.
So I think, as Ms. Harper and Ms. Virk so aptly summarized,
right now the law as it is currently applied actively
encourages law-breaking on the part of employers. So we know
from other data that between a quarter to a third of all
unionization drives include the unlawful firing or otherwise
disciplining of union supporters and union organizers.
And you combine that with all the lawful ways in which
existing law is tilted in employers' favor, and you have this
present situation, where millions of American workers cannot
exercise their legally guaranteed right to organize. And that
is why I think updating the National Labor Relations Act for
the present realities of today's workplaces is so important.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
Ms. Virk, we can all agree that when an employer breaks the
law, they should be accountable for their actions. But the
National Labor Relations Board has very limited power to
enforce the workers' rights it is charged with protecting.
In your experience, what have you found to be lacking in
the NLRB's current enforcement powers? And what can Congress do
to deter companies from engaging in illegal behavior?
Ms. Virk. Well, I think in the written submission that I
made to the committee there is a quote from a Supreme Court
case nearly 50 years old now called H.K. Porter, which says and
acknowledges the limited remedial powers that were granted to
the National Labor Relations Board upon the founding of that
board and the passage of the act in 1935. What the H.K. Porter
Supreme Court said was that if we want that to change, Congress
needs to act. That is not something that the judiciary can do.
That is not something that the board itself can do by
regulation.
Just to illustrate--and I provided a few illustrations in
my oral testimony--a substantial number of violations of the
act by employers are remedied solely with a notice posting.
That is, literally, if an employer fails to bargain in good
faith, like the court in the case that I described found the
employer in that case had done, the entirety of that remedy in
that case was for the employer to be ordered to go back to the
table and bargain with the union.
That is it. Literally a posting in the workplace saying: We
will not refuse to bargain in good faith. In other words, go
forth and just don't do it again.
That is not an effective consequence for breaking of the
law, and it tells an employer, and it tells, more importantly,
the workers who are attempting to organize, that the rights
that they have been deprived of by the employer's violation are
not important. Because if there is not a consequence attached
to that violation, there can be no change in behavior that we
can reasonably expect.
That is just simply one example. In terms of other remedial
deficiencies in the act, those are documented both in my
submission and elsewhere.
The lengthy delays between the time a person gets fired
illegally during an organizing campaign and the time that even
if they prevail they are reinstated, that can be years. And by
that time, the organizing drive that they were aiding itself is
either broken or has been substantially diminished.
So the employer in that case has accomplished the purpose
that it set out to do when it acted with animus in firing
somebody, and that is, to prevent and scare the union--scare
the employees from joining a union and voting to have an
effective voice on the job. That damage has been done, and it
cannot be remedied years later by a reinstatement order.
Those are just a few examples.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you. Thank you so much.
I now recognize our esteemed ranking member, Ranking Member
Walberg, for his round of questions.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you for the panel for being here.
And, Ms. Harper, I may make further statements in closing,
but your story, as told, evidences the reason why there needs
to be choice, there needs to be opportunity, and it has to be
free and fair, and that laws that are in place, regardless of
whether amendments are needed--and we certainly would recognize
that over time there are--have to be followed. And your case
illustrates it very clearly. And I say thank you for sharing
it.
Mr. Taubman, thank you for being here. The Department of
Labor has prosecuted union bosses for embezzling well over $100
million in workers' union dues since 2001, including most
recently, sadly, in my home State, with the United Auto Workers
Union scandal that was wide and far-reaching, and sad to see
the impact that it has had on union workers. Clearly, we can't
take for granted that union leaders always act with honesty and
integrity toward their union rank and file.
The Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act is
intended to allow workers to see how their dues are being spent
by union bosses. Unfortunately, the Obama Administration
rescinded rules that would have improved union financial
transparency under LMRDA. I believe that Congress should codify
those improvements into law.
Based on your experience, why do you believe it is so
important for workers to have this financial information
available to them about their union?
Mr. Taubman. Thank you, Congressman Walberg.
One of the reasons for the decline of workers choosing
unions is the prevalence of these kind of financial
transgressions that we see day after day, as you have said. The
Department of Labor, you can just go to their website and see a
constant stream of abuse of workers, abuse of the money that
workers are forced to pay, because basically absolute power
corrupts absolutely. So it is very important to strengthen the
LMRDA reporting requirements.
Employees come to me on a daily basis and ask me about how
unions are spending their money, and when we go and look at the
LM-2s, the main financial disclosure reports that the unions
are required to file, they are very, very cursory. They don't
provide any details. It is impossible for someone to look at
these disclosure documents and see what the union is actually
doing with their money. So all of this creates a culture of no
accountability.
I would also add, the National Labor Relations Board just
ruled in a case of mine called Kent Hospital, Jeanette Geary.
It is referred to in my written statement. And in that case,
the union refused to give these employees a copy of its audit.
It took a 10-year legal battle for these employees to get a
copy of the union's audit, which they still haven't gotten,
because the union hasn't yet complied with that decision.
So if you want to know the bottom line, employees need to
know what the union is doing with their money, especially in
situations where they are being forced to pay this money or
face discharge.
Mr. Walberg. I mean, it is a sad, sad display either way,
where the employee doesn't have transparency or the employer
isn't able to have the transparency as well to deal with.
Let me ask a final question here. The NLRA protects workers
from being fired, disciplined, or otherwise harmed by their
employer for seeking to unionize as the law intends, but no
such rules exist to protect workers from union coercion and
intimidation when trying to decertify their union. What other
inequities exist between the union certification and
decertification process?
Mr. Taubman. Right. Well, as I said in my statement and in
some of the written material as well, the labor law is slanted
to get unions in power and keep them in power. It is very
difficult for employees to mount a decertification campaign in
the face of entrenched union power in the workplace.
Now, these employees have lived with the union, maybe they
have lived with the union for decades, and then they say: You
know what, we want a vote. All we want is a vote. People vote
for all of the Congressmen in this room on a 2-year basis. So
employees say: All we want is a vote.
And what happens is, suddenly there is a raft of what is
called blocking charges that get filed, or suddenly there are
NLRB doctrines, all kinds of bars--the successor bar, the
voluntary recognition bar, the settlement bar--a whole raft of
crust that has been placed on the National Labor Relations Act
over these years that prevent employees from just getting a
simple vote. And that is one of the major inequities, because
none of these bars apply when a union is seeking a
certification.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
We will now go to the members for questions.
Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Good morning.
I would like to start with Ms. Virk and ask you some
questions about employers' standing. All right? When a union
files for an election, the employer, as I understand it, is
considered a party to the election and can litigate issues
involving the scope and timing of the election. Is that
correct?
Ms. Virk. That is correct.
Ms. Wild. And is the employer on the ballot when employees
vote on whether to have union representation?
Ms. Virk. The employer is not on the ballot. It is either
union or no union. Or if there is a contest between more than
one union, both unions will be listed on the ballot.
But employers, certainly in my experience, have approached
the process as if they were on the ballot and that a vote for
no union is, in fact, a vote for the employer, and they attempt
to try to convince employees through a variety of means, some
of which are lawful and coercive, some of which are unlawful,
to vote against having a union.
But that is correct, the employer is not technically on the
ballot, but most employers, many of them, act as if they are.
Ms. Wild. So where is it in the NLRA that an employer is
given the right to litigate an election when they are not on
the ballot?
Ms. Virk. Well, as I understand it, it is actually not in
the text of the act itself. I believe it is Section 9 that
identifies the process for choosing a representative and for
workers to choose a representative, but it speaks in those
terms, employees' choice of representative for the purposes of
collective bargaining. There is no mention of the employer
expressly having standing in that process in the text of the
act.
Ms. Wild. And am I correct that employers lack standing
when workers file for an election under the Railway Labor Act?
Is that correct?
Ms. Virk. I believe that is correct, yes.
Ms. Wild. And do you believe that employers have a due
process right to have standing in such elections?
Ms. Virk. I know that argument has been made. To be honest,
I don't know whether any court or whether the board has
considered that issue.
Ms. Wild. Do you believe they do?
Ms. Virk. I don't think that they are granted that right by
the text of the act. Whether there is a constitutional due
process claim or not, I am sure they could argue that. I
believe that they should not have it.
Ms. Wild. Thank you.
Ms. Harper, I would like to just ask you, you have
indicated in your written testimony that you were active in
trying to disseminate information about workers' right to
unionize and so forth. Can you explain or describe for us what
sort of actions were taken by your employer in response to
efforts to unionize?
Ms. Harper. Some of the actions were the mandatory meetings
that we had that would tell us the negative things about a
union. In just our department meetings, they would threaten
that if we had a union, they could move their business
elsewhere. People that were part of the union, like me, I was
demoted and then placed out in front of everybody for them to
see on a job that was a two-man job. So they did a lot of
intimidation that way.
Ms. Wild. And do you believe that your coworkers understood
that your demotion was related to your efforts to unionize?
Ms. Harper. Yes, I do, because I had a lot of them that
were afraid to even talk to me inside the plant. But they would
meet me at gas stations outside the plant to talk about the
issues they were having in their department, but they were
afraid because they needed their jobs.
I also had a man that met me outside of there to tell me
that management forced him to sign a statement against another
employee that was on our VOC committee that, in turn, got fired
behind that statement. And he was afraid, but he needed his
job, because that was his livelihood.
Ms. Wild. And are you still in touch with your former co-
employees?
Ms. Harper. Yes.
Ms. Wild. And do you know anything about whether safety
conditions at the plant have improved at all since you left?
Ms. Harper. They have improved, but a lot still exists, and
they tell me all the time they wish we had a union.
Ms. Wild. And you described an incident involving an
employee who was actually killed on the job?
Ms. Harper. Yes.
Ms. Wild. And that was back in March 2018?
Ms. Harper. Yes.
Ms. Wild. And you learned of that from another employee, or
how?
Ms. Harper. No, it was news, it was public news.
Ms. Wild. Okay. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
Chairwoman Wilson. Dr. Roe.
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate that. And
thank everyone for being here.
Look, the most protective worker in the world is the United
States worker, employee, no question about it. My dad was one
of them, a union member, worked for B.F. Goodrich Company
making heels for shoes. He did after World War II. He lost his
job. It was outsourced to Mexico.
And, Dr. Rosenfeld, I appreciate your research, but I think
it is a little more complicated. One worker in four in 1960 was
in manufacturing. Today, less than 8 percent of Americans are.
In 2016, we lost 20,000 manufacturing jobs. And thank
goodness, President Trump has tried to bring these back. We
have added 600,000 manufacturing, good-paying jobs for American
workers.
And I think that is one of the problems, where we lost
wages. You mentioned that. I think that absolutely contributed
to it. And seeing those jobs come back is a great thing.
Look, I remember I chaired this subcommittee for 6 years,
and if I remember correctly, the average time to unionize is 35
days on average.
I dropped a bill yesterday called the Employee Rights Act,
and I want to look after the employees. It requires a majority
of all union members, not a simple majority of those who cast
ballots, to unionize.
And this one is very near and dear to my heart because I
put a uniform on, left this country over 40 years ago to
protect the most sacrosanct right we have, and that is a secret
ballot. Every single one of us up here was elected by a secret
ballot.
If you want to unionize, you have an absolute right to do
that. My dad was in the union. But you should have a secret
ballot so you are not intimidated either, as Ms. Harper
mentioned, either for or against. You can vote on it the way
you want to.
It is a mandated opt-in permission for each union member to
utilize his or her union dues for any other activity other than
collective bargaining and direct all unionized workplaces to
hold periodic secret ballot referendums to determine if
employees wish to remain in their current union since the
majority or most members never voted on it. A safeguard to
worker privacy by granting individuals the ability to opt out
of sharing their personal information if they don't want to.
And I could go on. There is more to this.
But I would like to ask a question to Mr. Taubman. And this
I found interesting. A 2015 poll from the Opinion Research
Corporation found that 81 percent of Democrats support the
right to a secret ballot election, support a requirement that
unions stand for periodic recertification, and support a
requirement that unions receive opt-in permission from workers
before using their dues on politics.
Is this number surprising to you based on your experience
representing employees around the country?
Mr. Taubman. Not surprising to me at all, Congressman Roe,
because--
Mr. Roe. Is your mic on?
Mr. Taubman. Okay. Sorry.
These things represent fundamental American values. Secret
ballot, not being forced to give money to organizations that
you disagree with, having financial transparency with
organizations that you are asked to support, all of these
things are fundamental free speech, free association values.
The Supreme Court in the Janus case just last term and in a
series of cases going back many decades has recognized
employees have the right to join unions and support unions, but
also must have the equal right to not join, to refrain, to
disassociate.
And that is what we are talking about here. The right to
join must include an equal right to refrain, because without
that, then we are in Venezuela, let us say.
Mr. Roe. Americans vote for their representation here, as
you mentioned, every 2 years, and they are guaranteed access to
a secret ballot when doing so. In this way, Americans can hold
their congressional members accountable.
In your opinion, would the secret ballot and periodic
elections bring more accountability to unionized workplaces?
Mr. Taubman. Absolutely, because union officials will have
to work to get the support of the employees they represent.
Right now, if the employees have never voted, it is almost
impossible for them to even get an election to determine
whether the union has support or not. So the union officials
have no real need to be accountable to the people they
represent. But if there was automatic recertifications, they
would have to work for that support.
Mr. Roe. And I think, you know, I kind of laugh about this,
saying this tongue in cheek a little bit, but my wife claim she
votes for me during these elections, but I don't know for sure
because it is a secret ballot. That way I can't intimidate her
at the house to vote for me.
I feel that strongly about it. I think of anything we do,
we should guarantee every American the right to vote
unintimidated and with a secret ballot.
Madam Chair, thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Dr. Roe.
Now I recognize Representative Fudge.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And thank you all so much for being here.
Ms. Harper from Ohio, welcome.
Ms. Harper, there really is nothing that we can do to
change the hearts and minds of the lowlifes who treated you the
way they did, there are just some people who are despicable and
mean, especially when you were just only trying to exercise
your First Amendment rights, which people think only belong to
certain types of people. But you have the same right to First
Amendment speech as anybody else.
The only problem I see today with labor laws is the people
who want to destroy them, those who have become more desperate
and more aggressive in their effort to destroy people who work
hard every day like you do. These are people who have probably
never worked by the sweat of their brow or the bend of their
back, so they have no idea what it means to protect workers. So
the real problem with labor laws today is those who want to
destroy them.
And it is interesting that we talked about misappropriation
of funds. It is not confined to unions. We have had some people
in the President's Cabinet who had to leave because of
questionable use of taxpayer money. So it is not confined to
unions. People are put in jail every day, corporations who
misappropriate funds. It is not confined to unions. So I don't
know what that was all about, but it just absolutely made no
sense.
Mr. Rosenfeld, we talk about right-to-work laws. Can you
tell me if, in fact, right-to-work laws really were designed to
keep unions out because they didn't want Blacks and Whites to
have the same equal rights?
Mr. Rosenfeld. Thank you for that question, Congresswoman.
So the history of right to work is interesting. It is
pretty ugly. One of the key drivers behind these types of
regulations was a Texas businessman, a successful businessman
and White supremacist, Vance Muse, who promoted the rule
because he ardently felt that unions brought people together,
brought workers together across racial lines, and that was
something he felt needed to be stopped in its tracks.
And so it was no accident that the first states that
adopted these types of regulations happened to be the states of
the former Confederacy.
Subsequent to that, since then, they have spread. Missouri,
my home state, was the last state in which the legislature
passed right-to-work legislation. But just back in the summer
of 2018, two-thirds of Missourians voted against it, and that
was pretty astonishing from, I think, the broader perspective
of those who kind of fight for and fight against these types of
regulations, because like many States, Missouri has seen
dramatic declines in union representation.
Ms. Fudge. Mr. Rosenfeld, let me cut you off. I have got a
very short period of time. Your answer was yes, though, am I
right, that they--
Mr. Rosenfeld. Right.
Ms. Fudge. Okay. Thank you.
So are you surprised that today, with all of the heightened
hate speech and all of the rhetoric we hear every day, that we
are starting to see attacks on labor unions again?
Mr. Rosenfeld. No. But this has been a longstanding concern
from many powerful interests, conservative business interests,
to destroy organized labor in America. For the last 30 or 40
years, they have proven quite successful.
Ms. Fudge. So right to work really was born out of racism.
Ms. Virk, can you talk just briefly about how the Supreme
Court has undermined organizing and rights of immigrants?
Ms. Virk. I think you're probably the seminal case on that,
Congressperson Fudge, is the Hoffman Plastics case that was
decided, I believe, in the early 2000's. And what that case
held was that even if an employer fired a worker for union
activity, that if that worker was an undocumented immigrant,
that worker not only had no right to reinstatement but had no
right even to back pay.
And let me just pause here. The way that the board
calculates back pay is that they take the wages that the
employer paid and then they subtract any wages that the
employee earned in the interim period. So the employer
essentially gets the benefit of employees going out and seeking
work to keep body and soul together while they have been
unlawfully discharged from the employer.
And what that Supreme Court ruling, I think, has really
done is discourage even further undocumented immigrants from
organizing and has encouraged employers to use immigration
status as a weapon during organizing campaigns. And I can go
into further detail.
Ms. Fudge. Well, my time is running out. I would just say
that we find ourselves in a position that in this country, the
more things change, the more they stay the same.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wilson. I now recognize the esteemed ranking
member of the Education and Labor Committee, Dr. Foxx.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Taubman, one of the primary purposes of the National
Labor Relations Act, NLRA, is to protect the rights of
employees, but it appears much of the law as written assumes
that workers benefit from everything a union does and that
every worker agrees with the decisions of the union.
Would you agree with that characterization of the NLRA? And
from your experience, is this view accurate?
Mr. Taubman. Sorry, sorry thank you, Congresswoman.
That is a fantastic question because workers are not
monolithic and workers are not widgets. Workers are individual
human beings who bring their own experiences and their own
talents to the workplace.
And in answer to your question, if unions do such great
work and all workers benefit, you would think that all workers
would want to join. But, in fact, that is not the case, because
workers see that the benefit is not necessarily true to them.
If you are a top shelf worker with specific skills, you may
find yourself being held back by the union contract. If you are
a young worker who wants more pay and is not that concerned
about your pension, you may find your economic priorities are
turned upside down by a union contract and union
representation. And those are just a few examples.
So the bottom line is that individual workers should be
treated as individuals, free to make their own decisions about
what organizations they join or support.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you.
Mr. Taubman, 43 percent of union households voted
Republican for president in 2016 despite roughly 90 percent of
union political donations going to support Democrats.
What protections exist for workers to ensure they aren't
forced to fund union politics against their will? And how might
we amend the NLRA to provide stronger free speech protections
to workers?
Mr. Taubman. Well, of course, in right-to-work States
employees have the free choice to not join and to opt out. That
is how they exercise their right to protect themselves from
funding causes and candidates they do not support.
In forced unionism States, employees are forced to pay as a
condition of employment. And up until just a few weeks ago, the
National Labor Relations Board had ruled that employees must
fund union lobbying campaigns as a condition of employment.
That was a ruling from the Obama National Labor Relations
Board in 2012. And only just now have we gotten a reversal of
that in a case called Kent Hospital, where the National Labor
Relations Board said employees do not have to fund political
campaigns. But yet, it took a nurse, Jeanette Geary, a 9-year
legal battle to get that ruling.
So the protections for workers who don't want to support
political and ideological causes they oppose needs to be
strengthened greatly.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you for that.
It has been mentioned more than once here that 90 percent
of workers represented by a union today have never actually
voted for that union itself to represent them, so we have
created a system of inherited rather than elected
representation.
Why is this the case? And how might Congress amend the NLRA
to remedy this problem?
Mr. Taubman. I mean, this could be done easily by passing
legislation to have automatic periodic recertification. That is
all that would be needed.
All of the elected officials in this room face the voters
every 2 years. Senators face the voters every 6 years. I would
leave it up to this committee and to Congress to determine what
the appropriate interval should be, but it seems only fair that
workers be asked periodically: Do you continue to support the
union that represents you?
Ms. Foxx. Thank you.
And, Mr. Taubman, the last time Democrats held the House
majority they voted to deny workers the right to a secret
ballot for union elections, a protection guaranteed to every
American when they vote for their elected officials, including
Members of Congress.
Can you briefly explain the difference between the current
card check process, secret ballot voting, and the card check
scheme previously passed by the Democrats? Why is the right to
a secret ballot so important in union elections?
Mr. Taubman. My experience representing workers, and I am
told this by many, is that when there is a card check campaign
going on, they are coerced, they are harassed. Union officials
come to their home. They are bribed. We will take you out for
dinners. We will do whatever it takes to get you to sign a
card, which counts as a vote, whatever it takes. That is part
of the union organizer's manual, get that signature, whatever
it takes.
But that is not how a secret ballot election works. That is
not how free elections work. You walk into a booth, you close
the curtain, you vote. Why unions are so afraid of a secret
ballot election is just startling to me.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Chairman.
I thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Dr. Foxx.
Mr. Levin.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Taubman, you are getting good at turning on your mike.
So I hear--I see that you don't like it when--you consider
it harassment when unions go to people's home. So are you in
favor of giving workers access, mandatory access to union
organizers in the workplace so that they can have that access
to the information, yes or no?
Mr. Taubman. Well, I believe that unions running organizing
campaigns have access to workers.
Mr. Levin. You are wrong. I was a union organizer for
years. Every employer that I tried to organize the workers at
would arrest me if I came on the premises.
Mr. Taubman, I am also really interested in your devotion
to regular elections. Do you favor that all workers in the
United States should have an opportunity every 2 years to vote
on whether they wish to be represented by a union or not?
Mr. Taubman. No, because there should be--
Mr. Levin. Why not?
Mr. Taubman. Because there should be a showing of interest
by the workers.
Mr. Levin. So you only favor mandatory elections for
workers who choose to join a union or who have a union, but you
are against elections for all workers?
Mr. Taubman. Well, I gather from your question you are
suggesting that workers be assigned a union.
Mr. Levin. No, no, just whether they could--every 2 years
they could have an opportunity whether they wish to be
represented by a union or not.
Mr. Taubman. Which union?
Mr. Levin. Whatever union they want.
Mr. Taubman. Well, whatever union they want, but how would
that work? They are going to be told, well, you are a truck
driver, so we are going to assign you to the Teamsters.
Mr. Levin. No. No one talked about assigning. You mentioned
that.
So you are against--you are for mandatory elections every 2
years for workers who have a union, but you are against it for
workers who don't have a union.
Mr. Taubman. If the union can organize and file for an
election, which they seem to have every right to do, they only
need 30 percent of the cards under current law, then they can
file for an election.
Mr. Levin. All right. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Rosenfeld, you talked about the spillover effect when
workers join unions in terms of how it affects nonunion
workers. Can you explain more about what the spillover effect
is?
Mr. Rosenfeld. Sure. So spillover effects occur through a
variety of channels. I will be as brief as possible.
Mr. Levin. Yes. It is okay.
Mr. Rosenfeld. There are well-documented union threat
effects. So if you are a nonunion plant next to an organized
plant, you might raise your pay and benefits to match the
unionized plant's pay and benefits to avoid a unionization
drive. So that has been going back generations of research
documenting that.
But also we know from how pay setting occurs that industry
leaders oftentimes set pay standards for the rest of the
industry. And when organized labor was strong, many industry
leaders were unionized. And so that means that union and
nonunion plants alike looked to them when it came to setting
wages and benefits.
Mr. Levin. So I think in 1947 and 1952, 35 percent of
workers in the private sector were unionized. Today it is 6
percent. Sixty-two percent of Americans have a positive impact
of unions. If we had a free market for union organization, we
might have about 30 percent, according to Richard Freeman's
research and others.
What impact might it have on the United States economy and
especially on often marginalized workers--women, workers of
color, immigrant workers--if there was a real free market for
unionization and we got back up to something like 30 percent of
workers being unionized?
Mr. Rosenfeld. That is a great question.
I think, first and foremost, you would see--for decades,
post-World War II decades, we had productivity in the broader
economy tracking average workers' wages.
Mr. Levin. Almost exactly, yes.
Mr. Rosenfeld. Exactly. And then there was a great
divergence. And for a while, that kind of flummoxed economists
and others who study this issue. I think there is growing
consensus that one of the key reasons has been the dramatic
loss of worker power.
So if we were to bring density rates up, 20 percent, 30
percent, I think you would see that gap start to close again,
and your average workers, including racial and ethnic
minorities, would start to benefit from broader growth in the
economy.
Mr. Levin. And so you think it would have--do you think it
might have any significant impact on the problem of income and
wealth inequality in our country, which has gotten much worse
in the same period as union density has declined?
Mr. Rosenfeld. I think if you look in this country's own
history, you look across the developed world today, there is no
question that raising density rates is a key factor in terms of
reducing the types of disparities you are discussing.
Mr. Levin. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Virk, can you talk about some of the ways that
employers can stall elections?
Ms. Virk. Can stall elections?
Mr. Levin. Stall elections, yes.
Ms. Virk. Yes. Under the current rules that have been
adopted by the board several years ago it is somewhat more
difficult. But the main way that they can continue to do it is
by contesting the composition of what they call the bargaining
unit, which is the group of workers who is entitled to vote for
union representation.
And employers often do this by adding groups of employees
who may bear only an attenuated relationship to the group of
employees who wants to unionize and who the union has been
working with, and employers attempt to add those additional
groups into the group that will have the ability to vote on
unionization in the workplace.
Mr. Levin. And the 2014 rules somewhat mitigated the
problem. How did they do that?
Ms. Virk. They somewhat mitigated the problem by adopting a
set of presumptions that if the number of employees who were to
be added to the unit were less than a certain amount, then the
board would simply go forward to an election.
But it still is a substantial issue partly because the
board doctrine since the Trump administration appointees have a
majority has also decided some cases that make this additional
adding in of additional groups into the bargaining unit by
employers a much more routine practice. That case is called PCC
Structurals, I believe.
Mr. Levin. Okay. My time has expired.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
Mr. Allen.
Mr. Allen. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
My home State of Georgia has been named as the best State
to do business in the last 6 years. We have been a right-to-
work State since 1947. The economy in Georgia, particularly in
my district, is thriving.
And, of course, I was at a function just on Friday where we
had 7,000 national association of building and trades union
members working at a nuclear power facility, the only one under
construction in the country, and we had the president of the
union there, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of
Agriculture, the Governor.
And we were all thanking the President for helping us get
to this point as far as the economy and helping us. America can
now do big things again. It has been an amazing turnaround, by
the way, as far as production at that facility.
And so I asked: How did you turn this thing around? And
they said: We empowered the workers.
And so what we have seen in business, I was in business for
35 years, and this business of this top down, you do this, you
do that, or you are going to be this, you are going to be that
without freedom is out of style in this country. It is out of
style in the workplace. In other words, you have got union,
nonunion, this, that, or the other. I mean, what I am in favor
of is empowering the worker.
Ms. Harper, you shouldn't work for a company, I mean, with
7.5 million jobs open out there, there are companies that would
love to have your services and would treat you as you should be
treated. Every worker should be treated well.
But the bottom line is Georgia is doing something right.
And, obviously, the No. 1 reason that a business locates
anywhere, anywhere in the country, is skilled work force.
In fact, I told the president of the national Teamsters
building and trades union, I said, you skill up a work force
and I guarantee, because in construction, we are all getting
great at it. We don't have a lot of young people coming into
our trades. So you train folks up and there will be plenty of
jobs out there.
But according to the data, right-to-work States' household
employment growth was more than double than that of forced
union States. Again, you have to be this, you have to be that.
In Georgia, we can be whatever you need to be, okay?
Why might a right-to-work State be a more attractive State
for entrepreneurs and workers alike? I mean, what does your
research indicate there?
Yes, sir, Mr. Taubman.
Mr. Taubman. Well, when you talked about this gathering of
the building trades there in Georgia, the fact of the matter is
unions can exist well and can thrive in right-to-work States
because they have a work force that has voluntarily joined,
that sees benefit in it. In fact, there is a lot of union
organizing going on in right-to-work States.
So there is just a recognition that employees have free
choice and employees can thrive in right-to-work States. And
that is all that we are asking for, is the free choice so that
people can thrive in their workplace and their jobs and not be
forced into a private organization. And when you have that,
unions, if they represent people, have to be more responsive.
Mr. Allen. Again, which makes it a better fit for
businesses that are looking for a location. Particularly, of
course, foreign investment has grown substantially in Georgia
because of that.
The thing we have in this country that I hold so dear is
the freedom, the freedom to choose your job, your profession,
the skill, and that sort of thing. And of course, nobody is in
a caste system. You are not stuck.
I mean, what is it that we can do to bring both sides
together and say this is the best solution for both--all
workers?
Mr. Taubman?
Mr. Taubman. Well, to me, it is obvious that right-to-work
is just a free principle, that people get to choose and that
workers thrive. I mean, how you convince a union that exists on
coercion and compulsion to try something different, I don't
know and I can't answer. The fact of the matter is unions exist
and exist well in right-to-work States if they provide benefits
that their membership chooses to join.
Mr. Allen. They are doing great in Georgia.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
I will recognize Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you for
holding this hearing, something near and dear to my heart and
worked in close to 40 years dealing with labor board, labor
issues back in the New Jersey/Philadelphia region.
About 30 years ago, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held
that it was irrational for the board to presume that a union
was making an illegal threat unless the union proclaims that
its picketing would be conducted in a lawful manner.
In spite of this, in a recent case involving the IBEW, the
Republican-controlled board ruled that a union, the IBEW in
this case, breaks the law if it merely notifies Company B that
it might be picketing against A.
It sounds very confusing until you have actually lived this
life, which I have been involved in. This ruling was so off
base that it led three Republicans appointees on the D.C.
Circuit to rule that the NLRB approach to this issue was
without foundation in the act relevant to this case and the
general legal principles.
So what did the board do? It doubled down and issued
another opinion, defying the D.C. Circuit.
All the local union did in this case was provide a courtesy
copy to the Las Vegas Convention Center and Visitors Authority
that the building and the construction trades councils was
requesting the authority to engage in area standards picketing,
something I was involved in literally for decades. Nothing here
leads us to believe what the NLRB is making its decision.
So, Ms. Virk, where do you see this going, such defiance of
the court, not the committee itself, but the court? Where do we
go next, not follow any precedent, any law?
Ms. Virk. Well, if I understand it, the labor board, I
don't know if it is unique among agencies, but it is certainly
the agency that I am familiar with, that--it has a policy of
what they call nonacquiescence, which, as I understand it, it
means that in any given case, if a court of appeals reverses a
board order, the board is compelled to follow the court in that
particular case, but it does not or it is privileged not to
follow that same rule that the court has set down in any other
similar case.
This is just one of the ways in which the board's
jurisprudence ends up being conflicting and confusing and often
internally contradictory. You know, is there a cure for it or
is there an end in sight? I am not sure. But I do know--
Mr. Norcross. I think there is a cure, and it is something
that we can do.
But this is the point. Precedent, the rule of law, the very
basis for our country, and yet three individuals decide that
they are now the law and will change it in any way they see
fit.
This is a primary area of focus that I think we as a
committee should look at when we start making recommendations
and writing some of the changes that are really needed.
We thank you very much for your input in this, and it is
something that this is just one of many issues that has been
abused.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Norcross.
Congressman Banks is recognized.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Taubman, in 2014 the National Labor Relations Board
instituted what has become known as the ambush election rule,
which you mention in your testimony. Can you explain to the
members of this committee what that rule is and how it
infringes upon workers' rights?
Mr. Taubman. Well, the ambush election rules allow that
once a union files a petition that the election will be held
very, very quickly--meaning there is no time for debate among
the work force, there is no time for employees to educate
themselves. And for employers who have Section 8(c) free speech
rights, there is no time for them to have input into it.
You know, I heard some testimony about employers not being
parties to these things. There is actually three parties to an
NLRB election. There is the unions, there is employers, and
there is workers. And all of these people should have free
speech rights in the workplace. And so the ambush election
rules curtailed all of that and made it impossible for there to
be a real debate.
And at the same time, it didn't apply, the ambush rules did
not apply to a decertification. So if an employee said we want
to choose to vote to get rid of the current union, suddenly it
was all subject to being blocked and delayed, because those--
Mr. Banks. Can I stop you there and ask you, what is the
current status of the rule?
Mr. Taubman. The current status of the rule is that the
current NLRB is in the process of a rulemaking program looking
at changing some or all of that rule. But it is just--these
things take a long time when you deal with rulemaking, because
there has to be notice and comment, the board, when they issue
the final rules, has to respond to all of these comments. So
you are looking at a process that often goes years.
Mr. Banks. Okay.
Moving on to a different issue, a 2015 poll from the
Opinion Research Corporation found that 81 percent of Democrats
support the right to a secret ballot election. They support a
requirement that unions stand for periodic recertification and
support a requirement that unions receive opt-in permission
from workers before using their dues on politics.
Is this number surprising to you, based on your experience
representing employees across the country?
Mr. Taubman. Again, these are all basic free speech, free
association principles. I think if you ask Americans what do
they think about secret ballots and free speech, which,
frankly, is under attack in many parts of this country, most
Americans support free speech and the right of people to
organize together, but the equal right to not join, to not
organize, to refrain. You can't have the right of association
without having the right of nonassociation. The Supreme Court
has held this for years.
Mr. Banks. So it doesn't sound like you are surprised.
Let's move on to another issue. As a co-author of Indiana's
very successful right-to-work law, I have noticed that a lot of
opposition to right-to-work laws comes from the belief that
reduced union power will lead to lower wages.
There are a number of studies that make this claim, but
these studies often fail to account for the significant
difference in cost of living across the States.
In fact, the Missouri Economic Research Information Center
notes that right-to-work States have a cost of living that is
6.5 percent below the national average as of 2016.
When taking this difference fully into account, disposable
per capita income was $2,400 higher in right-to-work States
than forced union States, according to 2016 data from the
Bureau of Economic Research.
Can you talk about why income may be higher in right-to-
work States when the common wisdom suggests that it would be
lower?
Mr. Taubman. So I am not an economist. Talking about the
statistics is not my forte. I am a lawyer that represents
individual employees.
But to me, it is just common sense that when you have a
work force that has free choice, that is mobile, that their
talents are rewarded based upon who they are as an individual
and not treating workers as widgets or machines that get put
into collective bargaining units that you are going to have
more freedom and you are going to have more economic growth.
And that is why right-to-work States lead the country in
economic growth.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
Congressman Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and definitely
for holding this hearing this morning.
Mr. Rosenfeld, I would like to expand on some of your
comments regarding the role that unions play in reducing
inequality and ensuring that wages rise with worker
productivity and maybe in a little different sort of realm than
might have been discussed this morning, which is right now I
think almost any Member going anywhere in the country is going
to hear a hue and cry about the skills gap and the need for
getting work force training and just a way of imparting,
whether it is manufacturing, healthcare, finance. I mean, the
list goes on and on.
In Connecticut, where we do have a work force with 16
percent union participation, we have actually seen some really
impressive efforts between management and unions, particularly
in the area of defense manufacturing, again, as we see baby
boomers leaving in big numbers from the work force and,
obviously, trying to get millennials sort of up to speed.
The apprenticeship program which has been going on down at
the Electric Boat shipyard, which is now about 12,000 strong in
terms of the work force and it is going to continue growing
over the next 2 or 3 years with the Navy shipbuilding plan,
that, again, has been incredibly successful in terms of really
accelerating people through the skills acquisition process, if
you want to call it that. They also continue with active
learning centers for people who are actually in the yard. So
that, again, this is just an ongoing process. And, again, it is
done through a management-labor sort of agreement in terms of
how it operates.
We also up in Pomfret, Connecticut, have the Laborers'
International Union of North America, which actually has their
New England training academy for the building trades and
construction.
So, again, I just wonder if you could talk a little bit, if
you could, about sort of the ancillary benefits of collective
bargaining in terms of really addressing issues that are common
to both management and labor.
Mr. Rosenfeld. Yes, I think that is a great question. And
the unions' role in kind of fostering training, work force
development programs oftentimes gets overshadowed in these
highly politicized debates. But it is real, it is there, and we
see successful efforts across the country.
In Connecticut there has been good research done on
manufacturing, in Wisconsin, in Michigan as well, where they
have had kind of successful training programs working hand in
hand with management about how to upskill the work force.
And I think that is a nice way of saying that not only do
unions help close the gap between rising productivity and
average worker wages, but they also help bump productivity in
the first place. And that is, I will say, an area that gets
less attention, but probably needs more.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. Again, I think that having that
sort of bottom-up communication about ways that new
technologies are being introduced in terms of just workplace
methods and production, again, has just been very successful in
terms of--you know, they just commissioned the USS
South Dakota. Again, built ahead of schedule. The work
force is now 51 percent millennial. And if you go back just 3
or 4 years ago, it was about a quarter.
So this thing is happening very quickly in terms of just
the change in the work force. And there is just no question
that the union-management arrangements to really kind of mentor
these young folks coming in through the metal trades council
and the United Auto Workers has just really been a tremendous
success.
Mr. Rosenfeld. Yes, I wouldn't disagree at all. And we see
that kind of overseas in places that still retain strong
manufacturing bases, Germany, Denmark, and the like. That
unions, one of their key roles is helping in this kind of
upskilling and bringing in kind of new workers to replace those
who are now facing retirement age.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. I would be remiss if I didn't
mention that Mr. Scott's district is also seeing that same kind
of change that is happening in the work force. And this really
is the question of the day for our economy, is just whether we
are going to have the folks skilled up to take on these
opportunities.
With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
I now recognize the esteemed chair of the Education and
Labor Committee, Chairman Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Rosenfeld, we have heard a suggestion that unions hold
people back. Can you show the difference between compensation
of union members and nonunion members? Does it make a
difference?
Mr. Rosenfeld. Sure. The union wage premium, well
documented and now decades worth of studies, averages about 15
to 20 percent. So that means you take a worker who belongs to a
labor union and an otherwise similar nonworker, similar in all
sorts of characteristics that affect people's pay, the union
member earns on average 15 to 20 percent more than the
nonmember.
Mr. Scott. Likelihood of a pension or employer-provided
healthcare?
Mr. Rosenfeld. Absolutely. So once you start factoring in
benefits, the divergence grows. The likelihood of having
employer-provided healthcare is much higher among the union
members. And certainly having a pension, much higher among
union members. And certainly having a defined benefit pension,
much higher among the union members.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Ms. Virk, can you tell us why a private right of action is
important?
Ms. Virk. A private right of action to enforce the National
Labor Relations Act's protections?
Mr. Scott. Right.
Ms. Virk. Right now, I believe that the only private right
of action that exists for enforcing any of the protections
under the act is an action to enforce the duty of fair
representation, which is an action that an individual member
can bring against a union.
There are, to my knowledge, no other provisions of the act,
including the right to be free from illegal coercion, the right
not to be fired for engaging in union activity, the right to
bargain collectively. All of those rights are only enforceable
and exclusively enforceable through the board's own processes.
Certainly, we have seen that in other situations having a
private right of action does develop a body of law and provides
certain remedial measures that might not be available under an
agency statue. I am, obviously, not here as a policymaker, but
it is something that certainly this body could consider as an
effective way to provide a remedy.
Mr. Scott. Could you say a word about whether or not it is
important to have injunctive relief and potential reinstatement
during litigation?
Ms. Virk. Really, nothing could be more critical than
having quick relief for when an individual, such as Ms. Harper,
is fired for union activity. This often happens, it happens in
not just isolated instances, but in a substantial percentage of
campaigns to organize. Individuals who take the lead and who
come out to their employers, as it were, as union supporters
end up being suspended, fired, and targeted.
And it is not just that worker who is hurt. It is all the
other workers who wish to have a union who see that happen and
are reminded once again of the complete and utter coercive
authority of their employer, what their employer can do to
them. And having an injunctive relief that was not just
available but mandatory in those cases would be a critical
step.
Mr. Scott. Can you say a word about the deterrent effect of
civil penalties and whether the civil penalties are sufficient
today?
Ms. Virk. Well, as I understand it, there really are no
civil penalties under the National Labor Relations Act. As I
said, many of the wrongs that are found by the board are cured
or supposedly cured only by a notice posting, literally a piece
of paper up in the shop saying go forth and don't do it again.
This is really not a meaningful remedy.
Almost every other statue that I can think of in this
subject area and many others has civil penalties attached to it
for the basic reason that, again, we provide consequences for
violating those rights that we believe to be important.
Mr. Scott. There is a concept of joint employer where you
are at a temp agency and working at an agency, there is a
question of which one you can negotiate with. Why is it
important to be able to negotiate with whoever is actually
controlling the conditions, the terms and conditions of
employment?
Ms. Virk. Well, because those are the entities, just to
State the obvious, that have the ability to affect an
employee's terms and conditions of employment. If an employee
is going to have a meaningful right to bargain collectively,
they have to have the right entities across the table from them
when they do that.
Mr. Scott. And why is it important to have a first
contract? What happens on the first contract? Does that need to
be changed?
Ms. Virk. Right now when people organize, they choose a
union, they jump through all of the hoops that are required of
them. There is no incentive for an employer to reach a contract
with the employees. In many cases what happens is employers
stall that process, and in the end of the day, even though
workers have voted overwhelmingly to unionize, they never get a
contract.
I would suggest that one of the remedial measures that this
body could take into account would be to have some process by
which, if a contract is not reached after a certain period of
bargaining has expired, that there be a neutral process by
which an initial contract could be reached between the parties
or facilitated through mediation or arbitration.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you.
Before recognizing the ranking member for his closing
statement, I ask unanimous consent to enter the following
materials into the record: a letter from the International
Union of Painters and Allied Trades.
Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairwoman Wilson. I now recognize the distinguished
ranking member, Mr. Walberg, for his closing statement.
Mr. Walberg. I thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and appreciate
the hearing. It is always worthwhile to discuss things that we
may assume have been talked to death. Sometimes we forget that,
and we don't get the reality. So thank you for this.
You have almost persuaded me to start an organizing
petition for the minority. If we could get a union in place for
the minority I think we could have--don't worry, I am not going
to. You are still treating me fine.
I used to maybe drive my kids nuts, especially in their
teenage years, when they would come and talk to my wife--well,
first they would talked to me, then they would go to my wife
because they could get a better answer there--about the dating
process and what was going on and the romantic issues that were
taking place in their life. And I would respond to them and
say, well, that is the dance of the courtship.
And so it got to a point in time in their life where any
time they approached me and I thought it was going to be the
dance of the courtship. And they knew exactly what I was
saying. It is not an easy dance. It takes two people. It takes
some other factors. At times, it just doesn't seem to work out
in every case exactly the way you want it at that point in
time.
But somehow each and every one of them got through it, as
their mother and father did as well, that dance of courtship.
And so there is maybe a dance of the workplace. I want to
kind of apply that. There is a dance of the workplace. Nothing
is perfect in a workplace. And sadly, as Ms. Harper so clearly
illustrated for us today, there are still a few monster mashes
going on as well in those workplaces that need to be taken care
of, and that we have put in place rules and laws, agencies that
are supposed to be taking care of that.
In some cases, they are. In some cases, we miss those
things. And certainly we want to take those seriously and
especially when it relates to the life of an individual in the
workplace.
And Congress is responsible for defining and chaperoning
this dance, as it were. It is our responsibility, the workplace
miracle that has made America normally the greatest and most
productive place to live and work in the entire world. I don't
think there is a debate on that.
With our mistakes, we have remedied many of those. We have
moved forward. And the unions and the management, employees and
the owners, have been all part of that over the course of time.
And I don't want to give up on it, Madam Chairwoman, and so
again, I appreciate this hearing. I believe that any effort
that takes the employer-employee scale out of balance puts
everything out of sync. That scale has to remain in balance to
make it work, and that is our responsibility, along with the
workplace as well.
Sadly, the results, if this imbalance takes place, can
include abuse. It can include scandal. It can include fraud,
lack of transparency, fear, and economic failure, both in
individuals' household life as well as in the business' life as
well if we are not careful.
We have come a long way to turn back now. While there are
dark corners in most every room, there is irrefutable evidence
that workers enjoy free choice better than not.
We just have to look at Michigan for that. We can do all of
the studies we want and put all of the data that we can find to
put in that some cases, sadly, makes a point that we want to
make.
But when you look at the laboratory of life experience or
the dance of the workplace at times in a State like Michigan
that I am privileged to represent, free choice of free
individuals, making informed decisions, and then having the
regulations and rules in place that meet the need of the place
and time we find ourselves works best. Michigan hasn't seen a
decline in union membership and an actual increase in middle
class pay through coercion.
Those are the facts in Michigan today, and I want to see
them continue. So that means that we work together in a light
touch approach as necessary. If there is a heavy touch that is
absolutely required, that is one thing.
But to keep that scale so there is always that creative
tension, and in most of the businesses I go into, there is that
creative tension, where the employer knows that I am at this
State right now because I have taken care of my employees. And
all I need to do is let some of those lights go out and the air
conditioning fan go out and a number of things take place and
lockouts get left open and unrepaired and I have got a problem
on my hands.
I think that is productive, and I want to be part of that.
And I thank the panel for being here today to cause us to think
through those issues. And I yield back.
Chairwoman Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Walberg, and we continue
on our path together.
I will now recognize myself for the purpose of making my
closing statement.
Thank you again to all of our witnesses for your
testimonies today.
Today we heard how weak labor laws have failed to safeguard
the human right to join a union. Routine violations of the
right to organize suppress wages and deny workers the
opportunity to negotiate for their fair share of the wealth
they create.
We heard from Dr. Rosenfeld how the decline of union
membership hurts all workers and how unions can close the wage
gaps for women and people of color. We heard from Ms. Harper
how difficult it is to organize a union in the face of employer
resistance. Ms. Harper is one of many courageous Americans who
stood up for their right to organize a union and was unfairly
targeted.
As our witnesses have made clear, Congress must act now to
stop violations of workers' rights and reverse decades of wage
stagnation and income inequality.
I thank my colleagues for an informative hearing. I thank
the witnesses for coming. And I yield back my time.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
committee stands adjourned. Thank you for coming.
[Additional submission by Mrs. Foxx follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Additional submissions by Chairwoman Wilson follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Questions submitted for the record and their responses
follow:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]