- THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE'S ROLE IN PROTECTING DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS
[Senate Hearing 115-862]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-862
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE'S ROLE IN PROTECTING DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY
of the
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
FEBRUARY 13, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Armed Services
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-117 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2021
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
JOHN McCAIN, Arizona, Chairman
JACK REED, Rhode Island
JAMES M. INHOFE, Oklahoma
BILL NELSON, Florida
ROGER F. WICKER, Mississippi
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
JEANNE SHAHEEN, New Hampshire
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
JONI ERNST, Iowa
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
DAN SULLIVAN, Alaska
TIM KAINE, Virginia
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
TED CRUZ, Texas
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
LINDSEY GRAHAM, South Carolina
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
GARY C. PETERS, Michigan
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
Christian D. Brose, Staff Director
Elizabeth L. King, Minority Staff
Director
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota,
BILL NELSON, Florida
Chairman
CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri
DEB FISCHER, Nebraska
KIRSTEN E. GILLIBRAND, New York
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut
LINDSEY GRAHAM, South Carolina
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
February 13, 2018
Page
The Department of Defense's Role in Protecting Democratic
1
Elections.
Butler, Robert J., Cofounder and Managing Director, Cyber
4
Strategies, LLC.
Conley, Heather A., Director, Europe Program, Center for
9
Strategic and International Studies.
Harknett, Dr. Richard J., Professor of Political Science and Head
14
of Political Science Department, University of Cincinnati.
Sulmeyer, Dr. Michael L. Director, Cyber Security Project, Belfer
18
Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard
University.
APPENDIX A
The State and Local Election Cybersecurity Playbook............
36
Election Cyber Incident Communications Coordination Guide......
106
Election Cyber Incident Communications Plan Template...........
140
(iii)
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE'S ROLE IN PROTECTING DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS
----------
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2018
United States Senate,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:34 p.m. in
Room SR-222, Russell Senate Office Building, Senator Mike
Rounds (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Subcommittee Members present: Senators Rounds, Fischer,
Sasse, Nelson, McCaskill, Gillibrand, and Blumenthal.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MIKE ROUNDS
Senator Rounds. Good afternoon.
The Cybersecurity Subcommittee meets this afternoon to
receive testimony on the Department of Defense's (DOD) role in
protecting the U.S. election process.
The witnesses are Mr. Bob Butler, Co-founder and Managing
Director of Cyber Strategies, LLC; Adjunct Senior Fellow at the
Center for a New American Security; Senior Vice President of
Critical Infrastructure Protection Operations for AECOM; Ms.
Heather Conley, the Senior Vice President for Europe, Eurasia,
and the Arctic and Director of the Europe Program at the Center
for Strategic and International Studies; Dr. Richard Harknett,
head of political science at the University of Cincinnati and a
former scholar in residence at U.S. Cyber Command and the
National Security Agency; and Dr. Michael Sulmeyer, the
Director of the Cyber Security Project at the Harvard Kennedy
School.
At the conclusion of Ranking Member Nelson's comments, we
will ask our witnesses to make their opening remarks. After
that, we will have a round of questions and answers.
There is no dispute about what Russia did during the 2016
election cycle. There is clear evidence that Russia attempted
to undermine our democratic process through the hacking of
independent political entities, manipulation of social media,
and use of propaganda venues such as Russia Today. Evidence to
date indicates that no polls or State election systems were
manipulated to change the outcome of the vote. However, there
was evidence of Russian probing of certain election systems in
21 states.
The Department of Defense has a critical role to play in
challenging and influencing the mindset of our cyber
adversaries and defending the homeland from attacks, attacks
that could include cyber attacks by other nations against our
election infrastructure. We look forward to the Department
approaching these issues with a heightened sense of urgency.
The threat is not going away. Just a couple of weeks ago,
the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency warned that
Russia will seek to influence the upcoming midterm elections.
The White House National Security Advisor stated that they will
seek to influence the Mexican presidential campaign as well.
This is all in addition to Russian attempts to influence the
elections in France and Germany last year.
Each of us on this panel has been quite vocal about the
need for a strategy that seizes the strategic high ground in
cyberspace. Whether you call it deterrence or something else,
we need a strategy that moves out of the trenches and imposes
costs on our adversaries. The lack of consequences for the
countless attacks over the past decade has emboldened our
adversaries and left us vulnerable to emboldened behavior. The
attacks we experienced during the 2016 election are just the
latest rung on that escalation ladder. As long as our
adversaries feel that they can act with impunity, they will
press further.
Our witnesses offer unique perspectives on the challenges
we face. We look to them to help us understand why our posture
restraint has not worked, if we can reverse the damage already
done, and what it will take to develop and implement a strategy
that limits our exposure and imposes costs on malicious
behavior.
We invited Dr. Richard Harknett to explain his theory of
cyber persistence, specifically on how our failure to tailor
our strategies to the uniqueness of the cyber domain limits our
ability to confront challenges we face. Our adversaries
actively exploit us because they see great benefit and little
consequence in doing so. I agree with Dr. Harknett that the
Cold War models of deterrence will not work and look forward to
hearing what he believes it will take to influence the mindset
of our adversaries.
In addition to his writings on cyber deterrence and
election attacks, Dr. Michael Sulmeyer has focused a great deal
of his research on the organizational challenges we face as a
government. We understand that Dr. Sulmeyer is working on a
paper addressing some of the challenges we examined during our
full committee hearings in October on the whole-of-government
approach to cybersecurity. We look forward to hearing more from
Dr. Sulmeyer on the gaps and the seams he sees in our
organizational model and what lessons we can learn from
analyzing like the British.
Ms. Heather Conley provides an expertise in Russian
politics and foreign policy. Russia has yet to face serious
consequences in the cyber or other domains for its 2016
elections interference. We look forward to Ms. Conley's
testimony on how the United States can tailor and implement
these penalties and how the Department can best deter or
dissuade further Russian election meddling.
We also look forward to the testimony of Mr. Bob Butler who
brings extensive cyber experience in both the Department of
Defense and the private sector. Mr. Butler has been involved in
numerous studies on the cyber deterrence, including the recent
Defense Science Board Task Force on Cyber Deterrence.
Let me close by thanking our witnesses for their
willingness to appear today before our subcommittee.
Senator Nelson?
STATEMENT OF SENATOR BILL NELSON
Senator Nelson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to make sure that, since this is a
hearing on elections, everybody understands that this Senator
feels that this is about the foundation of our democracy and
that we as a government ought to be doing more to defend
ourselves.
The second thing I want to make sure everybody understands
is that this is not a partisan issue. This can happen to either
party or the non-party candidates as well. It ought to be all
hands on deck.
The chairman and I in public and in closed meetings because
of the clearance level--we have been quite disturbed about
wondering if we are doing as much as we should as a government
to protect ourselves. So in a recent closed hearing of this
subcommittee, the Department of Defense demonstrated that it is
not taking appropriate steps to defend against and deter this
threat to our democracy.
So, Mr. Chairman, I join you in welcoming these witnesses
and hope that some practical suggestions are going to come out.
Now, I want to mention just a few things.
First, the Department has cyber forces designed and trained
to thwart attacks on our country through cyberspace, and that
is why we created the Cyber Command's National Mission Teams.
Members of this subcommittee, Senator Blumenthal, Senator
Shaheen--we all wrote to the Secretary of Defense last week
that they, the Department, ought to be assigned to identify
Russian operators responsible for the hacking, stealing
information, planting misinformation, and spreading it through
all the botnets and fake accounts on social media. They ought
to do that. The Cyber Command knows who that is.
Then we ought to use our cyber forces to disrupt this
activity. We are not.
We should also be informing the social media companies of
Russia's fake accounts and other activities that violate those
companies' terms of service so that they can be shut down.
Second I would ask us to look at that as the Department's
own Defense Science Board Task Force on Cyber Deterrence
concluded last year--we ought to show Mr. Putin that two can
play in this game. We ought to consider information operations
of our own to deter Mr. Putin like exposing his wealth and that
of his oligarchs.
Third, I would suggest the Department should ensure that
its active and reserve component cyber units are prepared to
assist the Department of Homeland Security and the governors to
defend our election infrastructure, not just after the attack
but proactively before and during the Russian attacks.
Fourth, I would suggest that the Department must integrate
capabilities and planning into cyber warfare and information
warfare to conduct information warfare through cyberspace as
last year's defense bill mandated. Our adversaries recognize
the importance of this kind of integration, but today cyber
warfare and information warfare are separated in the Department
of Defense and involve multiple organizations.
Fifth, I would recommend, as one of our witnesses I think
will testify today, the Department must help develop an
effective whole-of-government response to Russia's strategic
influence operation through things like a joint interagency
task force and a fusion center. Our colleagues on the Foreign
Relations Committee have proposed something similar. The threat
is not going away. It is likely to intensify. As our
intelligence community has been warning and as DNI [Director of
National Intelligence] Coats has just testified to the Senate
Intelligence Committee, that threat is not going away.
So the 2018 elections are upon us. We cannot sit idly by
and watch this happen again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Welcome to all of our panelists here today, our witnesses.
We would ask that, first of all, you limit your opening remarks
to 5 minutes, but your entire statements will be made a part of
the record. We would like to begin with Mr. Butler.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT J. BUTLER, COFOUNDER AND MANAGING DIRECTOR,
CYBER STRATEGIES, LLC
Mr. Butler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Nelson,
and distinguished members of the Cyber Subcommittee. It is a
privilege to be here. Thank you for the invitation.
My views really represent my views and not that of any
particular organization. I will just quickly hit the highlights
of my written statement. They track very closely with a lot of
the opening comments. My comments are really focused around my
assessment of the threat in the electoral processes after
interviewing a few different States; secondly, recommendations
for the Federal Government partnered with a whole-of-America
campaign; and then thirdly, what this subcommittee can do going
forward.
I have been watching the Russian influence operations
threat for some time in uniform and out of uniform. Our ability
to counter Russian influence operations is not only a function
of what we know about the threat but our willingness and our
ability address that threat through hardening resilience and
other countermeasures.
As I have looked at the election infrastructure in a few
different States, we have learned from 2016, and our known
vulnerabilities have been remediated. Whether you look at the
voting registration systems in the election infrastructure
proper, we are making progress there. However, the States do
not know how to address the disinformation campaign. That is a
struggle and the threat still remains very, very high.
From my perspective looking at this particular threat, what
we are talking about today is one line of operation within what
I think has to be addressed through a National Security
Council-led task force, a whole-of-America campaign not too
much dissimilar from the NCTC [National Counterterrorisim
Center], but with a strong, empowered private sector element.
Again, I go back to the idea of a whole-of-America process.
Two key components inside of this. One is the idea of
having an element that is focused on strengthening States'
election infrastructure and hardening American citizens,
deterrence by denial some would say. A second component focused
on cost imposition from botnet disruptions to other kinds of
sanctioning activities, importantly reinforced multilaterally.
I am a big proponent of an International Cyber Stability Board,
a coalition of the willing, working to ensure the most
effective way of doing cost imposition. Those two components
then supported by an integrated fusion center that provides
situational awareness, combines the best of intelligence both
in the commercial and from the national security community with
law enforcement and active defense actions, focused on a
campaign that is centralized in its planning but decentralized
in its execution.
From my perspective, it really requires both cultural and
legislative enablers. Culturally the President must lead, must
rally the nation. There are opportunities already this week
that can be used to help with that. The infrastructure proposal
is a great example. I do not see anything about resilience in
the infrastructure proposal. We should have a way of
incorporating, especially as we are building new
infrastructure, methods and strategies and incentives for
strengthening the infrastructure here in this country.
Additionally, we need to leverage the best of U.S.
competencies across America. Defense is excellent at campaign
planning and exercise. U.S. intelligence agencies, combined
with web-scale companies, do a great job in intelligence
generation and fusion. Web-scale companies are very good and
growing in their ability to rapidly identify disinformation
campaigns and response, and we will need some help from the
legislative side.
Specifically for DOD [Department of Defense], five
recommendations that track very closely with what Senator
Nelson was talking about. I think to jump start this NSC
[National Security Council]-sponsored task force, we should
coordinate with the Secretary of Defense to immediately stand
up a JIATF, a joint interagency task force. Inside of that,
again empowered private sector players. We typically do not
think about that, but this really is something where we need to
work together in a public-private partnership. We need to make
arrangements with State and local officials through DHS
[Department of Homeland Security] and the National Guard
Bureau.
The second recommendation really is to the NGB and working
with the National Guard Bureau to really not only inventory
what we have from a cyber and IO perspective. We have cyber
units. We information operations units. But to begin to scale
them to help the States and to help us as we think about
incident response in general. I think they could be aligned
with FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] regions. I
think they could be aligned in a lot of different ways, but we
need to first get organized.
The third is to actually have a session where we discuss
courses of action. It would have to be a closed session. But I
think that is where the request for authorities, new
authorities, requests for new resources come out. It really
gets at the point of not only looking at offensive actions but
defensively what we are in store for as we begin to move
offensively and what we are going to do from a continuity of
government, continuity of business perspective.
The last two relate to Senator Nelson's comments with
regard to the DSB [Defense Science Board] task force. I think
we should continue to push with the NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] and operationalizing the rest of the Cyber
Deterrence Task Force recommendations. I would advocate that
this committee should have its own campaign of exercises to
help it understand where the adversary is going and to be able
to advance ideas with regard to looking at threat and
countermeasures.
I stand ready to answer any questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Butler follows:]
Prepared Statement by Robert J. Butler
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Nelson, and distinguished members of
the Cyber Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak on the topic
of countering Russian influence in the United States elections
infrastructure. I would like to begin by noting that my opinions are
mine and do not reflect the views of any organization.
For more than 37 years, my work life has been about Information
Technology (IT) and its application across Defense and other sectors.
Along the way, I was afforded the opportunity to help guide the
evolution of information warfare; information and cyberspace strategy
and operations within the Department of Defense (DOD); and the United
States Government (USG) as a planner and commander. My work in DOD
included the stand-up of information operations (IO) organizations,
development of IO campaign plans, and serving as the DOD lead in the
first USG negotiation with the Russians on cyber arms control in 1998.
I was also privileged to serve as the Director of Intelligence at U.S.
Transportation Command (TRANSCOM) during Operations Enduring and Iraqi
Freedom. I culminated my military career by commanding the intelligence
operations organization that is now commonly referred to as NSA-Texas.
After retirement from the United States Air Force (USAF), I served
as the senior civilian executive for DOD's premiere joint information
operations command before joining a U.S.-based global IT services firm
as its Director of its Military Intelligence Programs. Returning to
Government service in 2009, I served as the first Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense (DASD) for Space and Cyber Policy. During my time
as a DASD, I witnessed and was alarmed at the expansion of the cyber
threat around the globe--specifically, China's rampant on-line theft of
United States intellectual property and Russia's continued disruptive
cyber-attacks in the Ukraine and other parts of the world.
Since leaving government service in 2011, I have spent most of my
time in the private sector. As a corporate Chief Security Officer and
now as an AECOM \1\ security executive, I had the opportunity to build
and implement enterprise security programs to countering foreign
threats. Additionally, I have served and continue to serve as a
consultant to various Defense Science Board (DSB) task forces including
the recent cyber deterrence task force. It is from this experience
base, I address you today. I've organized my remarks around three
topics: 1) my assessment of the Russian threat, specifically to our
electoral process; 2) my recommendations for what the federal--
including DOD--and state governments, along with United States industry
should do to further counter Russian or any other foreign government
influence; and 3) my suggestions for how this committee could help in
this national security work. While my testimony focuses on enhancing
the resilience of the U.S. electoral process, I have also made some
suggestions regarding the resilience of critical infrastructures more
generally as the threats and responses overlap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ AECOM is an American multinational engineering firm that
provides design, consulting, construction, and management services to a
wide range of clients. AECOM has approximately 87,500 employees, and is
number 156 on the 2016 Fortune 500 list. (2018, January 01). About
AECOM. Retrieved February 06, 2018, from http://www.aecom.com/about-
aecom/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the russian threat and our election process.
Our ability to counter Russian influence operations is a function
of what we know about the Russian threat and our ability to address
that threat through hardening, resilience, and other countermeasures.
The National Security Strategy (NSS) and the National Defense Strategy
(NDS) identify Russia as ``attempting to erode American security and
prosperity'' including ``using information tools in an attempt to
undermine the legitimacy of democracies.'' \2\ As reported by our
intelligence agencies, the Russian Federation has been engaged in a
campaign aimed at interference with our 2016 presidential election
process. Russian intelligence obtained and maintained access to
elements of multiple United States state or local electoral boards.
Russia's influence campaign has been multi-faceted and has included
Russian Government cyber and media activities along with the use of
third party intermediaries and social media ``trolls.'' \3\
Importantly, we have no indication that this Russian influence campaign
against democratic elections has stopped. In fact, Russian Government
interference in European national elections leads us to a very
different judgment, namely that this type of Russian aggression is
growing. \4\ NATO assessments about Russia's capabilities and intent
confirm this assessment. \5\ CIA Director Pompeo has stated that Russia
can be expected to meddle in the 2018 elections. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Trump, D. (2017, December). National Security Strategy. https:/
/www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-
0905.pdf pp. 2, 14.
\3\ Director of National Intelligence. (2016, January). Background
to ``Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent U.S.
Elections''. https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICA--2017--01.pdf
\4\ Greenberg, A. (2017, June 02). NSA Director Confirms That
Russia Really Did Hack the French Election. Retrieved February 06,
2018, from https://www.wired.com/2017/05/nsa-director-confirms-russia-
hacked-french-election-infrastructure/
\5\ Giles, K. (2016, November). Handbook of Russian Information
Warfare. https://krypt3ia.files.wordpress.com/2016/12/fm--9.pdf
\6\ Cohen, Z. (2018, January 31). CIA director Pompeo met top
Russian spies. Retrieved February 06, 2018, from https://www.cnn.com/
2018/01/30/politics/cia-director-pompeo-russia-spies/index.html
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key focus of the Russian influence actions has been against the
election infrastructure in our states. The threat to state electoral
systems is dependent on the state election infrastructure architecture.
Some states have highly automated infrastructure while others continue
to employ paper ballot systems. In the latter case, digital
interactions still exist with web interfaces for voter registration and
election day voter verification along with the use of digital ballot
counting machines which scan paper ballot and store results.
Based on my conversations with Government representatives from
geographically dispersed states, the integrity and quality of election
infrastructure has improved since 2016. States have reviewed the
exposure and configuration of their end-to-end voting system, and known
areas of technical and procedural weaknesses have been remediated. \7\
Nonetheless, the threat to electoral processes remains high. For one,
it is difficult to identify and nullify disinformation campaigns that
are portrayed as news coverage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Department of Homeland Security. (2018, January). National
Cyber Incident Coordination Center. https://www.dhs.gov/national-
cybersecurity-and-communications-integration-center
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
recommendations to counter russian influence in our election process.
America has been and will continue to be involved in a campaign of
continuous engagement and pressure from the Kremlin to weaken United
States and allied critical infrastructure and democratic processes. To
counter, we need a ``whole of America'' campaign approach aimed
directly at preventing Russian or any other foreign government
interference. This campaign must be led by a National Security Council
(NSC)-sanctioned task force (not too dissimilar to the National
Counter-Terrorism Center) with membership from empowered government
agencies and industry representatives. One line of operation in this
campaign is countering Russian interference to influence our electoral
process.
This standing national task force needs to have two synchronized
components--one focused on continuous strengthening of the states'
election infrastructure as well as ``hardening'' American citizens to
Russian media and other cyber-enabled influence operations.
Importantly, these activities should include a partnership with
industry to regularly red team state election infrastructure; share
relevant intel with state election and cybersecurity officials; bar
Russian or other foreign online election material (just as we bar
foreign election contributions;) continuously identify fake and harmful
messages; and quickly disseminate the truth about USG actions. As a
starting point, this USG-industry partnership could build off the
actions already underway to counter on-line terrorist propaganda. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Robertson, A. (2017, June 26). Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter,
and YouTube launch anti-terrorism partnership. Retrieved February 06,
2018, from https://www.theverge.com/2017/6/26/15875102/facebook-
microsoft-twitter-youtube-global-internet-forum-counter-terrorism.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The second component of this task force should be focused to
directly impose cost on the Russian Federation, including activities
ranging from cyber-enabled social media operations and botnet
disruptions to sanctions and other enforcement actions.
Importantly, these cost imposition measures, when and where
possible, need to be multilateral in nature, involving other allied
nations and coordinated with appropriate private sector organizations.
\9\ The formation of an International Cyber Stability Board (ICSB) of
allied nations and industry partners could support rapid coordination
and enforcement of actions across Internet infrastructure. The NSC
staff should lead in the development of the ICSB.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Frank Kramer, Bob Butler, and Catherine Lotrionte. (2017,
November 06). Raising the Drawbridge with an ``International Cyber
Stability Board''. Retrieved February 06, 2018, from https://
www.thecipherbrief.com/raising-drawbridge-international-cyber-
stability-board.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The two components should be supported by an integrated fusion
center that enables continuous situational awareness and engagement
through human capital intelligence, intelligence at large, law
enforcement, and active defense actions. Although centrally planned,
execution of action must be decentralized to support persistent and
agile engagement against Russian ``trolls,'' bots, and other surrogates
of the Russian Government.
To enable this type of organization and ensure its success will
require both cultural and legislative changes. The President needs to
rally the U.S. Government and U.S. industry. Infrastructure resilience
and countermeasures need to be part of the President's ``call to
action'' this year. Additionally, we need to leverage the best U.S.
organizational core competencies to include the following:
Defense for campaign planning and exercise,
U.S. Intelligence Agencies and industry for rapid
intelligence generation and
fusion,
Webscale companies for rapid identification of
disinformation campaigns and
response,
Congress for potentially changing laws like the Computer
Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) and enabling Government and industry to work
together to actively defend this nation. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ McCain, U. S. (2017, October). Press Releases. Retrieved
February 06, 2018, from https://www.mccain.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/
2017/10/mccain-klobuchar-warner-introduce-legislation-to-protect-
integrity-of-u-s-elections-provide-transparency-of-political-ads-on-
digital-platforms. https://tomgraves.house.gov/uploadedfiles/
discussion_draft_active_cyber_defense_certainty _act_
2.0_rep._tom_graves_ga-14.pdf.; https://cchs.gwu.edu/sites/
cchs.gwu.edu/files/downloads/CCHS-ActiveDefenseReportFINAL.pdf. and
https://www.mccain.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/2017/10/mccain-
klobuchar-warner-introduce-legislation-to-protect-integrity-of-u-s-
elections-provide-transparency-of-political-ads-on-digital-platforms.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On the international front, it is critical to align our efforts
with our allies and identify appropriate ``red lines'' for actions. For
example, these would include attempts to hack or disrupt our electrical
grid and voting machines. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Miller, J. (2018, January). Navigating Dangerous Pathways.
Retrieved February 06, 2018, from https://www.cnas.org/publications/
reports/navigating-dangerous-pathways?utm_medium =email&utm
_campaign=Project Pathways 3 Report Release&utm_content=Project
Pathways 3 Report
Release%2BCID_2bd61d40546a491ed2980e0568645014&utm_source=Campaign
Monitor &utm_term=Navigating Dangerous Pathways A Pragmatic Approach to
United States-Russian Relations and Strategic Stability
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
proposals for the cyber subcommittee and sasc.
To ``jump start'' the stand-up of an NSC-sponsored national task
force, the SASC should coordinate with the Secretary of Defense in
immediately establishing a joint interagency task force to begin and
accelerate counter-Russian influence campaign planning. Key private
sector elements from the Defense Industrial Base and webscale companies
should be included as needed. Also, appropriate working arrangements
with state and local officials through the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) and the National Guard Bureau (NGB) should be created.
The SASC through its oversight jurisdiction should then monitor the
progress of the task force.
To further support the stand-up of the new national task force for
countering Russian or other foreign government influence, I recommend
the SASC direct the NGB, in conjunction with U.S. Cyber Command
(CYBERCOM), to inventory and certify all cyber capable National Guard
assets that could augment state resiliency and federal efforts. Working
with other committees, the SASC should then develop a statute to grow
ten NGB ``cross-state mutual assistance'' teams as certified active
defense teams to work alongside Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) regional leads, other government and industry partners at the
state and federal level.
The SASC should direct the Defense Leadership Team to develop
Defense-Defense Industrial Base Courses of Action (COA) to support the
new national task force, and to provide in a closed session a summary
of these COAs along with new resources and authority requests to the
Committee. Related to this point, the SASC should work with the DOD and
other Committees to update all statutes for enabling Defense counter-
influence actions at home and abroad.
To deter further adversary action, we must harden our critical
infrastructure. This includes the election infrastructure, but also all
infrastructure which ensures national security, public safety and
democratic processes. From a defense standpoint, this starts with the
resilience of our nuclear strike capabilities, non-nuclear capabilities
such as conventional strike, missile defense and offensive cyber.
Specific recommendations are included in the 2017 DSB report on Cyber
Deterrence. \12\ The SASC should continue to act to operationalize
these recommendations as part of developing the next National Defense
Authorization Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Defense Science Board. (2017, February). Task Force on Cyber
Deterrence. https://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/2010s/DSB-
CyberDeterrenceReport_02-28-17_Final.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the Committee should set up its own campaign of ``table
top'' exercises that would help members to better understand different
adversary scenarios which could involve defense capabilities and
highlight the need to the Committee for other Congressional actions in
countering Russian influence.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share these thoughts. I
stand ready to help the Committee as we seek to better protect and grow
our nation.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Mr. Butler.
Ms. Conley?
STATEMENT OF HEATHER A. CONLEY, DIRECTOR, EUROPE PROGRAM,
CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Ms. Conley. Thank you so much, Chairman Rounds, Ranking
Member Senator Nelson, and esteemed colleagues. Thank you for
this very timely opportunity to speak to you this afternoon and
what a timely moment as United States intelligence agencies
have now assessed that Russia will continue to make bold and
more disruptive cyber operations focused on the midterm
elections. CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] Director Mike
Pompeo also stated publicly that he fully expects that Russia
will attempt to disrupt the United States midterm elections. So
we know they are doing it and will do it, but we as a nation
are not prepared to effectively combat what I believe is an
intensifying disinformation operation and influence operation.
I am a bit of a contrarian on this panel. I am not a
cybersecurity expert. But what I am most concerned about is
that we have 9 months, and the American people are not educated
as to what is going to happen to them. That is where I think
our focus must lie. I am less concerned about the mindset of
President Putin. I know his mindset. I am more concerned about
the mindset of the American people as we head towards this
election.
You asked us what role DOD could play to protect the U.S.
elections. I think simply DOD, working with Congress, has got
to demand a whole-of-government strategy to fight against this
enduring disinformation and influence operation. We do not have
a national strategy. Unfortunately, modernizing our nuclear
forces will not stop a Russian influence operation. That is
where we are missing a grave threat that exists in the American
people's palm of their hand and on their computer screens. It
is vital that we start talking publicly about this threat and
educating the American people on a bipartisan basis.
Tragically the Russian campaign has already deeply
polarized our country, which only serves the Kremlin's
interests. As one of the most trusted institutions in the
United States, the Department of Defense must leverage that
trust with the American people to mitigate Russian influence.
Simply put, the Department of Defense has to model the
bipartisan and fact-based action, behavior, and awareness that
will help reduce societal division. This is about leadership.
It is about protecting the United States, and as far as I can
see, that is in the Department of Defense's job description.
So a good place to begin is using DOD's extensive employee
and military networks to provide timely policy guidance and
statements about the threat the Russian influence operation
poses to election security. Secretary Mattis and General
Dunford should provide extensive public outreach to the defense
community about the threat and how to counter it. Perhaps they
should think about forming public service announcements.
European governments have been very effective in warning their
publics about the danger of Russian disinformation. France and
Germany were very strong on that, but you have to put the
message out and we have not.
I offered one suggestion in my written testimony to look at
how we could leverage the National Guard Bureau, working
closely with State and local leaders in cooperation with the
Department of Homeland Security, to enhance cybersecurity
awareness and be able to detect patterns of influence, for
example, if packed emails surface online in conjunction with
the false rumors about potential electoral candidates. We need
to start talking about this.
Another instrument is the State Partnership Program. The
National Guard has partnered with the Lithuanian military, the
Estonian military. They can bring back to their States
information about how Russian influence works.
We are speaking today about protecting the homeland from
continuous disinformation attacks, which alter how the average
American thinks about their system of governance and their
government. What the American people may end up thinking is
that everyone is lying, everything is fake, and there is
nothing that can be trusted. Then even the most trusted of
American institutions, the Defense Department, the Justice
Department, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the
Department of Homeland Security, the Office of the President,
will mean very little to the American people. This is exactly
how you break the internal coherence of the enemy's system
according to Russian military doctrine. Unfortunately today we
are doing most of this to ourselves without assistance from the
Kremlin.
This is a matter of urgency. We have 9 months. We need to
educate the American people in addition to enhancing, of
course, our cybersecurity protections. But as the French
disinformation attacks showed, what many of the organizations
that looked like that disinformation was coming from--it was
coming from American organizations. This is designed to be
hidden. It adapts. We have to educate the American people about
what they are going to confront on the November elections.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Conley follows:]
Prepared Statement by Heather A. Conley
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Nelson and distinguished members of
the Cybersecurity Subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee,
thank you for the invitation to speak before this important
subcommittee on a topic that is of utmost importance to the future of
the United States and its national security: The essential need to
ensure that the American people have complete trust and confidence in
the fairness and accuracy of U.S. elections, be they at the local,
state or federal level.
I am a professional outlier on this panel for I am not a cyber
security expert, but I have spent the last several years at CSIS
studying and understanding how malign Russian influence works in
Europe, which we have described in detail in our seminal report, The
Kremlin Playbook. \1\ We have studied in detail how Russian economic
influence has worked in five European countries (Latvia, Hungary,
Slovakia, Bulgaria and Serbia) over a ten-year period to understand how
Russia infiltrates a democracy and erodes confidence and credibility in
how that democracy works. We have extended our research to include six
more European countries (Italy, Austria, the Netherlands, Romania, the
Czech Republic and Montenegro) which will culminate in a new report,
The Kremlin Playbook 2, in early 2019. The Central and Eastern European
region has constituted an extensive Russian laboratory for a variety of
influence operations for nearly two decades. European Governments and
citizens have been exposed to a full spectrum of Russian influence
tactics that have collapsed weakened governments as well as
systemically important financial institutions. Russian influence has
fomented societal unrest and altered Western-oriented government
policies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Heather A. Conley and Ruslan Stefanov, The Kremlin Playbook,
Center for Strategic and International Studies, October 2016, https://
www.csis.org/analysis/kremlin-playbook.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Having said this, I believe Russian influence is less about
physical cyber security (although cyberattacks are a useful tool) and
more about (dis)information and influence superiority, which is how the
Kremlin believes it will maintain its global preeminence as it
addresses slow and long-term decline. According to the Czech Security
Information Service, it is the Kremlin's goal to convince the average
citizen that ``everyone is lying,'' which in turn will ``weaken
society's will to resist'' Russian interests. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Jakub Janda, ``How Czech President Milos Zeman Became Putin's
Man,'' Observer, January 26, 2018, http://observer.com/2018/01/how-
czech-president-milos-zeman-became-vladimir-putins-man/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Therefore, one of our first lines of defense is to develop a much
deeper understanding of and a body of research into how Russia
practices its influence operations as well as to study how European
countries defend themselves against these ongoing operations. Europe
has been at this longer than we have. Our knowledge has atrophied. Our
defense and intelligence officials must have the closest possible
relationship with our European partners to develop effective and
sustainable countermeasures against Russian influence.
Secondly, it needs to be understood that Russian influence does not
simply occur in and around a national election; it is a continuous and
holistic series of operations that are designed to break the ``internal
coherence of the enemy system.'' \3\ It is true that elections are the
most visible opportunity to harm a democracy when it is at its most
vulnerable. We can observe that Russian influence operations and cyber
infiltration may accelerate approximately two years prior to an
election but this does not mean that Russian operations cease after an
election. If anything, they simply adapt their methods to the outcome
and alter their strategies to continue to degrade confidence in
democratic institutions. Sustained Russian influence operations focus
on those issues that are deeply divisive within a society, such as
issues related to migration or questions of history or national, racial
or religious identity. Today's Russian influence operations, just as
their predecessor, Soviet active measures, exploit the weaknesses that
are present within a society but they benefit from increasingly
sophisticated means amid increasingly confused Western societies that
are overwhelmed daily by a growing amount of information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Dimitry Adamsky, ``Cross-Domain Coercion: The Current Russian
Art of Strategy,'' Proliferation Paper no. 54, Institut Francais des
Relations Internationales, November 30, 2015, https://www.ifri.org/en/
publications/enotes/proliferation-papers/cross-domain-coercion-current-
russian-art-strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My contribution to this important discussion is to offer you what I
believe European countries have done successfully to combat malign
Russian influence and disinformation as well as increase cyber-
protection. But before doing this, I will address the questions posed
to all the witnesses today.
I do not believe the Department of Defense has a leading role to
play in the cyber protection of U.S. elections. This is the purview of
the Department of Homeland Security, which has struggled to develop
effective policies to protect critical election infrastructure as
distrust between the Federal Government and state as well as local
election officials has grown. However, I believe the Department of
Defense can play a role that is highly complementary to the work of the
Department of Homeland Security by rebuilding trust between state and
federal officials, and building knowledge and awareness of the ever-
present threat. This will not be easy. State and local election
officials are unable to receive classified intelligence briefings.
Candidates for office may not have received cybersecurity training or
know whom to contact should they become the victim of illicit hacking
or an influence operation.
We can learn from the French Government about how to combine
military and civilian efforts to prevent cyber-destabilization. This
month the French Ministry of Defense released its Military Planning
Law, which prioritizes cyber risks and seeks to increase cooperation
with telecommunication companies to enable them to scan networks for
technical clues of ongoing or future cyberattacks. The civilian French
Network and Information Security Agency (ANSSI) will provide a list of
risk indicators to the Defense Ministry. These risk indicators only
focus on technical aspects of security breaches and not on content
(which is important to ensure First Amendment protections in the United
States). The goal is to enhance early detection. A French white paper
was released in conjunction with the planning law which outlined and
defined the possible cyberattacks that France could suffer and
identifies cyber-protection as a strategic priority. \4\ The strategic
review of France's cyber defense sets out six main goals: prevention,
anticipation, protection, detection, attribution, and reaction. \5\ The
ANSSI provides cybersecurity awareness-raising seminars to politicians
and parties. Could DOD produce something similar in cooperation with
DHS?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Martin Untersinger, ``Cybersecurite: le gouvernement veut
mettre les telecoms a la contribution pour detecter les attaques,'' Le
Monde, February 8, 2018, http://www.lemonde.fr/pixels/article/2018/02/
08/cybersecurite-le-gouvernement-veut-mettre-les-telecoms-a-
contribution-pour-detecter-les-attaques_5253808_4408996.html.
\5\ Olivier Berger, ``Revue strategique de cyberdefense : l'Etat et
les operateurs pourront collaborer pour traquer les attaques
informatiques,'' La Voix du Nord, February 8, 2018, http://
defense.blogs.lavoixdunord.fr/archive/2018/02/08/l-etat-et-les-
operateurs-pourront-collaborer-pour-traquer-le-15570.html
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While there is a role for the Defense Department to play in
deploying offensive cyber capabilities should there be an attributable
Russian attack on the United States election process, it would have to
be part of a whole-of-government policy and strategy toward Russian
influence operations, which at present the United States Government
does not have--but urgently needs. Perhaps a more credible policy of
deterrence would be for the United States Government to notify the
Kremlin that future attributable attacks against United States
elections would force the United States to seek to block Russia's
access to the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial
Telecommunications (SWIFT). Although the Russian Government has
developed an alternative system that may mitigate financial disruption
internally, it could certainly hamper access to international bank
accounts from the Kremlin's very wealthy inner circle--which may have
more immediate impact.
There are two additional areas that the Defense Department could
explore to enhance disinformation awareness and cyber-protection prior
to the 2018 mid-term and 2020 presidential elections. First, it could
use its extensive employee and military network to provide timely
policy guidance and statements about the threat that Russian influence
operations pose to election security. Secretary Mattis and General
Dunford should provide extensive public outreach to the defense
community about the nature of the threat and how best to counter it to
sensitize the DOD community to the threat of Russian influence and
misinformation operations in a public service announcement format.
Another idea would be to consider engaging the National Guard Bureau to
help develop and facilitate training of state and local election
officials to enhance cybersecurity awareness and to be able to detect
patterns of influence (for example, hacked e-mails surfacing online in
conjunction with the spread of false rumors about candidates) in
partnership with the Department of Homeland Security. Those National
Guard units that have participated in the State Partnership Program
(SPP) have served and developed relationships with European partners,
and could also be particularly helpful in sharing information about
Russian influence operations (United States forces serving in these
countries have been the recipients of Russian misinformation campaigns)
through the State Adjutant Generals who are very well regarded among
state and local officials. State Partnership Programs particularly well
placed for this would be the Pennsylvania National Guard (Lithuania),
the Maryland National Guard (Estonia), the Texas National Guard (the
Czech Republic) and the Michigan National Guard (Latvia). \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See more at ``State Partnership Program,'' National Guard,
http://www.nationalguard.mil/Leadership/Joint-Staff/J-5/International-
Affairs-Division/State-Partnership-Program/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Simply put, the Defense Department must model the bipartisan and
fact-based actions, behavior and awareness that will reduce societal
division and help bridge the state and federal divide. As one of the
most trusted institutions in the United States, the Defense Department
must leverage that trust to mitigate malign Russian influence.
Turning now to the European laboratory of Russian cyber-
destabilization, there are several important lessons that the 2017
European election cycle has taught us (and that Europeans have
learned):
The necessity of having a paper ballot either as the
ballot of record or as a back-up to an electronic ballot. The Dutch and
German national elections use paper ballots. The German Government has
also focused on protecting the software that tallies the election
results to ensure that these systems are not vulnerable to cyberattack.
A unified and all-political party message on what is at
stake as well as how to detect and understand Russian influence. The
French and German Governments were particularly effective at early
notification regarding the likelihood of Russian influence and
announcing when data breaches occurred. There was sufficient trust in
the institutions and their leaders to ensure that a majority of the
public took heed of the warning, which reduced the impact of the
Russian misinformation campaign.
French and German media organizations set up fact-
checking teams and social media platforms that cooperated with
authorities to protect sensitive accounts. The French polling
commission went so far as to warn against illegitimate polls coming
from Kremlin-affiliated outlets that did not fit legal criteria for
accurate polling. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Laura Daniels, ``How Russia hacked the French election,''
Politico, April 23, 2017, https://www.politico.eu/article/france-
election-2017-russia-hacked-cyberattacks/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Sweden, ahead of the September 2018 elections, the
Government plans to create a new agency to enhance the public's
``psychological defense'' against influence by identifying, analyzing
and reacting to Russian influence attempts; this would also take place
through increased funding for the Swedish intelligence services, and
cyber-defense. \8\ In January 2018, the Swedish head of security
services (Sapo) warned against increased foreign influence operations
ahead of the election, citing as examples forged letters of arms deals
with Ukraine or fake reports that Muslims had vandalized a church. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Andrew Rettman and Lisbeth Kirk, ``Sweden raises alarm on
election meddling,'' January 15, 2018, https://euobserver.com/foreign/
140542.
\9\ Gordon Corera, ``Swedish security chief warning on fake news,''
January 4, 2018, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe0-42285332.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Swedish Prime Minister Lofven plans to convene political
parties to share protection and resilience strategies throughout the
election process. The media would also take part in some of these
meetings to bolster awareness of foreign influence.
The chief of Sapo has increased information-sharing with
European partners, and with other security services to better protect
the election process; he argued that despite being a security service,
openness was important to inform the public on the threat. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ 10 Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Swedish Government is also discussing the inclusion
of critical thinking skills in primary school curricula, teaching
children how to spot fake news. Swedish Government authorities have
initiated a series of public news literacy activities to help the
Swedish public discern how truthful and fact-based information that
receive. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``A practical approach on how to cope with disinformation,''
Government of Sweden, October 6, 2017, http://www.government.se/
articles/2017/10/a-practical-approach-on-how-to-cope-with-
disinformation/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. Government has taken none of these positive, proactive
steps--to my knowledge. The most proactive work being done in this
space is taking place in U.S. think-tanks and universities through
independent funding.
If we understood 2016 and 2017 to be exceptional years for all-
encompassing Russian influence operations, we must reckon with the fact
that 2018 has already witnessed significant Russian influence
activities, particularly around the Czech presidential elections.
There, in a close second-round election, the opponent (a former
president of the Czech Academy of Sciences) of the preferred Russian
candidate (outgoing president Milos Zeman) received an onslaught of
disinformation during the second and final round of the campaign, from
being called a pedophile to a Communist secret police agent who stole
intellectual property. Milos Zeman won 51.4 percent to 48.6 percent.
\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Marc Santora, ``Czech Republic Re-elects Milos Zeman, Populist
Leader and Foe of Migrants,'' The New York Times, January 27, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/27/world/europe/czech-election-milos-
zeman.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We watch with particular concern the upcoming Italian
parliamentarian elections (March 4), Montenegro's presidential
elections (April 15), Latvian parliamentary elections (September/
October), Swedish parliamentary elections (September 8), and Moldovan
elections (to be held before April 2019), where Russia has long-
standing investments and would potentially seek to influence the
outcome of elections in support of the Kremlin's interests. The very
same methods that are being deployed to undermine the credibility of
these elections are being actively pursued in the United States. This
has been recently acknowledged by CIA Director Mike Pompeo. \13\ So
perhaps the most immediate and important step the Department of Defense
could take--in concert with Congress--is to demand a whole-of-
government approach to minimize the impact of Russian influence
operations in the United States. A disjointed approach by the United
States Government and the daily undermining of the legitimacy of United
States intelligence and law enforcement agencies does the Kremlin's
work far better (and cheaper) than any Russian influence operation
could.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Scott Neuman, ``CIA Director Has `Every Expectation' Russia
Will Try To Influence Midterm Elections,'' NPR, January 30, 2018,
https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2018/01/30/581767028/cia-
director-has-every-expectation-russia-will-try-to-influence-mid-term-
electio.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Ms. Conley.
Dr. Harknett?
STATEMENT OF DR. RICHARD J. HARKNETT, PROFESSOR OF POLITICAL
SCIENCE AND HEAD OF POLITICAL SCIENCE DEPARTMENT, UNIVERSITY OF
CINCINNATI
Dr. Harknett. Chairman Rounds, Ranking Member Nelson,
distinguished members, thank you for this opportunity to speak
to you about this critical issue today.
We have a big picture problem. Throughout international
political history, states have at times misaligned their
security approaches to the strategic realities in which they
tried to secure themselves.
In 1914, every general staff in Europe thought that
security rested on the offense, and they found out
devastatingly in World War I that they were tragically wrong.
France in the 1930s said, okay, we learned from the last
war. It is a defense-dominant environment. We are going to rest
our security on the most technologically advanced defensive
works in history. But again, the fundamentals had changed and
the Germans simply went around the Maginot Line.
Senators, with all due respect, I do not want to be France
in the 1930s, but I think we are coming dangerously close to
that myopia and the misalignment of strategy that follows from
it. Our adversaries are working through a new seam in
international politics. Cyberspace is that seam. Its unique
characteristics have created a strategic environment in which
our national sources of power can be exposed without having to
violate traditional territorial integrity through war.
What we have been witnessing are not hacks. They are not
thefts. It is not even simple espionage. What we must accept is
the fact that we are facing comprehensive strategic campaigns
that undermine our national sources of power, be they economic,
social, political, or military. Therefore, I agree we must
develop a counter strategic campaign to protect those sources
that has as its overall objective a more secure, stable,
interoperable, and global cyberspace.
With regard to the integrity of our elections, we have
effectively left civilians, whose main focus is not security,
on the front lines. That is not a recipe for success.
Specific to the Department of Defense's role in producing
greater security in, through, and from cyberspace, we must
adopt a seamless strategy of what I call cyber persistence, in
which our objective is to seize and maintain the initiative. We
must defend forward as close to adversary capacity and planning
as possible so that we can watch and inform ourselves, disrupt
and disable if necessary.
Our immediate objective must be to, first, erode the
confidence adversaries now have in their ability to achieve and
enable objectives. They are very confident.
Second, we have to erode their confidence in their own
capabilities.
Third, we must erode those capabilities themselves.
We are well past the post on this. We need a comprehensive,
seamless, integrated strategy that pulls to get a greater
resiliency, forward defense, and when necessary, countering and
testing cyber activity to reverse current behavior. We are not
at step one. We are well past that. We actually have to reverse
behavior.
Our security will rest on our ability to simultaneously
anticipate how adversaries will exploit our vulnerabilities and
how we can exploit theirs.
Cyberspace is an interconnected domain of constant contact
that creates a strategic imperative for us to persist. This is
a wrestling match in which we have to grapple with who actually
has the initiative, being one step ahead in both knowledge and
in action. If we do not adjust to this reality, our national
sources of power will remain exposed and more of those who wish
to contest our power will pour into this seam.
I, therefore, argue that we must make three critical
adjustments.
The first is we have to adjust our overall strategic
perspective. War and territorial aggression, which can
effectively be deterred, are not the only pathways for
undermining our national sources of power. In fact, because we
have this effective strategic deterrent, we should expect our
adversaries to move into this new seam of strategic behavior
below the threshold of war.
Second, we must move our cyber capabilities out of their
garrisons and adopt a security strategy that matches the
operational environment of cyberspace. We must meet the
challenge of an interconnected domain with a distinct strategy
that continuously seeks tactical, operational, and strategic
initiative.
Third, we must make the fundamental alterations to
capabilities development, operational tempo, decision-making
processes, and most importantly, as Bob referred to, overall
authorities that will enable our forces to be successful. We
cannot succeed using authorities that assume territoriality and
segmentation in an environment of interconnectedness, constant
contact, and initiative persistence. We cannot secure an
environment of constant action through inaction. Strategic
effect in cyberspace comes from the use of capabilities and
having the initiative over one's adversaries. It is time for us
to seize that initiative.
I look forward to explaining in more detail how we can
pursue security through persistence during our Q and A. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Harknett follows:]
Prepared Statement by Professor Richard J. Harknett
``department of defense's role in protecting democratic elections''
The Subcommittee is concerned that, in the lead-up to the 2018 and
2020 elections, the Department and Government as a whole have not
sufficiently deterred future interference, leaving our democratic
institutions at risk to foreign intrusion.
The Subcommittee is correct in its concern. The likelihood of
foreign intrusion (not just Russia, but other revisionist actors as
well) is high due to the nature of this domain. Cyberspace is an
interconnected domain and yet all our approaches rest on a principle of
segmentation, instead of seeking synergies of expertise. Our
adversaries have figured this out. Cyberspace is a new Seam in
international power competition in which strategic effect can be
produced below the threshold of war and the reach of traditional
deterrence strategies. We should assume as a starting point that
adversaries will engage in cyber operations against our national
sources of power, including economic wealth and social-political
cohesion. If we do not actively engage these strategic cyber campaigns,
we will suffer. We need a new strategy that rests on a seamless
operational environment of 1) integrated resiliency, 2) forward
defense, 3) contesting adversaries' capabilities and 4) countering
their campaigns. Through this new strategy, we can actively erode the
confidence that our adversaries have in achieving their objectives and
in their capabilities. Over time this may produce a deterrent effect,
but that can only be achieved through persistent efforts to seize the
cyber initiative away from our adversaries. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For more on persistence, see M. Fischerkeller and R. Harknett,
``Deterrence is Not a Credible Strategy for Cyberspace,'' Orbis 63 1
(Summer 2017): 381-393.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In traditional great power politics, national sources of power were
vulnerable only through direct violation of the territory upon which
they centered. Thus, we came to equate strategic effects with war, and
to narrow the central role of the state to promoting territoriality
(its sovereign territorial integrity). The interconnected nature of
cyberspace, however, means that now our national sources of power are
vulnerable to manipulation without direct assault across territory.
Strategic effects can occur without war through this new seam--and we
should expect adversaries to explore it. We must contest this effort
and seize back the initiative. In order for this to occur and
positively affect the electoral cycle, we must position the Department
to contribute to the defense of electoral integrity, protecting the
vote and the voter. Electoral integrity cannot be protected by leaving
civilians alone on the front lines.
Are the roles and expectations of the Department clearly defined with
respect to protecting U.S. elections process from foreign influence in
the cyber domain?
They currently are not sufficiently defined nor enabled. Most
importantly, we must move away from 1) our ``doctrine of restraint''
\2\ that forces us to defend in our own space after the first breach is
detected, and 2) away from the tendency o view every intrusion as a law
enforcement problem first. Cyberspace is an interconnected domain of
constant contact, which creates a structural imperative to persist.
Persistence in resiliency, forward defense and countering is necessary
because the analytical categories of offense and defense do not
actually hold in this space--it is too fluid and dynamic. As former
Deputy Director of the National Security Agency Chris Inglis put it:
``It's almost impossible to achieve a static advantage in cyberspace--
whether that's a competitive [offensive] advantage or a security
[defensive] advantage--when things change every minute of every hour of
every day. And it's not just the technology that changes; it's the
employment of that technology; the operations and practices.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Department of Defence, DOD Cyber Strategy (2015).
\3\ Chris Inglis as quoted in Amber Corrin, ``Is Government on the
wrong road with cybersecurity?, FCW: The Business of Federal Technology
(May 21, 2013), https://fcw.com/articles/2013/05/21/csis-
cybersecurity.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our protection posture must be moved as close to the sources of
adversarial action and capability as possible so that we can watch,
react, disable, and disrupt at a speed of relevance (defined as one
step ahead of the adversary). We forward deploy in terrestrial space,
where actual time and distance still matter for defense, so why do we
hesitate to do so in the one domain where time and distance are crushed
and cannot be leveraged for defense? Garrisoning our cyber forces has
created a great disadvantage for us and invites opportunity for our
adversaries. DOD is not on the front lines, which because of
interconnectedness, are everywhere. We need to secure through a
persistent pursuit of the initiative if we are to manage this new seam
in international power competition.
How can the Department use its national mission teams' offensive
capabilities to improve deterrence?
National Mission Teams (NMTs) can eventually produce a deterrence
effect, but not by relying on deterrence strategy. Cyber strategic
effects do not come from mere possession and the threat of employment,
but from actual use. It is critical to differentiate between deterrence
strategy and deterrence effects in answering this question because they
get conflated too often. We can achieve a deterrent effect through
other means than a deterrence strategy. Deterrence strategy rests on
the prospective threat of punishment or denial to convince someone not
to take an action. This dynamic cannot work in a strategic environment
of constant action. Cyberspace is a strategic environment of initiative
persistence (one can always find the willingness and capacity to get
one step ahead). Our NMTs must be charged with eroding adversary
confidence and deployed capability, not sit idle as prospective threats
to impose costs in the face of cyber operations below the level of war.
Cyberspace operations should be treated as a necessary national
security activity and as a traditional military activity. Persistent
erosion of confidence and capability will shape adversaries' behavior,
over time, toward more stable norms. If we make the strategic effects
sought by adversaries inconsequential, their penchant for attack may
diminish--then we may get a deterrent effect (i.e., adversaries may
determine it is not worth it to confront us). But we will not get there
without allowing our NMTs to hunt, disrupt, disable cyber activities,
and thereby seize the initiative back from our adversaries. We must
understand this cyber persistent space not as an unstable escalatory
environment, but rather as a fluid environment in which the initiative
is always in play and we must seek initiative control.
Is the Department's conception and implementation of deterrence
sufficient?
The Department's Cold War conception of deterrence does not map to
the realities of this new strategic environment. Deterrence is an
approach to security, not the approach. We cannot rely on a strategy in
which the measure of effectiveness is the absence of action if we hope
to manage an environment of constant action. The cost-benefit calculus
an adversary may hold within cyberspace is never stable enough for us
to be certain that our static deterrent threats are credibly
influencing adversaries. There are always new and cost-effective
opportunities for them to explore. They can constantly manipulate the
data, networks, tools, and vulnerabilities that are coming on-line
daily thanks to the efforts of malware developers and the innovations
of the market. The cyber terrain to secure and the means to traverse
that terrain are always changing. There is too much incentive and
potential for adversaries to refrain from persisting in cyber
activities below the level of war.
In short, deterrence is a strategy reinforced by segmentation
(borders/thresholds), sovereignty, relative certainty, and
territoriality. Cyberspace by contrast is defined by none of those
conditions; it is defined instead by its interconnectedness, constant
contact, relative anonymity, and a lack of territoriality. Just as
nuclear weapons precluded defense and necessitated deterrence,
cyberspace below the threshold of war precludes deterrence and
necessitates persistence. We must understand this space as a wrestling
match in which we are in constant contact with the adversary and we are
grappling to sustain the initiative through both our knowledge of what
the adversary is likely to do and through our action anticipating what
they wish to do.
How should our posture be improved to combat the threat of future
Russian interference?
First, we need to build a posture focused not just on Russia, but
on revisionist actors across the globe. We need to focus on the effects
on our national sources of power we wish to prevent. To achieve this
outcome, we need an alignment of forces, capabilities development,
operational tempo, and, critically new authorities and decision-making
processes that allow the Department to gain tactical, operational, and
strategic initiative, continuously. We must operate in cyberspace
globally and continuously, seamlessly shifting between defensive and
offensive tactics to create an operational advantage--i.e., cyber
initiative. By understanding our own vulnerability surface better than
our enemies do, we can through resiliency and defending forward render
much of their activity inconsequential. This can in turn help free our
forces to focus on the truly consequential potential of strategic
action below war, to disrupt and disable their cyber activities,
creating enough tactical friction in our adversary's operations to
shift their focus toward their own vulnerabilities and defending their
own networks. This can produce a strategic effect for us.
This will also require a new alignment with the private sector that
makes a clear demarcation around protecting human speech. Bots cannot
be afforded First Amendment rights. Trending on social media must
reflect human majoritarian aggregation, and automated manipulation of
that speech needs to be examined in our public policy. The Department
should be enabled to disrupt foreign attempts at technical
manipulation. 2016 was the Stone Age relative to the sophistication of
cyber activities we are likely to see. Before the next presidential
election, for instance, we will lose the capacity for audio-visual
authentication due to Artificial Intelligence manipulation. We need
policy changes to make the Department's capabilities more relevant to
the private sector's defense.
What can the Department do to close the gaps--across the Federal
Government and between state and local governments--that inhibit the
protection of election infrastructure?
First, it is critical to recognize that there are gaps and that our
adversaries are likely to engage in operations that exacerbate them.
These gaps exist in the authorities, roles and responsibilities that we
have put in place for protecting the voting infrastructure, and exist
in the absence of a plan for protecting the information space so that
the competition of election campaigns can be conducted fairly by
Americans. Based on open source reporting, most State election boards
have not prioritized security based on open source reporting and we
have not aligned with the private sector social media platforms to
produce a coherent plan of how Department resources could contribute to
the nation's defense. Our current policy framework essentially rests on
a reactive context. The Defense Support to Civil Authorities has not
been construed in a proactive and on-going context of defense, which is
what is needed to map to the realities of cyberspace. We cannot succeed
with an emergency management/disaster relief/crisis framework that
places us on the back foot and relegates action to `cleaning up on
aisle nine.' We need to consider authorities that allow DOD, DHS, and
our intelligence community to employ a coordinated strategy of cyber
persistence as described above. If one considers the approaches
emerging among all of our allies, particularly the British, Germans,
Australians and Israelis, they are all moving toward increased policy
and organizational coordination and synergy. They understand that the
answer to the challenge of interconnectedness is not segmentation of
roles, responsibilities, and authorities but synergies across pockets
of expertise. The policy framing question you should ask yourselves in
every discussion you have is whether the policy under question advances
synergy or segmentation. If it is the latter it should be rejected; if
it is the former it should be explored. Right now our approach to
defending our electoral integrity rests on the principle of high
segmentation. That will expose us to clever adversaries moving forward.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Dr. Harknett.
Dr. Sulmeyer?
STATEMENT OF DR. MICHAEL L. SULMEYER, DIRECTOR, CYBER SECURITY
PROJECT, BELFER CENTER FOR SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS,
HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Dr. Sulmeyer. Thank you, Chairman Rounds, Ranking Member
Nelson, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. It is an
honor to be with you today.
Before I get to the military's role, however, I would like
to note that I am part of a team at the Kennedy School's Belfer
Center that released a report a couple hours ago. It is a
playbook for State and local election administrators, and it
has got steps they can take to improve the cybersecurity of
systems that they administer. It is based on field research by
a wonderful research team. Many, many students contributed. I
am very lucky to have one of the wonderful students here with
us today. Corina Faist has flown down to join us.
So regardless of the role of the Department of Defense,
these defensive improvements are essential. I want to make sure
I hit that right up front. Those recommendations that we put
out today complement our last playbook for political campaigns
to also improve their cybersecurity. It is essential that we
make our elections harder to hack and that we improve
resiliency in case critical systems are compromised. But we
should also consider how best to counter threats abroad before
they hit us at home.
So let me transition to how I see some potential roles for
the military outside of the United States to protect our
elections. There are two necessary conditions of posture that I
see as critical: reconnaissance posture and force posture.
First, reconnaissance posture. Our cyber mission forces
should constantly conduct reconnaissance missions abroad to
discover election-related threats to the United States and
provide indicators and warnings to our forces and decision-
makers. There will never be sufficient resources to address all
threats equally, so prioritizing threats to our democratic
processes is critical. Otherwise, we cannot hope to disrupt
these threats.
On force posture, our forces must be sufficiently ready to
strike, strike against targets abroad that threaten our
elections. Readiness is a critical issue for our armed forces
today, and I would encourage Senators on this subcommittee to
ensure they are asking tough questions about the readiness of
our cyber forces just as they would about any other part of our
military.
If the military's reconnaissance and forces are postured to
focus on threats to our elections from abroad, there are four
objectives that I think our forces should be prepared to
pursue. It should go without saying that undertaking these
actions should be consistent with international law and other
relevant U.S. commitments.
Those objectives are: first, preventing attacks from
materializing; second, preempting imminent attacks; third,
halting attacks in progress; and fourth, retaliating, if
necessary, after an attack.
On the fourth, let me just note I would emphasize that this
retaliation needs to be timely. It has got to be timely since
the more time that elapses after an adversary's initial attack,
the harder it will be to message and communicate that our
action is a direct response.
Across those objectives, proper training, thorough
rehearsals, and coordination with other parts of our government
are essential. Bringing military capabilities to bear inside or
outside of cyberspace is always a serious matter, so it is
critical to ensure that rules of engagement and questions about
authorities are settled well in advance of any order to strike.
Here, I would note that some of our closest allies like the
United Kingdom and Israel have undertaken some national-level
organizational reforms to streamline responsibilities for cyber
issues. We may at some point want to consider something similar
here.
One of the best cyber-related investments the Nation has
made is in the national mission force, an elite group of
network operators at Cyber Command. They defend the nation from
an attack of significant consequence in cyberspace. I think it
is very much worth considering what role the NMF [National
Mission Force] can play to accomplish the objectives I
described just now.
I might note for Senators that I have not discussed
deterrence much so far. I very much support calls to deter our
adversaries from meddling in elections. Do not get me wrong.
However, I would not want to bet the cybersecurity of U.S.
elections on a policy of deterrence if I did not have to.
Sometimes, like the prospect of defending against thousands of
nuclear-tipped missiles, deterrence is the least bad option.
That is not the case in cybersecurity. We have other options,
like the ones I described just now, and we should employ them
alongside strong policies of deterrence.
Finally, I would just note that information derived abroad
from reconnaissance should be shared with relevant parties at
the State and local level. I want to commend the Department of
Homeland Security for working hard to promote information
sharing over the last few years.
I would also like to encourage more thinking, especially
among my colleagues in academia, to help Congress protect
itself since Congress is so critical as a part of our
democratic process, not just work accounts but also campaign
accounts, personal accounts. These cannot be left vulnerable.
That concludes my prepared testimony. I look forward to
taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sulmeyer follows:]
Prepared Statement by Michael Sulmeyer
Chairman Rounds, Ranking Member Nelson, and distinguished members
of the committee, it is an honor to be with you today. The need to
protect the foundations of our democratic system is of vital
importance, and there are several potential roles the military can
play.
I am proud to be part of a team at the Belfer Center that is
releasing a new report in the coming days: a playbook for state and
local election administrators with steps they can take to improve the
cybersecurity of the systems they administer. Regardless of what roles
the Department of Defense assumes, these defensive improvements we
recommend are essential. These 10 recommendations reflect months of
fieldwork by the research team, including several exceptionally
talented students. They are:
Create a proactive security culture,
Treat elections as an interconnected system,
Have a paper vote record,
Use audits to show transparency and maintain trust in the
elections process,
Implement strong passwords and two-factor authentication,
Control and actively manage access,
Prioritize and isolate sensitive data and systems,
Monitor, log, and backup data,
Require vendors to make security a priority, and
Build public trust and prepare for information
operations.
These recommendations complement our last playbook, which contained
recommendations for political campaigns to improve their cybersecurity.
Both reports can be downloaded from our website, belfercenter.org. It
is essential that we make our elections harder to hack and to improve
resiliency in case critical systems are compromised. Bolstering federal
capacity to provide the kinds of support that state and local
administrators request should be a priority.
In addition to improving defenses and becoming more resilient, we
should also consider how best to counter threats abroad before they hit
us at home. To that end, let me transition to how I see some potential
roles for the military in protecting our elections. I will focus my
remarks on roles that the military could play outside of the United
States.
There are two necessary conditions of posture that I see as
critical:
1.
Reconnaissance Posture: Our cyber mission forces should be
constantly conducting reconnaissance missions abroad to discover
election-related threats to the United States and provide indicators
and warnings to our forces and decision-makers. There will never be
sufficient resources to prioritize all threats equally, so prioritizing
threats to our elections and our democratic processes is crucial. If we
do not prioritize collecting information abroad about election-related
threats, than we cannot hope to disrupt them.
2.
Force Posture: Our cyber mission forces must be sufficiently
ready to strike against targets abroad identified by reconnaissance as
threats to our election. Readiness is a critical issue for our armed
forces today, and I would encourage the Senators on this committee to
ensure they are asking tough questions about the readiness of our cyber
mission forces just as they would about any other area of our military.
Our forces must be ready to create different effects against a range of
targets. Sometimes, they will not have much notice, so developing
tactics that can be employed on the fly is important.
If the military's reconnaissance and forces are postured to focus
on threats to our elections from abroad, there are four objectives that
our forces should be prepared to pursue. It should go without saying
that undertaking these actions would need to be consistent with
international law and other relevant U.S. commitments.
1.
Preventing Attacks from Materializing: Based on election-
focused reconnaissance, U.S. cyber mission forces should develop
options to disrupt the activities of those planning to meddle in our
elections, and those who are in the early steps of doing so. Because
these would be actions conducted by U.S. forces with a relatively long
lead time, scenario-based plans should be developed and socialized with
decision-makers so they are aware of the viability, risks, and benefits
of different options.
2.
Preempting Imminent Attacks: Reconnaissance abroad may provide
indicators and warnings of an imminent cyber attack against election-
related infrastructure, campaigns, and media and social media
platforms. Our forces can prepare to neuter those attacks before they
commence. Such actions would need to be undertaken rapidly as
opportunities to strike may be fleeting, so developing options in
advance to deliver effects promptly when so ordered is essential.
3.
Halting Attacks in Progress: There may be situations when an
adversary has already established access to a system, is in the process
of denying access to data by legitimate users in the United States, or
is already conducting operations to inject misinformation or steal
information. In these cases, our cyber forces should provide options to
decision-makers to disable these attacks by taking actions outside of
the United States at the source of an attack.
4.
Retaliating after Attacks: If the United States suffers an
attack on its election infrastructure and democratic processes,
policymakers may request options to respond in a timely manner. I would
place emphasis on timely retaliation, since the more time that elapses
after the adversary's initial attack, the harder it will be to
communicate that our action is a direct response to that attack.
Across all of these objectives, proper training, thorough
rehearsals, and coordination with other parts of our government are
essential. Bringing military capabilities to bear, inside or outside of
cyberspace, is always a serious matter, so making sure that rules of
engagement and questions about authorities are settled in advance of
any order to strike is critical. Here, I would note that some of our
closest allies like the United Kingdom and Israel have undertaken some
national-level organizational reforms to streamline responsibilities
for cyber issues. We may at some point want to consider something
similar.
I always appreciated how the Armed Services Committee has been a
champion of supporting the Department of Defense's cyber mission force.
Through the last several National Defense Authorization Acts, this
committee, and its counterpart in the House of Representatives, has
empowered Cyber Command with unique authorities and has engaged in
necessary civilian oversight. One of the best cyber-related investments
the nation has made is in the National Mission Force, an elite group of
network operators under the command of the Commander of U.S. Cyber
Command. According to the 2015 DOD Cyber Strategy, their mission is to
defend the nation from a cyber attack of significant consequence. I
think it is very much worth considering what role the National Mission
Force could play to accomplish the objectives I described.
Senators might note that I have not discussed deterrence in this
testimony. I very much support calls to deter adversaries from meddling
in our elections. However, I would not want to bet the cybersecurity of
U.S. elections on a policy of deterrence if I did not have to.
Sometimes, like the prospect of defending against thousands of nuclear-
tipped missiles, deterrence is the least bad option. That is not the
case in cybersecurity. We have other options, like the ones I described
previously, and we should employ them alongside deterrence.
Let me conclude with one final proposal for the military: when
possible, relevant information derived from the reconnaissance it
conducts should be shared with relevant parties at home. At times, some
of this information may be useful to officials at the state and local
level. I want to commend the Department of Homeland Security for
working hard to promote information sharing over the last several
years, and more recently to provide clearances to state officials so
they have greater access to important information.
That concludes my prepared testimony. I look forward to taking your
questions.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Dr. Sulmeyer.
First of all, let me thank all of you for some great
insight, and I look forward to your thoughts in terms of the
questions that we ask.
What I would like to do is to do what we call 5-minute
rounds here. We will alternate back and forth. Then after we
have done that once through, if we have time, I would go back
through and do a second round depending upon the amount of time
that we have and whether or not other members come.
Let me begin with mine. I am going to start with Dr.
Harknett. You have written that restraint and reactive postures
are not sustainable, that the United States needs a strategy
that capitalizes on the unique attributes of the cyber domain.
You have called for a strategy of cyber persistence where we
are constantly engaged with our adversaries seeking to
frustrate, confuse, and challenge.
How would your strategy calling for persistent engagement
apply in the Russian meddling with our election as an example?
Should this involve us contesting the malicious behavior at its
source? What do you believe are the consequences of our failure
to respond in cyberspace to the Russian election interference?
Because, number one, we have got to be able to provide
attribution to where it is coming from, and hopefully we have
got that completed. But give me your thoughts on it. What would
you say would be an example of persistent engagement with
regard to what they have done already and what we expect them
to do?
Dr. Harknett. Thank you, Senator.
So let us think about the Internet Research Agency. Right?
I mean, we know about this center in St. Petersburg. We know
that it controls a series of automated bots that are driving
particularly well conceived information operations that are
meant to be divisive. I do not know why we are according or why
we should accord First Amendment rights to bots. It is not a
free speech issue. If we have evidence of foreign manipulation,
technical manipulation, of the social media space, that is not
what the American people, from an educated standpoint, actually
understand is coming at them. They think that this is a
majoritarian aggregator trending. It is telling me, hey, this
is where everybody is going. But if that trend is being driven
by automated foreign intrusion, that is not an issue over free
speech. That is an issue of direct foreign manipulation.
I agree with Dr. Sulmeyer. We need to have the
reconnaissance, to your point about attribution. That is what
persistence enables you to do, to start to get better at
attribution. But we need to be able to move at the speed of
relevance. So if in fact those bots are hitting us in a
particular trend that is meant to be divisive, we should be
able to have the capacity to at least disrupt if not disable
that capacity.
So we do know where some of these capacities lie. By being
persistent in our reconnaissance, we will get a better
understanding of what our vulnerability surface is. We have to
think about it that way. We tend to think about an attack
surface. That is from their perspective. We have to get a
better handle on what our vulnerability surface is. By being
able to understand where our vulnerabilities are and anticipate
where their capabilities map to that, again, a product of being
persistent in this space, we can start to take those
capabilities away.
Senator Rounds. Dr. Sulmeyer, do you agree with that?
Dr. Sulmeyer. I do. I agree with the vast majority of what
my colleague, Dr. Harknett, just said.
For me, even just to get a little more specific, the kinds
of options that I would want to be seeing presented need to
allow decision-makers some flexibility from lower-level actions
like denying troll farm access to compromised infrastructure,
to deleting some accounts, to erasing some systems if it comes
to it. It is too important to take options off the table ahead
of time. So as long as the option space is kept open, we can do
it persistently or less persistently, but a wide range of
options.
Senator Rounds. Mr. Butler, your thoughts?
Mr. Butler. I agree with both Michael and Richard on this.
I would say that we need to be asymmetrical in our response. So
I am a big believer in botnet disruptions and taking down bot
infrastructure, as we just saw with Levashov, but we need to do
that in a continuous way and that is a symmetrical response.
I think if you look at the Internet Research Agency in St.
Petersburg, they are coupled to the Kremlin. You need to have
an information operations counter-influence campaign where you
begin to cut the funding and cut the support enablers behind
that infrastructure. So we need to think about things
differently. It should not be cyber on cyber, social media on
social media. It has got to be a broader campaign.
Senator Rounds. Ms. Conley?
Ms. Conley. Yes. I will agree with absolutely the
asymmetrical response. While trying to bring down the
infrastructure of those bots, what they are doing, though,
Russia exploits the weaknesses that it finds. So it is
amplifying the weaknesses and divisions that are already
appearing on social media. So how do we try to reduce the
weaknesses?
This, again, gets back to the critical importance of
exactly what this committee represents, the bipartisanship,
fact-based, and getting to communities through a variety of
methods to help inform the American people so when they see a
trending site, let us look at that. What is underneath that?
The only way we can really stop this from changing hearts and
minds among the American people is helping them discern what is
coming. We can do everything we can technologically to
eliminate it. But the other part is just missing. We are not
educating.
On the asymmetrical sanctions, my frustration--and I am
sure many on this committee as well----
Senator Rounds. I am going to ask you to shorten it up
because my time has expired.
Ms. Conley. Absolutely, sorry about that. Is to think about
ways that we can focus on the Kremlin, on financial sanctions,
on sanctioning the inner circle as ones attributable back to
that, so not just in the cyber domain, focusing on financial
sanctions and individual sanctions. That could be very powerful
as well.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Senator Nelson?
Senator Nelson. So all of you sound like that you just do
not think enough has been done and that we are not ready. Dr.
Harknett, you have said that 2016 was the Stone Age compared to
what is going to happen. So do you want to trace what you think
will happen?
Dr. Harknett. Well, one of the things, back to the
chairman's question about whether the lingering effects, is
again we have got adversaries who are confident. There are
other actors aside from Russia out there as well that are going
to look at this space and say, hey, this is a space that I can
play in and I can work in. Until we start to reverse that
confidence, we are going to see greater experimentation.
Technologically, I will give you one example, Senator. My
concern with regard to leveraging artificial intelligence and
machine learning. I mean, this will be a step function, thus my
Stone Age allusion, from where we are. We are going to--within
the next 16 months, I am going to be able to take you and put
you in a video in which you are saying something that you never
said in a place that you have never been, and you are not going
to be able to authenticate that you were not doing--that you
had not done that and not been there. Just think about that as
a tool for an adversary who wants to engage in disruptive
social cohesion types of information campaigns.
Senator Nelson. Right.
Dr. Harknett. That is around the corner.
Senator Nelson. So, Ms. Conley, given that, you have
already said that you do not think we have taken any positive
proactive steps. Why do you think that is the case?
Ms. Conley. I think the executive branch refuses to
recognize the threat. It refuses to put forward a national
whole-of-government, whole-of-society strategy and bring all
the agencies and tools of influence to bear on this. We have to
think of this as a direct threat to the national security of
this country. It has to receive the priority.
Also, to focus on what Dr. Harknett said, this is
adaptation. If we are preparing for what Russia did in 2016, it
will be very different in November. It will be very different
in 2020. It will look more American. It will look less Russian.
This is adaptation. We are already fighting the last war. We
are not ahead of the new one, which is why I think education is
so critical, that absent a U.S. Government approach, we are all
going to have to do our part in our communities to inform the
American people about the threat. It is unfortunate we cannot
pull together and do this in a unified way.
Senator Nelson. So if we cannot get the Government to move,
are there any private initiatives that would help?
Ms. Conley. What I am seeing is some very effective news
literacy campaigns. I think, again, news sources, social media
are doing fact checking. The pressure that Congress has brought
to bear on the social media companies is changing their
perspective. But, again, we are so late to need. This has been
ongoing. This campaign is only intensifying, and we are just
getting our arms wrapped around this. So this is where every
Member of Congress has to return to their home district and
talk about this in very clear ways.
Senator Nelson. Amen to that.
Dr. Harknett, on the example that you gave of the next
level of technology, of which something can be created that
looks real, acts real, feels real, et cetera, if Cyber Command
were to adopt your thinking, knowing what the threat is even
greater in the future, what would you suggest that they change
the way that they are doing their operations?
Dr. Harknett. I think it is very important to expand this
notion of defending forward, this notion that we need to be as
close to the source of adversarial capability and decision-
making as possible. This is not a space in which time and
geography is leveragable for defense. So when we think about
the notion of front lines, the front lines are everywhere.
Right now, our general approach has been to defend at our
borders, at our network, which actually means that we start
defending after the first breach, and we are already playing
catch-up.
So I concur with the notion of adaptability here. It is all
about anticipation. So when Bob Butler talks about asymmetric,
that is what I would talk about in terms of being able to be
one step ahead. We have to be able to anticipate the
exploitation of our vulnerabilities. You need to be able to be
defending as far forward as possible. In terrestrial space, we
defend forward. We are not defending forward in cyberspace
right now.
Senator Nelson. Thank you.
Senator Rounds. Senator Gillibrand?
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member, for having this hearing.
Thanks to all of you for your testimony. I agreed with a
lot of it.
So to Professor Harknett, I appreciate your effort to
redefine cyberspace and the challenges we face in operating
within it. Were Russia to have bombed one of our States rather
than attacked our election infrastructure, we would treat it
just like an attack, as you said. But because of the way in
which we set up our cyber capabilities, which we have done for
good reasons, including privacy and States rights, it seems to
me that the DOD is hamstrung in trying to properly respond to
an attack on our democracy.
I have asked this in many settings, and every single time
they said it is not our job.
So you argue that we need to consider authorities that
allow DOD, DHS, and our intelligence community to employ a
coordinated strategy of cyber persistence and recommend looking
at approaches emerging among all of our allies. Can you expand
on what kind of authorities we should be considering and what
we might learn from our allies?
I ask this because I have put this question to the
Department of Defense in every setting we have had, any
conversation about cyber, and every response is we do not have
the authorities and the States rights issue. It is not our job.
I cannot, for the life of me, understand why they do not see it
as their job because if another country bombed any one of our
States, then that is a declaration of war and we would have
responded from the military. We are not doing that in this
regard, and it seems really off-putting to me. Their response
is often, that is Homeland Security's job. They can call us if
they need us, but they have not. I understand why that is
probably not the case because a lot of secretaries of state in
a lot of States think it is their job, not anyone else's job,
and they do not want to relinquish that control.
So I would like your suggestions on how to write the
authorities that you think are necessary, but also I have
really tried to push National Guard as a possible place where
this can be done because the National Guard already serves the
States. They are already under control of the governors. So why
not amplify what we are already doing with our National Guard
and Reserve to give them the expertise in cyber but actually
delegate this mission specifically to them in conjunction with
all the other assets in the military?
So to all of you, you can answer this question. You start,
Dr. Harknett, since you addressed it a little bit in your
opening remarks about what authorities can we give. How can the
National Guard be useful, and how do we get this done? Because
it is frustrating to me that we are not doing it.
Then just a third thing to add to your answer. I do have a
bill with Lindsey Graham to do a 9/11 deep dive style analysis
of the cyber threat to our electoral infrastructure. It is a
bipartisan bill. You know, whether we ever get a vote on it, I
will never know, but that would be a great first step in my
mind to at least just get a report and say these are the 10
things you need to do to harden our infrastructure. So maybe
comment on those three ideas.
Dr. Harknett. Thank you, Senator.
You mentioned our allies, and I think Michael had some work
that he has been doing as well analyzing them. I think if you
look at the UK [United Kingdom], for example, you look at the
Israelis, you look at the Australians, their first default in
cyberspace is to ask how do we find synergy, not segmentation.
Our entire approach to this space has been starting with who
has divided roles and responsibilities. So I think we can learn
something from our allies right now in terms of their
orientation to trying to find synergy rather than segmentation.
That should be our first policy framework question.
But in terms of authorities, I think there is a false
debate, say, for example, between 10 and 50. So when I argue
for a seamless notion, I am suggesting that we understand title
10 and title 50 as actually mutually reinforcing, not defined
as, again, segmentating. They segment in Congress in terms of
oversight, and I get that, but they do not segment in
operational space. We should actually understand and
reinterpret, I would argue, those authorities to emphasize
where a synergy and where there is seamless reinforcement
rather than looking at those authorities as something that
divides and puts us into different lanes.
In terms of the National Guard, I think the cyber
protection teams and force type of an approach would be
appropriate. We need to get at this, Senator. So if that is the
best mechanism, there is expertise at that level.
Ms. Butler has talked about leveraging our private sector.
Through National Guard, as well as Reserve, we have a capacity.
If you look at the Brits, they are looking at cyber civilian
reserve force. I think that is another interesting way of
thinking about this.
So ultimately if we need to do a deep dive, I think we do.
Right? I think we have authorities that are structured for a
terrestrial space that do not map to the realities of this
human-made interconnected space. Authorities are what we should
do last. We should figure out what our mission is. We should
develop the organizations to pursue those missions, and then we
should authorize them to do it.
I would submit to you that one of the major problems that
we have faced is we have been continually trying to shoehorn
our cyber forces into existing authorities and working
backwards from the way we should be working.
Senator Gillibrand. Ms. Conley?
Ms. Conley. Senator, I think the National Guard is an area
that we absolutely should explore, and I mentioned it in my
written as well as far as education, bringing together DHS,
DOD, working with community leaders at the State and local
level.
On the 9/11 Commission style, cyber is critical pillar of
this, but it transcends it as well. We need to look at Russian
economic influence. We have to look at a whole range not just
of Russia as the adversary but other adversaries that will use
cyber disinformation and economic. So please broaden that out.
They will find any seam, State, federal, First Amendment,
privacy. That is where they will be, and that is why we cannot
get locked into those seams.
Mr. Butler. Senator, I take it from two different angles.
One is clean-sheet everything. What do you want to do? Let us
refocus the authorities. Catherine Lotrionte's work here in
looking at countermeasures is a great example of that. Her
legal interpretation of the Tallinn Manual is very different
than what most people are saying these days.
The other thing is I am involved in exercises where I am
blending physical and cyber together and looking at what we can
do with physical authorities in cyberspace. So I am working
with the Army Cyber Institute on an activity where we have a
natural hazard and a nation state actor is manipulating inside
of it. How do you get a rolling start? You can use our
authorities. The military has the ability to use an immediate
response authority to create a rolling start. We need to
leverage. We need to reinterpret and leverage these kinds of
things as we go forward.
A part of that is the National Guard Bureau. We have
unevenness within the stand-up of our National Guard activities
both in the air and now with the Army. We have both cyber and
information operations. I think we could create pockets of
talent. I mean, Washington State has a phenomenal industrial
control system security unit. Maryland has a fantastic unit
where they leverage a lot of NSA [National Security
Administration] expertise. We have got units spread around the
country. We need to create a construct of cyber mutual
assistance across boundaries, across State borders. Again, I
think we can do that. We have just got to sit down and plan
together a campaign in that regard.
Senator Rounds. While the Senator's time has expired, if
you could expedite your answer, we will let you finish up as
well, sir.
Dr. Sulmeyer. I will go real quick. I support all the
goodness just said.
Abroad, I do not believe the kinds of activities I
described earlier need new authorities.
On the deep dive, I would say great. The Belfer Center's
work over the last year has tried to get a start on that. So we
hope we can be of support.
On coms and education, there is a part of me that wonders
if that by saying ``cyber,'' the response is help desk. By not
describing it in a way about warfare and propaganda and foreign
influence, we do a disservice to the real problem.
Thank you.
Senator Rounds. Senator Blumenthal?
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all of you for being here. I am very
familiar with the work done by the Belfer Center in particular,
and thank you all for the work that is done by each of your
organizations.
I want to first tell you--you probably already know--that
the immediacy and urgency of this task was reinforced this
morning before the Senate Intelligence Committee where Dan
Coats, the Director of National Intelligence, said, ``There
should be no doubt that Russia perceives its past efforts as
successful and views the 2018 midterm elections as a potential
target for Russian influence operations.'' That statement would
be beyond conventional wisdom. It would be unnecessary to state
because it is the consensus of our intelligence community. It
has been broadly accepted by everyone except the President of
the United States. In my view that is the elephant in this
room, that the President refuses to acknowledge this threat to
our national security.
So I put that on the record simply because we can propose
all the great ideas in the world. Some very good ideas, as a
matter of fact, came from a report done by the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee. It is a minority report by my colleague,
then-Ranking Member Senator Cardin, called, ``Putin's
Asymmetric Assault on Democracy and Russia and Europe
Implications for United States National Security.'' It makes
some very good proposals.
I would be interested to see the Belfer Center's release
today, and in fact, without even having seen it, Mr. Chairman,
I ask that it be made part of our record.
Senator Rounds. Without objection.
[The information referred to in Appendix A.]
Senator Blumenthal. But I think we need to make progress on
gaining acceptance at the highest levels of the United States
Government--let me put it as diplomatically as possible--for
the proposition that Russia attacked our democracy. In my view
it committed an act of war. They are going to do it again
unless they are made to pay a price for it, and that includes
enforcing sanctions passed overwhelmingly by this body 98 to 2,
still unenforced. So the talk about retaliatory measures in
real time, Dr. Sulmeyer, I think is very well taken. But why
should the Russians take us seriously when the President denies
the plain reality of their attacking our country and the
sanctions that would make them pay a price are still
unenforced?
All of that said, I want to raise another topic, which I
think so far has been untouched, the social media sites,
Facebook, Google. Let me ask each of you if you could comment
on what their responsibilities are and how they are meeting
them in this disinformation, propaganda campaign using bots and
fake accounts which have been appearing on those sites. Mr.
Butler?
Mr. Butler. I think, Senator, the response--and I have
talked with a couple of the web-scale companies about this--is
aligning with what we have already seen in the counterterrorism
fight. In that space what you see is them actively, proactively
looking for disinformation, in the case of terrorism, of
course, looking for recruitment. I think the challenge is
guidance with regard to counter-narratives or alternative
narratives in that space. That needs to be done with others.
But I think that is where we need to head. They have the
ability based on their reach and their fusion engines to really
help us move much more quickly into active defense in this
space and not just to do it from a cyber perspective but from a
counter-influence perspective which I think is so critical.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Ms. Conley?
Ms. Conley. Thank you, Senator.
I would just note that building the awareness of what
Congress has already done to force the social media companies
to really take a very deep look at this has been very helpful.
I would suggest to you that I think Russia will adapt their
tools, that this will look more and more American, which will
get more and more into First Amendment issues because that is a
weakness to exploit here.
So what I would commend, in the interest of being ahead of
the curve and not behind it, is we start looking at how social
media engines can start detecting what looks like it is
American origin but it in fact is not. So that would be the
next step I would recommend.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Dr. Harknett. I think we have to move away from a
partnership model, to be perfectly honest with you. We have
been talking about a public-private partnership for 25 years. I
published about this 25 years ago. The problem is that
partnerships require shared interest in the beginning of the
morning. The private sector has a very specific interest:
profit making. The state has a very specific interest: security
providing. We should recognize and grant that they have a
different interest.
We need to move us to an alignment model. How do we
structure incentives within the marketplace for them to achieve
their primary objective, which is profit making, while
producing an effect that the state requires, which is enhanced
security?
Until we actually start to think about how can we shape and
incentivize that behavior and recognize that we actually have
very different interests in this space--I mean, that is Strava
fitness band company a few weeks ago produced a heat map that
exposes all of our forward-deployed troops. I would submit to
you that nobody at their board meeting, when they came up with
this really great idea of releasing that heat map--and they
said, look, our stuff is in the real dark places, and they
thought that was really cool. Ten years ago, the intelligence
capacity that a state would have had to have found all of our
forward-deployed troops--think about that. This was produced by
a fitness company.
There are non-security seeking, security relevant actors in
this space. That is the way we have got to think about them.
Let us meet them on their grounds and start to get them to
align towards the security needs that we have.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you.
Dr. Sulmeyer. Briefly I would just note the interests are
not aligned, and that is really the most essential part and to
not treat them all the same. Not all the companies have gone
through the same amount of self-reflection. Some have not; some
have. We should be honest about that.
Finally I do not think we should limit this to social media
companies. There is a lot of companies up and down the stack, a
lot of different types of people on the Internet who have an
interest in this type of work.
Senator Blumenthal. Thank you all.
I apologize, Mr. Chairman. I have gone over my time.
Senator Rounds. What I would like to do is another round.
Okay? Let us do it this way. Let us do one more round so that
everyone has an opportunity. We will make it 5 minutes. I would
simply say that for those of us up on this end--and I went over
as well--let us phrase it so that when we hit the 5 minutes,
whoever is final speaking on it will have their--that will be
the last one and we will move from there.
So with that, let me just begin with this very quickly.
Right now, we are looking at changing our hats, our dual hats.
Right now, within the cyber community, we have a dual-hatted
individual for both title 10 and title 50 operations and so
forth. We are looking at separating those into separate items:
title 10 one side, title 50 on the other. The cybersecurity
side would be separated out from the NSA side and so forth. We
had a lot of discussions over it. We were concerned at first
that they were going to go very, very rapidly. Now there is the
discussion about whether or not moving in this particular way
is quick enough.
I just want to know your thoughts about whether or not we
are actually approaching the challenges that are facing us in
the right way with regard to the organization of government as
a whole. Can I just very quickly go across and just ask each of
your thoughts about whether or not we are moving in the right
direction as to how we are arranging so that we can respond to
these types of threats? I will begin with Mr. Butler.
Mr. Butler. Thank you, Senator.
Let me start with the CYBERCOM/NSA issue. My sense is we
are at a point where we have got enough of the infrastructure
developed to really work within Cyber Command, that we are not
as dependent as we once were on the National Security Agency.
I think the other part of this is as we move forward with
the kinds of influence strategies that we are talking about, we
need to have a way of checking and understanding whether it is
working. We need an activity that understands this space that
can help Cyber Command make adjustments along the way.
So I support the split and support where we are trying to
go as we move forward. As we take a look at those two elements
and we put it into a larger DOD IC [Intelligence Community] and
whole-of-government, whole-of-America construct, I go back to
what I put in my written statement. I think from my
perspective, having been through this both in uniform and doing
information operations campaign planning and where we are
today, we need to get the best of America into this space.
There is a role for DHS. The FBI is very engaged. There is a
role for the Department of Defense that goes beyond the
National Guard Bureau that ties in with the intelligence
community. There is a role for trusted private sector partners
in this space. As a matter of fact, you cannot scale without
it. So I think we have to align.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Ms. Conley?
Ms. Conley. The organizational structure gets to the reason
why we needed a comprehensive 9/11-type commission because we
are horribly structured for this particular challenge. It falls
within the streams of law enforcement, intelligence, defense,
education, awareness, and that is why we need a deeper dive to
get to a reconfiguration. Just as we did after 9/11 with the
DNI and DHS, we restructured ourselves. We need to do that
again.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Dr. Harknett?
Dr. Harknett. I fully concur that we should do that deep
dive, and I would urge us to reconsider the split of the dual
hat. I know that that is not the current view. This notion of
my litmus test. Are you producing more synergy or are you
producing more segmentation? There is not one of our allies
that is moving in that direction.
Senator Rounds. Let me just ask one question on that very
quickly because one of the items was is that we know that on
the title 50 side, on the NSA side, they love to be deeply
embedded and they do not want to be seen. There is a real
concern out there that if they actually actively and more
persistent that they are constantly being seen, that that
interrupts their capabilities to be the intelligence gatherers
that they are. How do we then allow for that constant and
persistent activity if they have the same concern about they
would really rather not been seen? They just simply want to be
the deep ears for us.
Dr. Harknett. So I think having the dual hat enables that
kind of determination to be made. The sensitivity of both when
and where we are going to make certain tradeoffs and where that
seamless between intelligence and----
Senator Rounds. But it is not working today. Is it?
Dr. Harknett. No. I think it can. I think it can, sir.
Senator Rounds. But we do not have evidence.
Dr. Harknett. But if you look at our adversaries, why are
they not worried about burning capabilities? Why are they not
worried about--we have had a high-end right kind of focus to
all of this both in the recon phase and in the force phase that
I think has actually been distorting of this space.
Senator Rounds. I am going to move over very quickly
because Dr. Sulmeyer has been shorted each time around here.
Dr. Sulmeyer. You always pick on the Harvard guy.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Sulmeyer. I think we are back to different interests.
The two different institutions have matured and now they have
different missions, different jobs to do. The current
structure, what you can say for it, is very efficient decision-
making because it is one person who makes the decision. I think
it is time, though, for two different and for an adjudication
to be made for which priorities are going to take precedence
each time.
Senator Rounds. Thank you.
Senator Nelson?
Senator Nelson. But until we evolve into that new
structure, we are stuck with what we have. We set up these
Cyber Command national mission teams to disrupt the Russian
troll farms, the botnets, the hackers, all engaged in attacks
on our democracy, re the elections. We can identify them, the
infrastructure they use. We can identify their plans, their
operations. We can do everything that we can to stop these
activities, but if you do not do anything, it is not going to
happen. Until the existing structure that we have--the
Secretary of Defense walks into the room and says, boss, and
his boss is the commander-in-chief--until he says, boss, we
have got to act, nothing is going to get done.
So are we describing a situation that we are defenseless in
this 2018 election?
Mr. Butler. My sense, sir, is no. My recommendation is, in
the homeland defense mission of the Department of Defense, we
should stand up a JIATF [Joint Interagency Task Force] and move
forward as we begin to move to another level, which would be a
national security task force. But in the interim, this
committee has jurisdiction. The Secretary has prerogatives to
set up a JIATF in support of homeland defense. This is a
homeland defense issue.
Dr. Harknett. I would just add one. I think it is a defend
the nation issue.
Senator Nelson. I think you are right. I think this is as
clear an attack on the country as if you lobbed a missile or if
you lobbed an artillery shell.
Senator Blumenthal wanted to ask the question. One of you
had stated that it is going to morph into where the attacks are
going to look more American. Would you expand on that, please?
Ms. Conley. Senator, that was me.
It is in part from some of the lessons we learned from the
French presidential election. The last cyber attack, which
happened within the last 24 hours of the campaign--it was a
combination of both hacked emails from Macron's campaign, as
well as made-up messages, and it was all mixed in between. What
we understand--and I do not have access to classified briefings
from our French colleagues--where the source came from looked
like it was coming from the United States, from United States
organizations. Some of this is tied into adaptation where they
do not want it to look like a Russian bot. They do not want it
to look Russian. They wanted to originate from other sources to
confuse and make attribution questionable in those last few
moments.
So my intuition tells me that more and more of these
attacks will look like they are coming from America. It will
obscure attribution, and then people will say this is their
First Amendment right to say these things and put forward
these--that is the problem.
Senator Nelson. How did the French counter that?
Ms. Conley. Well, very gratefully, the French have a very
unique--they have a blackout period 24 hours before an
election. It is a reflection period. Because the French
Government and intelligence agencies had made very clear
repeatedly and publicly that this was likely to happen, French
media were very responsible. They could not fact check the
material in time. The reflection period would not move forward.
In fact, that last major attack was really thwarted because
both of a law but also a lot of French proactive steps to
inform their public that this could happen.
Senator Nelson. That was in the last 24 hours before the
French election.
Ms. Conley. So what had happened, it was the presidential
election debate between Marine Le Pen and Emmanuel Macron. It
was the Wednesday before the election on Sunday. In that
debate, she began to hint that there may be some information
about potentially Mr. Macron's overseas bank accounts and sort
of hinted at this. Then about 24 hours later, the document
release happened. So one could speculate that there was some
coordination. But because it hit so late, it really did not
have the impact. But, again, responsible media, Government
warnings, and the reflection period all prevented something
that, if it would have happened 72 hours before, may have had a
different impact on that election.
Senator Rounds. Senator Gillibrand?
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
Just following up on a couple things. You said the Belfer
Center already has done a deep dive on how we were hacked and
ways to prevent it. Is that true?
Dr. Sulmeyer. Senator, the two reports are about the
practices that campaigns and State and local officials can take
based on field research about what they found as vulnerable and
techniques that were effective in the past, so ways to shore up
those defenses. It is not going to be that kind of a deep dive
like you are----
Senator Gillibrand. Have you distributed that to the 50
States?
Dr. Sulmeyer. I believe so, yes.
Senator Gillibrand. Have you gotten comments or any
response back?
Dr. Sulmeyer. It went live today.
Senator Gillibrand. So I would like to request that you
brief this committee on what the responses are to each of those
efforts to outreach the different States and a copy of the
report for all committee members so that we have our own first
draft of what our 9/11 deep dive might ultimately look like
because this has to be done. It is striking to me that there is
no sense of urgency by this administration. It is absolutely
crazy as far as I am concerned. I want to work towards
elevating this issue, and your work will help us do that.
Dr. Harknett, you mentioned in your comments that bots do
not have free speech rights. I could not agree with you more.
So what kind of legislation do you think we could write or
could be written to say we expect these platforms, whether it
is Facebook or Twitter or Instagram or any other online
community, to not sell its technology to fake entities who are
posing as real people? The reason I say that is it is simple
fraud, as far as I am concerned, because you are doing it for
the purpose of changing someone's mind, distracting them,
giving them false information. I believe it should be illegal
under the same analysis that we have for fraud statutes. How
would you go about trying to take away those free speech rights
that are given to non-entities today?
Dr. Harknett. Thank you, Senator.
So I am not a lawyer, but I would build on what you just
said. I think the notion of our default to fraud--so if in fact
what you are trying to sell is trend, if that is the actual
operative thing that you are trying to--then that actually
should be capturing human behavior. We really have to think
through--I mean, this is very tricky. But legislatively we have
to separate out human behavior from automated behavior, and
automated behavior can be classified as falsification of
trending, if you wanted to capsulize it in that fashion. So I
think the notion of understanding technical manipulation of the
space is not smart marketing. It is manipulation and therefore
should be out of bounds.
Can I make one quick comment on your deep dive?
Senator Gillibrand. Yes.
Dr. Harknett. I would look as another example, Eisenhower's
Solarium exercises back in the 1950s. President Eisenhower
said, okay, what is going to be our macro level grand strategy?
Set up three competing teams to come up with what those
strategies should look like, and that is where containment and
deterrence came from. It is an interesting alternative
approach, but we get at the same sort of things that you are
looking at.
Senator Gillibrand. Like a national competition?
Dr. Harknett. Well, he brought together three very specific
groups of experts. They were given access to classified
information, but they worked as independent teams. Then they
were brought together to knock heads over what the best route
to a grand strategy looks like.
We do not have a cyber grand strategy, and we do not have a
grand strategy for cyberspace. I can tell you the Chinese do.
They have announced it. They are going to be the number one AI
[Artificial Intelligence] country by 2030. We need to start to
think in those kinds of grand strategic terms.
Senator Gillibrand. Other thoughts?
Mr. Butler. Yes. Senator, I would build on the Honest Ads
Act. You have got elements in this particular legislation which
gets to what we want online platforms to do. They can identify
botnet infrastructure and are beginning to identify
infrastructure that has origin in elements that are nefarious.
I think I would add to that as one way of kind of tackling this
issue.
The second point. I do not want to disagree too strongly
with my colleagues here, but I have worked in the private
sector and I have worked on the public sector side. I know that
there are models that can work to align incentives. The
enduring security framework is a good example of that. We have
had it work before. When you show private sector and national
security government elements working together a threat of this
magnitude and you provide some type of limited liability
protection, you can get there. It took us a long time with
Facebook, Twitter, and Microsoft to get to pulling terrorists'
data offline, but they are doing it now. My sense is the sooner
we get into this process with creating an alignment of not only
incentives but understanding of the problem--and again, it is
not with everyone. It is with folks who can do things on scale
and really help us as a nation.
Senator Gillibrand. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Rounds. Thank you, Senator Gillibrand.
First of all, let me just take this time to say thank you
very much to all of our witnesses for your time. You spent an
hour and a half with us today. It has been greatly appreciated.
I would suspect that we will be speaking again in the future as
we continue to learn more about the challenges and the threats
that face our country. It is not going to get better. It is
going to get worse. We all recognize that. Our challenge is to
make sure that we have the right long-term strategies and that
they are being properly implemented. As such, I think we have
got a lot of work to do.
With that, once again, thank you. Thank you for the
participation of our members here today.
At this time, this Subcommittee meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:53 p.m., the Subcommittee adjourned.]
APPENDIX A
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]