- EFFECTIVE ADMINISTRATION OF THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
[Senate Hearing 115-827]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-827
EFFECTIVE ADMINISTRATION OF
THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
=======================================================================
HEARING
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION,
LABOR, AND PENSIONS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
EXAMINING EFFECTIVE ADMINISTRATION OF THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
__________
JUNE 19, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-644 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2020
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR, AND PENSIONS
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee, Chairman
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
PATTY MURRAY, Washington
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BERNARD SANDERS (I), Vermont
JOHNNY ISAKSON, Georgia
ROBERT P. CASEY, JR., Pennsylvania
RAND PAUL, Kentucky
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine
TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin
BILL CASSIDY, M.D., Louisiana
CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TODD YOUNG, Indiana
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah
TIM KAINE, Virginia
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska
TINA SMITH, Minnesota
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
DOUG JONES, Alabama
David P. Cleary, Republican Staff Director
Lindsey Ward Seidman, Republican Deputy Staff Director
Evan Schatz, Democratic Staff Director
John Righter, Democratic Deputy Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
STATEMENTS
TUESDAY, JUNE 19, 2018
Page
Committee Members
Alexander, Hon. Lamar, Chairman, Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions, Opening statement.........................
1
Murray, Hon. Patty, Ranking Member, a U.S. Senator from the State
of Washington, Opening statement...............................
3
Witness
Pedley, Captain, Krista M., PHARM.D., M.S., Director, Office of
Pharmacy Affairs, Healthcare Systems Bureau, Health Resources
and Services Administration, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Rockville, MD..................................
6
Prepared statement...........................................
8
EFFECTIVE ADMINISTRATION OF
THE 340B DRUG PRICING PROGRAM
----------
Tuesday, June 19, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in room
SD-430, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lamar Alexander,
Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
Present: Senators Alexander [presiding], Isakson, Cassidy,
Young, Scott, Murray, Casey, Baldwin, Murphy, Warren, Kaine,
Hassan, Smith, and Jones.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALEXANDER
The Chairman. The Senate Committee on Health, Education,
Labor, and Pensions will please come to order.
Senator Murray and I will each have an opening statement.
Then, I will introduce the witness and then we will hear from
the witness. Senators will each have 5 minutes to ask
questions.
We have three Appropriations bills on the floor; unusual
development. I am managing the Energy and Water Appropriations
bill. We even have the prospect of several amendments that may
be offered and voted on today including, hopefully, one or two
at 11:45 a.m.
I will be leaving the hearing after a while and going to
the floor to manage that bill, but Senator Cassidy has agreed
to chair the hearing from that point forward.
I want to acknowledge at the outset that this is a hearing
suggested by Senator Kaine, as a result of our earlier hearings
on 340B. We appreciate the suggestion and look forward to it.
At Methodist Hospital, in downtown Memphis, five employees
working as community navigators go to events in Memphis to give
local residents preventative cancer tests and refer them to the
Methodist cancer treatment center if necessary.
Saint Thomas Hospital, in Nashville, operates four
Dispensary of Hope pharmacy sites across the State of
Tennessee, providing low income, uninsured patients with free
or low-cost prescription drugs.
The Erlanger Health System, in Chattanooga, delivers
prescription drugs at no cost to low income patients at their
homes to ensure they are receiving and taking their
medications.
Methodist, Saint Thomas, and Erlanger are all able to
provide these services because of the money they save by
participating in the 340B Drug Pricing Program, which requires
drug manufacturers that participate in Medicaid to provide
discounts on prescription drugs to qualifying hospitals and
clinics.
Some of the time, the 340B discount is passed directly to
the patient as a lower priced drug. Other times, the hospital
or clinic uses the savings to provide other services to
patients, like the programs Methodist, Saint Thomas, and
Erlanger run. In other words, the savings are used in many
different ways.
Arguably, all these uses, and others, fit into the broad
language Congress wrote when it created the 340B Program in
1992, which says the program was created to, ``Permit covered
entities to stretch scarce Federal dollars as far as possible,
reaching more eligible patients and providing more
comprehensive services.''
But, as we learned at our two previous hearings on the
Program, there is no consistent data that show how hospitals
and clinics are spending the money they save through the 340B
Program.
Data is necessary to demonstrate the value of the 340B
Program, and Congress cannot evaluate the Program, conduct
oversight, or consider changes to improve the Program without
more information.
There has been a lot of bipartisan interest. I mentioned
Senator Kaine's role in suggesting that we hear from the Health
Resources and Services Administration--we will call that HRSA
today--which oversees the 340B Program. Today's hearing is an
opportunity to hear from HRSA on whether they need more
authority to collect data and properly oversee the Program.
At our previous hearings, we have heard that the reason we
do not have much data is because HRSA may not have the
authority to collect data and conduct oversight of the Program.
We heard explicitly from two Government watchdogs--the
Government Accountability Office and the Office of the
Inspector General at the Department of Health and Human
Services--at our last hearing that HRSA needs more authority to
properly oversee the 340B Program.
Right now, HRSA has clear authority to determine if
hospitals, clinics, and drug companies are eligible to
participate in the Program. However, we have heard it is
unclear if HRSA has the statutory authority to oversee other
aspects of the 340B Program, for example, defining what
patients may benefit from in the 340B Program.
Today, I would like to hear directly from the agency in
charge of the 340B Program. What data is being collected? What
data is missing?
For example, according to HRSA itself, the agency only has
data on about 90 percent of drugs sold through the 340B
Program.
What oversight is being conducted on the 340B Program and
are these oversight activities effective?
For example, HRSA currently conducts audits to determine
hospital and clinic eligibility, but we have heard these audits
are inconsistent.
One Tennessee hospital shared with me that it was asked to
provide information during an audit that was based on draft
guidance that was never made final. To satisfy the unexpected
request, the hospital was forced to do additional work at
additional expense.
Does HRSA need more authority to collect data or provide
more oversight? And is HRSA using its existing authority
properly?
As I mentioned, we heard at our last hearing HRSA does not
have, quote, ``broad rulemaking authority'' over the 340B
Program. On the other hand, HRSA may not be using its clear,
existing authority.
For example, earlier this month, HRSA delayed for the fifth
time a rule to ensure drug companies are properly participating
in the 340B Program. Why is HRSA not using this existing
authority to ensure drug companies are participating properly
in the 340B Program?
Congress cannot make the 340B Program work better for
patients and hospitals if we do not have accurate and complete
information about how the program works.
I look forward to hearing from our witness with the Health
Resources and Services Administration today, and our other
Committee Members about what Congress can do to evaluate the
340B Program, measure the Program's performance, and ensure
that the agency responsible for the Program is conducting
proper oversight.
Senator Murray.
OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MURRAY
Senator Murray. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witness for joining us today.
Before we get into the topic of today's hearing, I want to
make one brief comment on another issue that is on the minds of
many this morning. I know this is not your jurisdiction, but I
hope you will pass this along to Secretary Azar.
What President Trump is doing at the southern border right
now with the support of so many others in this Administration,
including at HHS, is appalling: separating children from their
parents, tearing babies away from breastfeeding moms, ripping
these families apart. This is what people across the country
are seeing happening in their country's name.
It is a deliberate choice being made by President Trump and
this Administration, and it needs to stop. President Trump can
end this right now, on his own, and he should not point fingers
and he should not wait any longer.
Captain Pedley, I do not know if you support this policy or
not, and you should feel free to weigh-in, if you would like,
but I could not let this hearing begin without passing my
thoughts on this along. I am hoping you will take them back
with you and help your bosses understand that this is not
acceptable, especially because I asked Secretary Azar last week
to tell me what is being done to, at least at the minimum,
ensure that parents know where their children are, whether they
are safe, and whether they will see them again. And he has not
yet gotten me back that information.
People across this country are going to keep paying
attention to this. They are going to continue demanding action.
And they are going to hold President Trump, and his
Administration, accountable.
Now today, I want to say I am glad we are going to continue
our conversation about the 340B Program. It helps so many
safety net providers stretch their resources to serve
vulnerable families and how we can help to strengthen it.
340B provides critical drug savings to providers to take on
the burden of serving our communities with the greatest needs
and fewest resources. It works by requiring pharmaceutical
companies to discount their prices for these care providers who
can then use those savings to, as the original congressional
report puts it, and I quote, ``Stretch scarce Federal resources
and provide more comprehensive services.''
At our previous hearings on 340B, I have shared stories
from care providers across my home State of Washington who are
putting their 340B savings to good use. I have shared stories
from Seattle, and Spokane, and Sequim, and Olympia, and Walla
Walla, and Monroe, and many more.
I have shared stories about:
Programs that serve cancer patients;
Programs that serve homeless and low income communities;
Programs in our rural communities, and stories about
countless patients who got the medications they needed, but
would not have been able to afford them if their provider had
not been able to discount them.
While I have already shared so many great stories from
across my state about the good work providers have been able to
do with their 340B savings, I have a lot more.
Stories from the very tip of the Olympic Peninsula, where
Olympic Medical Center uses those 340B savings to provide
discounted care in a community with many seniors and low income
patients.
Stories from Providence St. Peter Hospital in Olympia and
Providence Centralia Hospital, where they have used these
savings to provide thousands of free and discounted
prescriptions every year; and lower-cost chemotherapy services,
including support and counseling, for patients receiving
treatment.
It is clear many providers, in Washington State and across
the country, are using these savings to make sure that even
with few resources they can do a lot of good.
We should take steps to strengthen 340B by providing more
accountability and transparency for everyone in the system. We
should be confident entities are using their 340B savings
appropriately and pharmaceutical manufacturers are providing
340B discounts fairly.
Unfortunately, instead of working in good faith to make
this system stronger, President Trump has worked to sabotage it
by repeatedly stalling measures to provide accountability and
clarity, severely cutting funds to 340B recipients, and even
suggesting 340B discounts somehow contribute to high drug
prices.
When the Health Resources and Services Administration,
HRSA, drafted a rule to make sure drug companies played by the
rules and gave the discounts required by the law, the Trump
administration sabotaged it by delaying the rule. Not once, not
twice, but five times.
When HRSA drafted its so-called ``mega-guidance,'' which
would have provided more clarity for the Program, the Trump
administration walked away from the table with stakeholders who
wanted to find resolution on these issues, and sabotaged the
process by withdrawing the guidance completely.
I am particularly interested to hear what our witness today
thinks of these efforts.
While President Trump seems entirely uninterested in
allowing oversight and guidance of this Program, unfortunately,
he has shown an interest in cutting it.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services have
traditionally reimbursed 340B-eligible care providers at market
price, just like everyone else, but the Trump administration is
working to sabotage the Program by slashing those
reimbursements by nearly 30 percent for drugs. That dramatic
cut is already hurting many of these care providers and the
families that rely on them.
President Trump has talked a lot about lowering drug
prices--in crowds, and in his tweets, and in his deeply
underwhelming blueprint--but instead of putting forward
proposals to actually strengthen or expand 340B, the blueprint
characterizes 340B as, quote, ``a business challenge,'' that
contributes to, quote, ``downward pressure on revenues'' of
drug companies.
No mention of the real pressures low income patients and
families face. No mention of the great work being done by
safety net providers keeping people healthy and delivering care
close to home.
The Administration's suggestion that this Program, which
makes companies lower their prices, is actually a barrier
keeping companies from lowering their prices contradicts
itself. It also contradicts what we saw after Republicans
jammed through their partisan tax bill; companies spent that
major giveaway on massive stock buybacks, not on lowering
prices.
This blueprint speaks loudly about the President's
promises. His Administration's actions to sabotage 340B, which
actually helps make drugs more affordable, are moving us in
exactly the wrong direction. Instead of walking away from this
Program, we should strengthen it, so providers in Washington
State and nationwide can continue to use it to stretch their
resources, support struggling families, and reach vulnerable
communities.
We do need to look at every part of the 340B system for
ways to make sure it is accountable enough to fulfill its
intent and solid enough to continue serving our communities for
generations to come. These hearings are a great opportunity to
do that.
I look forward to seeing what today's witness has to offer
to this conversation.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray.
I am pleased to welcome Captain Krista Pedley to today's
hearing, and I thank her for taking the time to be here.
Captain Pedley is the Director of the Office of Pharmacy
Affairs at the Health Resources and Services Administration--
which we are calling HRSA today--the Office which administers
and oversees the 340B Drug Pricing Program.
Before joining HRSA's Office of Pharmacy Affairs, Captain
Pedley served in the Food and Drug Administration's Office of
Generic Drugs and in the Department of Health and Human
Services Office of the Secretary.
She began her career as a pharmacist with the United States
Public Health Service. In conversation with her before the
hearing, I believe she said she has been at her current job 8
years and with HRSA for 11 years.
We look forward to her expertise.
Welcome, again, Captain Pedley. If you could summarize your
comments in about 5 minutes, then we will take questions from
Senators.
STATEMENT OF CAPTAIN KRISTA M. PEDLEY, PHARM.D., M.S.,
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF PHARMACY AFFAIRS, HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS
BUREAU, HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, ROCKVILLE, MARYLAND
Captain Pedley. Good morning, Chairman Alexander, Ranking
Member Murray, and Members of the Committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the 340B Program.
HRSA shares the commitment to the effective oversight and
integrity of the Program, and today, I will provide an overview
of the steps we have taken to strengthen those efforts.
The Program was authorized in 1992 to stretch scarce
Federal resources by reducing the cost of covered outpatient
drugs to 340B eligible entities. Approximately 12,850 entities
and over 30,000 associated sites currently participate, in
addition to 600 manufacturers.
We appreciate the work done by the HHS Office of Inspector
General and the Government Accountability Office to provide
recommendations on strengthening safeguards, which inform our
activities across all HRSA programs.
HRSA has worked to address the majority of these
recommendations through systematic efforts to improve the
Program. However, the 340B statute does not provide sufficient
authority to effectively implement some of the recommendations
that remain open.
We continue to welcome feedback from our stakeholder
community, Members of Congress, the GAO, and OIG to help
strengthen our operations and oversight.
The President's Fiscal Year 2019 budget includes a proposal
to increase transparency and accountability in the Program in
two specific ways.
First, by ensuring that the benefits of the programs are
used to help low income, uninsured patients.
Second, to amend the statute to provide explicit, general
rulemaking authority in order for the Program to set clear,
enforceable standards of Program participation.
The President's budget also proposes to implement a user
fee that would be paid by covered entities based on their
overall sales.
The user fee revenue would be used to administer the
Program, and enhance Program integrity and oversight activities
by conducting additional audits of both covered entities and
manufactures, and by improving our I.T. system capabilities.
HRSA works to verify that both covered entities, and
manufacturers, comply with Program requirements.
For covered entities, HRSA conducts efforts, such as
initial certification, annual recertification, and Program
audits. To ensure the transparency of that audit process, we
post the summary of our final audit findings, including the
names of the covered entities, on our public Website.
As of April 1, 2018, HRSA has completed 981 covered entity
audits since it began auditing in 2012, which encompasses
nearly 13,000 offsite facilities and nearly 21,000 contract
pharmacy locations. In Fiscal Year 2018, HRSA is on track to
conduct an additional 200 covered entity audits.
The findings of the audits have varied. Some findings were
minor in nature, requiring basic corrections to their 340B
record, while other audits found diversion, either through
ineligible providers or ineligible sites.
Through findings in the audits, HRSA developed educational
tools and resources for all stakeholders to improve overall
Program integrity.
HRSA is also actively engaged in manufacturer oversight.
Manufacturers have one core, statutory obligation in the 340B
Program, which is to offer a price that does not exceed the
statutory 340B ceiling price to covered entities. HRSA's
oversight efforts of manufacturers center on this key
obligation.
To that end, the audit process for manufacturers is the
same as the process for covered entities. As of April 1, 2018,
HRSA has conducted 12 audits of manufacturers. HRSA also
develops guidance and policy releases specific to manufacturer
compliance.
HRSA verifies that manufacturers that participate in
Medicaid have signed a Pharmaceutical Pricing Agreement,
reviews all allegations of manufacturer noncompliance brought
to its attention, and requires refunds and credits when a
covered entity is overcharged.
The 340B statute specifies the types of entities eligible
to participate in the Program, but does not specify how a
covered entity may dispense such drugs to its patients.
The diverse nature of eligible entities has resulted in a
variety of drug distribution systems. HRSA has issued guidance
recognizing covered entity use of contract pharmacies to
dispense 340B drugs. The majority, or 73 percent, of covered
entities do not contract with these pharmacies.
Contract pharmacies provide access points for eligible
patients to obtain 340B drugs. They do not increase the number
of eligible patients. HRSA guidance outlines compliance
requirements for entities that utilize contract pharmacies,
which HRSA reviews as part of its audits.
If a contract pharmacy is found to be out of compliance
with Program requirements, HRSA may terminate the contract
pharmacy from the Program.
HRSA is committed to strengthening 340B Program integrity
efforts and ensuring that its oversight supports the Program's
success.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and answer
any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Captain Pedley follows:]
prepared statement of capt. krista m. pedley, pharmd, ms
Chairman Alexander, Ranking Member Murray, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Health
Resources and Services Administration's (HRSA) efforts to improve the
integrity of the 340B Drug Pricing Program (340B Program). HRSA shares
the Committee's commitment to the effective oversight and integrity of
this program. In my testimony today, I will provide an overview of the
steps we have taken to strengthen oversight of the Program.
HRSA's mission is to improve health and achieve health equity
through access to quality services, a skilled workforce, and innovative
programs. We do this by working to improve health care for people who
are geographically isolated or economically or medically vulnerable.
HRSA strives to maximize every dollar and seeks to achieve the best
outcomes for the populations we serve. Consistent with HRSA's Strategic
Plan, we are continuously working to enhance oversight and integrity in
all HRSA programs, including the 340B Program.
The 340B Drug Pricing Program
The 340B Program was authorized by the Veterans Health Care Act of
1992. Based on congressional report language, \1\ the 340B Program is
intended to substantially reduce the cost of covered outpatient drugs
to 340B-participating eligible entities, known as ``covered entities,''
in order to stretch scarce federal resources. Some examples of covered
entities include Federally Qualified Health Centers, Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program grantees, hemophilia treatment centers, and
disproportionate share hospitals (DSH). Covered entities must apply to
participate in the 340B Program and, once eligibility is verified by
HRSA, the entities may begin purchasing drugs at the statutorily
defined ceiling price. As of April 1, 2018, approximately 12,850
covered entities and over 30,000 associated sites currently participate
in the Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\
The House Report accompanying the original 340B Program
legislation states the following intent: ``[i]n giving these `covered
entities' access to price reductions the Committee intends to enable
these entities to stretch scarce Federal resources as far as possible,
reaching more eligible patients and providing more comprehensive
services.'' H.R. Rep. No. 102-384(II), at 12 (1992).
Manufacturers participating in Medicaid enter into an agreement
with HHS and agree to charge 340B covered entities a price that does
not exceed the statutory ceiling price. Over 600 manufacturers
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
participate in the Program.
We appreciate the work done by the Department of Health and Human
Services Office of Inspector General (OIG) and the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) to highlight potential program integrity
vulnerabilities and provide recommendations on strengthening
safeguards. HRSA uses these recommendations to inform our program
improvement activities across all HRSA programs, including the 340B
Program. The GAO made four recommendations from its 2011 study, and
HRSA has implemented two recommendations from the study. The remaining
two recommendations are open, which direct HRSA to clarify hospital
eligibility requirements and the definition of a 340B patient.
Additionally, earlier OIG 2005 and 2006 reports include 11
recommendations, nine of which HRSA has implemented. The remaining two
recommendations specify that HRSA should develop a pricing system to
improve the oversight of the 340B Program and to allow entities access
to secure pricing data to ensure that they are charged at or below the
340B ceiling price. In addition, the OIG's 2016 report recommended that
HRSA clarify guidance to prevent duplicate discounts for Medicaid
managed care organization drugs, and this recommendation remains open.
Within our statutory authority, HRSA has worked to address the
majority of these recommendations through systematic efforts to improve
the 340B Program. The 340B statute does not provide sufficient
statutory authority to effectively implement some of the
recommendations. We continue to welcome feedback from our stakeholder
community, Members of Congress, GAO, and OIG to help strengthen our
program operations and oversight.
Budget Proposals
The President's fiscal year 2019 Budget includes a proposal to
increase transparency and accountability in the Program, by ensuring
that the benefits of the Program are used to help low-income and
uninsured patients. The Budget also proposes to amend the statute to
provide explicit general regulatory authority in order for the 340B
Program to set clear, enforceable standards of program participation,
and to require all covered entities to report on the use of program
savings. If Congress were to enact the fiscal year 2019 Budget
proposal, HRSA would have explicit general rulemaking authority for all
aspects of the 340B program, significantly strengthening HRSA's
oversight of the 340B Program. Binding and enforceable regulations
would dictate specific 340B Program requirements and provide the
clarity necessary for participants to be fully compliant, for example
on hospital eligibility requirements and the definition of a 340B
patient.
The President's Budget also proposes to implement a user fee that
would be paid by covered entities. The user fees revenue would be used
to administer the Program and enhance program integrity and oversight
activities by conducting additional 340B Program audits of covered
entities and manufacturers and by improving IT system capabilities.
340B Program Integrity
HRSA places the highest priority on the integrity of the 340B
Program and has strengthened oversight of this program. We work to
verify that both 340B covered entities and manufacturers comply with
340B Program requirements. We have always worked to achieve program
integrity within our authority to provide clarity in important program
areas.
We conduct efforts such as initial certification (entity enrollment
and validation), annual recertification, and program audits (onsite
audit of 340B compliance). When an entity applies for participation in
the program, HRSA staff review and validate the applicant's eligibility
based on statutory requirements. In addition, through the annual
recertification process, covered entities verify that all eligibility
information is up to date and attest to compliance. We have been
conducting annual recertification for all covered entities over the
last several years. Since 2012, there have been steady improvements in
recertification efforts by all covered entities in the 340B Program.
Based on program requirements and information submitted and verified
during the registration and recertification process, HRSA has
instituted additional program integrity checks such as quarterly DSH
hospital checks, site visits to grantees, and randomized collection of
contracts related to contract pharmacy arrangements.
Fiscal year 2018 is our seventh year of covered entity audits.
Randomly selected covered entity audits continue to be utilized
according to a risk stratification methodology, so that entities with
higher risk factors are more likely to be selected for audit. Targeted
audits are also performed and may be triggered by reported violations
or allegations. HRSA has also re-audited covered entities with earlier
violations.
The 340B covered entity audit process begins with a selected
covered entity receiving an engagement letter explaining what to expect
and how to prepare for the audit. Auditors follow a strict protocol
when conducting an audit. After the completion of the audit, the entity
receives a final report, and is granted one opportunity for ``notice
and hearing,'' by which it can submit a written disagreement addressing
any or all of the audit findings. If the entity submits a disagreement,
HRSA considers additional points raised, which may result in adjusted
findings. The entity is then issued a revised final report, if
warranted. If findings were included in the final report, the entity
would be required to submit to HRSA a Corrective Action Plan (CAP),
which would include repayment to manufacturers for findings of
diversion, duplicate discount, and/or violation of the Group Purchasing
Organization prohibition.
HRSA is regularly reviewing and updating its processes to improve
program integrity. Based on our reviews, we have updated our audit
expectations regarding the implementation of a covered entity's CAP.
Specifically, as of April 1, 2018, HRSA expects full CAP
implementation, including any settlement with manufacturers, to be
completed within 6 months of a CAP approval. If covered entities are
unable to meet this expectation, they may be subject to termination
from the Program. In addition, HRSA may collect additional
documentation to demonstrate that the CAP has been implemented,
including any applicable repayment to manufacturers. Covered entities
may be subject to a re-audit to assess compliance with program
requirements, including when audits have identified the same exact
finding of non-compliance. A finding of non-compliance in two or more
audits, depending on the type of violation, may be considered
systematic and egregious, as well as knowing and intentional, which may
result in the covered entity being removed from the 340B Program and
may also disqualify the covered entity from re-entry into the 340B
Program for a reasonable period of time.
To ensure the transparency of the audit process, HRSA posts a
summary of final audit findings, including the name of the covered
entity, on our public website. As of April 1, 2018, we had completed
981 covered entity audits since we began auditing in 2012, which
encompass nearly 13,000 offsite outpatient/offsite facilities and
nearly 21,000 contract pharmacy locations. In fiscal year 2018, HRSA is
on track to conduct an additional 200 covered entity audits. The
findings of the audits have varied. Some findings were minor, requiring
basic corrections in the 340B data base (e.g., contact or address
information was incorrect). Other audits found diversion, either
through ineligible providers or ineligible sites. For audits with
findings of a possible duplicate discount violation, the covered entity
is required to work with the state to clarify and resolve the issue.
In addition, for instances of noncompliance, covered entities must
work in good faith with manufacturers to remedy any repayment owed
after the entity determines the scope of noncompliance. Covered
entities and manufacturers have access to the necessary data to resolve
any repayment, which is a matter between the two parties due to their
established business relationship.
Through findings in the audits, HRSA develops educational tools and
resources for all 340B stakeholders in order to improve overall program
integrity.
In addition to covered entity oversight, we are actively engaged in
manufacturer oversight. Manufacturers have one core statutory
obligation in the 340B Program, which is to offer a price not to exceed
the 340B ceiling price to covered entities. Our oversight efforts of
manufacturers center on this key obligation. To that end, the audit
process for manufacturers is the same as the process for covered entity
audits as outlined above. As of April 1, 2018, HRSA had conducted 12
audits of manufacturers. HRSA also works to ensure manufacturer
compliance through development of guidance and policy releases specific
to manufacturer compliance. HRSA verifies that manufacturers that
participate in Medicaid have signed a pharmaceutical pricing agreement,
reviews all allegations of manufacturer noncompliance brought to its
attention, and requires refunds and credits when a covered entity is
overcharged.
Contract Pharmacy Use in the 340B Program
The 340B statute specifies the types of entities eligible to
participate in the 340B Program, but does not specify how a covered
entity may provide or dispense such drugs to its patients. The diverse
nature of eligible entity types has resulted in a variety of drug
distribution systems. The majority (73 percent) of covered entities do
not contract with pharmacies. Of the 27 percent of covered entity
organizations utilizing contract pharmacy arrangements, Section 330
health centers represent the largest users of contract pharmacy
arrangements, with 73 percent of health centers utilizing one or more
contract pharmacies. HRSA notes that contract pharmacies provide access
points for eligible patients to obtain 340B drugs; they do not increase
the number of eligible patients.
HRSA issued revised guidance in 2010 to further outline compliance
requirements for covered entities that utilize contract pharmacies to
dispense 340B drugs to their patients and to permit covered entities to
utilize more than one contract pharmacy. The guidance states that
covered entities are responsible for compliance of the contract
pharmacies, and they must ensure against diversion and duplicate
discounts, maintain auditable records, and meet all other program
requirements. HRSA expects entities to conduct annual audits of their
contract pharmacies in order to conduct sufficient oversight. If HRSA
determines that a covered entity has not provided adequate oversight,
the contract pharmacy arrangement is terminated from the 340B Program.
HRSA conducts audits of covered entities and their contract
pharmacy arrangements and has included in the criteria for risk-based
audits the number of contract pharmacy arrangements a covered entity
utilizes. HRSA verifies that the covered entity and contract pharmacy
have entered into a valid, written contract during its audits of 340B
covered entities. Entities must demonstrate that they have mechanisms
in place to prevent diversion and duplicate discounts. During audits,
HRSA also reviews a sample of the records of 340B drugs dispensed at
the contract pharmacy and reviews contract pharmacy compliance. During
the annual recertification process, covered entities that have
arrangements with contract pharmacies must attest that the arrangement
complies with all requirements set forth by the 340B Program. If an
arrangement is found to be out of compliance with 340B Program
requirements, HRSA may terminate the contract pharmacy arrangement from
the 340B data base so that manufacturers no longer ship 340B drugs to
the pharmacy.
Conclusion
HRSA is committed to strengthening 340B program integrity efforts
and ensuring that our oversight supports the program's success. As I
have outlined today, with our multi-faceted strategy, HRSA is employing
many effective tools within our authority to maximize our oversight
reach and manage compliance in the 340B Program.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today.
______
The Chairman. Thank you, Captain Pedley.
We will now begin a round of questions. As I mentioned
earlier, I will be going to the floor shortly to manage the
Appropriations bill and Senator Cassidy has agreed to chair the
hearing after that.
Senator Murray mentioned what was happening at our border.
New enforcement policies have resulted in hundreds of children
being separated from their parents. In my view, the
Administration should end that new policy immediately and work
with Congress, in a bipartisan way, to secure the border, to
provide a status for those who are illegally here, and then
prevent a humanitarian crisis at the border.
Captain Pedley, you have a lot of experience with the 340B
Program, and we have listened to hospitals and clinics talk
about how much good it does, but we do not really know how the
money is being spent. I spend a lot of my time here pushing
back on new Federal regulations and particularly on requiring
people across the country to send in information to Washington
that nobody is going to read.
But it seems to me that it would be helpful for us to know
how hospitals and clinics spend the money they save from
discounted drug prices.
Why should we not require that hospitals and clinics tell
us how they are using their 340B savings so that we can know
how the money is spent?
Captain Pedley. HRSA's authority is currently limited as it
relates to requiring what the entities do with their savings
and requiring they then report that information to HRSA at this
time.
We have proposed in the Fiscal Year 2019 budget to require
how the entities spend that savings, as you mentioned, to
report that information to HRSA, and then to make that
information auditable.
We would want to work on a legislative proposal to move in
that direction.
The Chairman. It would take legislations to do that.
Based on your experience, can you think of any reason not
to do it? Why should we not ask a hospital, ``Tell us how you
are spending the money?'' Ask a community health center, ``Tell
us how you are spending the money.''
I gave some examples in my opening statement of activities
that are not passing along the direct discounted price to an
individual, but obviously help people who need help.
Any reason we should not do that?
Captain Pedley. The intent of the Program in the last 25
years was for the entities to stretch their resources as far as
possible.
As we continue to examine the Program, and as we proposed
in the budget, we think it is an important next step move
toward defining how the entities use that savings and then
require that they report it to HRSA.
It is a very complex issue and would be a shift in how the
Program is operated. Currently, the grantees who participate in
the Program do have to report their savings under their grant
requirements as Program income. So they are currently doing
that under the grant authority, but there is not similar----
The Chairman. Are you talking about the community health
centers in that case?
Captain Pedley. The community health centers, the Ryan
White grantees, the hemophilia treatment centers, for example.
Yes.
The Chairman. You mentioned ``define''. There is a
difference between our defining how they spend the savings and
our asking them to tell us how they spend the savings.
My inclination would be to say as long as we know what they
are doing, and it looks to us like it is within the broad goal
of the law, that it would be unnecessary for us to write a
narrow definition about how hospitals and clinics should spend
the money.
Do you see the difference between defining and reporting?
Captain Pedley. Based on our experience, and anecdotally
what we hear entities report now on what they do with their
savings, it is being defined inconsistently across entities
whether the savings is just based on the upfront discount on
the product.
Are they also including what they receive via reimbursement
from insurance companies? Are they considering the compliance
costs to participate in the Program?
I do think in order to receive consistent information that
we can then evaluate, it would be important to define the term.
The Chairman. What do you mean by ``define''? Tell them
there are only a limited number of things they can do?
Captain Pedley. I think we need to define how they----
Again, are they considering just the upfront discount and
their cost that they receive from insurance companies when they
end up with a number on what they are saving?
Then to define, ``What are you allowed to do with that
savings to benefit patients?'' which could also be very diverse
in nature and we would need to think through.
We would want to work with you on also considering the
diverse nature of entities that participate in the Program.
There are very small clinics to the very large hospitals, so
they may be doing very different things at their clinics
related to how they are benefiting their patients.
The Chairman. I think the fear of the hospitals in any
event, maybe the community health centers too, is that if we
ask them to tell us how they are doing that we will tell them
what to do.
I do not see any reason why, at least to start with, we
need to say to a hospital, ``You may only do A, B, and C,''
beyond what we have already said.
What I would like to see is to say to the hospital, ``Tell
us how you are spending the money and how you think it fits
this broad goal that Congress established in 1992?''
Can you give us specifically, either in writing after this
or in other conversations with Senators, what authorities you
need to ensure you can properly oversee the 340B Program?
My time is about up. I only have 25 seconds, but if you
want to give me 20 seconds' worth, that would be good.
Captain Pedley. HRSA has outlined in the budget, in
addition to the requirement around how entities use the
savings, that HRSA needs general rulemaking authority in the
Program to appropriately and clearly define how entities should
comply with requirements. So that is definitely an area that
HRSA needs authority in.
The Chairman. Thank you. If you would like to expand on
that following the hearing, that would be helpful.
Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The 340B Drug Pricing Program actually allows our safety
net providers to stretch limited resources to help vulnerable
patients and communities. Over the last three hearings we have
had here, we have heard a lot about the need for changes and
limitations to the Program.
But I am, frankly, skeptical this is not just a tactic by
the Program's opponents from the playbook they have been using
against 340B, actually, for years.
For example, the ACA expanded the 340B to more hospitals,
like rural and cancer hospitals, but did not allow them to
receive a 340B discount on drugs for rare diseases called the
orphan drugs.
But Congress intended, actually, to apply that exemption to
the treatment of a rare disease, not when a drug that is
sometimes used to treat a rare disease is being prescribed for
more common conditions like arthritis.
The Obama administration issued a rule actually
implementing that provision.
What happened to that rule?
Captain Pedley. HRSA did issue a rule to further define
that new requirement in the statute around orphan drugs. It was
published in a manner whereby the hospitals could not purchase
orphan drugs when they were specifically used for their rare
disease indication, but that they could purchase those orphan
drugs if they were used for their common use.
HRSA and HHS were sued based on that regulation. The courts
overruled the interpretation by HRSA that was beyond the plain
meaning of the statute. Therefore, we had to withdraw that rule
and currently, those hospitals cannot purchase orphan drugs in
the Program regardless of the indication, whether it is for the
disease or the common use.
Senator Murray. That is exactly right.
PhRMA, which represents big drug companies, sued the
Government and demanded these drugs be carved out of the 340B
Program even if they were not being used to actually treat a
rare disease.
Now, our rural and cancer hospitals cannot get discounted
prices on many of these big, blockbuster drugs because one of
their many uses happens to be treatment of a rare disease. That
lawsuit has real costs.
Olympic Medical Center reported that of the over $12.2
million it spent on prescription drugs in 2017, about half of
it was on orphan drugs.
Samaritan Hospital spent over one-third of its operating
margin on orphan drugs.
Grays Harbor Community Hospital told us it lost about one
quarter of a million dollars on purchasing just one blockbuster
drug, Remicade, which has numerous non-orphan indications.
That is what happened to that rule.
Now, the Affordable Care Act also requires regulations to
make sure drug companies were charging the appropriate amount
or ceiling price for 340B drugs and to hold them accountable
for overcharging.
Captain Pedley, when was that regulation finalized?
Captain Pedley. That rule was finalized in January 2017 and
it currently has an effective date of July 1, 2019.
Senator Murray. How many times has the Trump administration
delayed the rule?
Captain Pedley. The rule has been delayed five times.
Senator Murray. Correct. And did the Affordable Care Act
also require HRSA to establish a system that listed the ceiling
prices for drugs so that providers would know if they were
overcharged?
Captain Pedley. The statute did require HRSA to develop a
secure Web portal to display those ceiling prices to covered
entities.
Senator Murray. Why has that not been launched?
Captain Pedley. HRSA received money in Fiscal Year 2014 to
begin the development of that pricing system. We have been in
the development and in that process we recognized other of our
systems needed to be updated because of security reasons
because they feed that system. We have gone through that
process and that system was released to the public last fall.
The pricing system is currently available for internal use
by HRSA based on data we receive from CMS. However, that system
will not be released to the public until the rule that is
finalized and in effect as it relates to how prices are
calculated.
Senator Murray. Right. So because of the delay from the
Administration, we do not have now clear rules of the road for
what companies are supposed to charge. There are no penalties
for overcharging and there is no transparency to know if you
are being overcharged.
It sounds a lot to me like the drug companies right now do
not have a lot of accountability and I think we need to address
that.
I will save my final question for the next round.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Murray.
Senator Cassidy will now chair the hearing, since I am
going over to manage the Appropriations bill.
Captain Pedley, thank you for coming.
We will go to Senator Isakson for the next questions.
Senator Isakson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Captain, thank you for being here and thank you for your
service to HRSA and the country.
Is it correct that the 340B benefit goes to the facility in
which the patient is treated, not to the patient?
Captain Pedley. The intent was for the covered entity, or
the hospital and clinic, to save on these covered outpatient
drugs. Yes.
Senator Isakson. If I am an eligible patient, due to my
poverty or due to my qualifications, and I go to a facility
that does not get the 340B Program, then I do not get the
benefit of the 340B discount.
Is that correct?
Captain Pedley. You may. It depends on the entity's
policies around how they would then use those savings and
provide the discounts to certain patients.
But it is not required under the statute currently that
they do so.
Senator Isakson. Now, this might be a dumb question,
because I have not followed this issue that closely, but there
have been a number of comments. I know Senator Murray made the
comment, and it was a very good one, about telling us where the
discounts have gone, what they are doing with the savings in
the hospitals and the institutions that are getting the money.
Is that correct, Senator Murray?
Senator Murray: [Nods affirmatively.]
Senator Isakson. Why can we not get that information now?
Or, have we tried to get that information now? Is there any
suspicion on your part that if a facility is getting 340B
discounts are, in fact, giving us the information we need to
know where that discount is going or if we have the chance to
get that information?
Captain Pedley. The 340B statute is specific to allow HRSA
to oversee the Program as it relates to whether they are
following Program requirements, such as only providing drugs to
the patients and other matters.
It does not address the issue related to what they do with
their savings.
Senator Isakson. You said, I think in answer to a question
previously or in your testimony, that you needed statutory
authority to do that.
Is that right?
Captain Pedley. That is correct.
Senator Isakson. Okay. If you could write that statute,
what would you tell the covered hospitals to do or facilities
to do when they reported?
Captain Pedley. The President's budget outlines that HRSA
wants to work very closely with the stakeholders and with the
Congress to be able to define how they use the savings, how it
would be reported to HRSA.
It is a very complex matter that we would need to think
through a lot of different things as it relates to the types of
entities that participate; the possible burden it would create
for these entities to both track and report that information.
We would want to work with you all on that proposal.
Senator Isakson. It is a sticky wicket, as we used to say
about some things in business. The devil is in the details in
terms of how do you determine exactly where it is going, and
whether it is going where you would have liked for it to have
gone or it should have gone, and a very complex system to put
together.
Most of the time when we try to provide a benefit to
anybody to determine where that benefit went, in terms of a
savings after they realized that savings, is very difficult to
determine because it depends on the entity and how they use the
money.
Did we ever anticipate in the legislation or have we ever
directed in the legislation in any way for the hospitals or
facilities to use it solely to benefit lowering the costs to
indigent patients or patients who otherwise qualify for 340B?
Captain Pedley. That is not a part of the current statute.
Senator Isakson. Would that be the type of thing you would
like to see if HRSA was called upon to do it?
Captain Pedley. I think as we would work on the legislative
proposal, those are the types of things we would need to think
about before we look at any type of legislation.
Senator Isakson. If you were me--and you are certainly not,
you are lot prettier than I am, so you are not me in many
ways--but if you were me, and you could ask that one question
of the beneficiaries of the 340B Program or the hospitals and
facilities that get the benefit to disclose to us, what would
it be that you would ask for?
Captain Pedley. I think it is important that the entities
are using the savings in alignment with the intent of the
statute. That they are stretching their scarce resources as far
as possible to provide more care to more patients, and what
that looks like for them at their entity.
Senator Isakson. One last question. In your experience with
HRSA, is there any situation you know of, any audit or
otherwise in the governing responsibility HRSA has that you
have punished, penalized, or otherwise fined a company that got
340B benefits and then were using it in a way you did not like?
Captain Pedley. We currently conduct the audits of the
covered entities and we audit them for a couple of different
things, but the major items are around diversion of drugs to
patients who do not meet what is called our patient definition,
which is in the guidance. So they do not meet the certain
criteria in that guidance, and we have found that in our
audits.
Another matter that we find, that is also statutory, is
that the entity is prohibited from providing a 340B drug to a
Medicaid patient and the state also getting a rebate on that
same drug. It is known as a duplicate discount.
We also find that in our audits as well, and when we do, we
post that information on our Website. The covered entities are
required to submit a corrective action plan and repay the
manufacturers accordingly.
Senator Isakson. Yes, that is known as ``working the
system,'' and I think that is what some of them have done, to
work the system, to try and take advantage of the discount.
Thank you very much for your service.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy [presiding]. Senator Casey. Not here.
Senator Kaine.
Senator Kaine. Thank you.
I want to just begin and thank the Chairman and Ranking
Member for your strong statements at the beginning of this
hearing about the problem on the border with the family
separation.
I have a particular feeling about this because I worked as
a missionary in Honduras in 1980 and 1981, and a lot of the
children and families who are coming to the southern border of
the United States are coming from Honduras. Because I am still
very connected there, I know why they are coming.
They live in neighborhoods in a very, very poor country
whose institutions have been completely corrupted by something
in the compass of this Committee; the sad reality of Americans'
desire to buy illegal drugs.
If we buy illegal drugs that are manufactured in Mexico or
Columbia, as those drugs transit south to north, the dollars
that Americans pay to buy illegal drugs transit north to south
and they go into these countries that are so poor. They corrupt
police departments, judiciaries. They create gang wars.
Children in these neighborhoods in towns like El Progresso
where I worked, they do not want to leave their country. They
do not want to leave their home and their parents do not
either, but if you have to choose between your child getting
killed in the crossfire of a gun war or some chance that they
might have a better life somewhere else, you make that very,
very wrenching decision.
These Hondurans, or Salvadorans, or Guatemalans are coming
to the border. They generally come in one of two ways. They
come many not to break the law, but to seek refuge under the
laws of this country. They are not lawbreakers. They are trying
to apply. They may or may not be granted asylum or refugee
status, but they are trying to comply with American laws.
There should not be a penalty separating families for
trying to avail yourself of asylum laws of this country. And
yes, some come and their parents bring them over the border
illegally and that is a misdemeanor. But nowhere else in our
system in this country do we take children away from parents
who are charged with a misdemeanor. And so, this policy, that
is a completely invented policy of this Administration, is just
absolutely heartless.
A couple days before Father's Day, this article appeared in
``The New York Times.'' ``Honduran Man Kills Himself After
Being Separated From Family at U.S. Border.'' He crossed into
the United States with a wife and a 3-year-old, and as they
were separated, was so distraught that he killed himself, hung
himself in his jail cell.
We talk about the effect upon children of the separation.
What about the effect upon parents losing their children?
To Senator Murray and Senator Alexander, who is now on the
floor, thank you for stating strongly the need that we should
act in accord with our values and our laws, and support
families.
This is an important hearing, but the urgency of this issue
compels a congressional urgency in providing a fix. If the
President will not do it, we have to. We are not the Article
Two-and-a-Half Branch. We do not have to wait around. We are
the Article One Branch and we should act like it.
With respect to the HRSA hearing, Captain Pedley, I
appreciate your testimony. I just have a couple of questions.
You talk about audits. The vast number of audits of
providers, and you indicate what some of those audits have
shown. You also indicate that there were 12 audits of
manufacturers.
What are you finding as you audit manufacturers'
compliance?
Captain Pedley. For the manufacturer audits, HRSA monitors
the one core obligation as part of the statute, which is to
ensure the manufacturers are charging at, or below, the 340B
ceiling price.
To date, we have not had any findings in the manufacturer
audits around that one core obligation. We do post that
information on our public Website, both stating the name of the
manufacturer that was audited and any findings, if there are
any.
Senator Kaine. There was testimony last year at the House
Energy and Commerce Committee about re-audits of providers that
resulted in some repayments to manufacturers.
Have you done re-audits of manufacturers?
Captain Pedley. We have not. The standard on the covered
entity side is that we would re-audit a portion of covered
entities that had problems in their first audit that required
repayment, and we would then re-audit a certain portion of
those.
We apply the same standard on the manufacturer side.
However, we did not have any findings yet in any of those
reports, so we have not re-audited any manufacturers.
Senator Kaine. What is the rationale for the repeated delay
in the draft guidance that would have clarified standards
around 340B and imposed fines on manufacturers that did not
offer the correct discounts?
Captain Pedley. The ceiling price and civil monetary
penalty regulation, that has been delayed to July 1, 2019, is
an important rule.
It has been delayed in order to allow for a more
deliberative process in the context of the broader drug pricing
strategy that is being discussed at the Department. Therefore,
it would be premature to put that rule into effect at this time
as there are broader discussions, not only around the 340B
Program, but drug pricing in general.
That is why that has been delayed.
Senator Kaine. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Hassan.
Senator Hassan. Thank you very much, Senator Cassidy and to
Ranking Member Murray, thank you as well.
Captain, good morning. Thank you for being here and thank
you for your service.
I will just echo what the Ranking Member, and the Chairman,
and now Senator Kaine have said, to ask you to please express
the most urgent concern from me, as well as all of our
colleagues who are speaking up, about this Administration's
policy at our border.
Early in May, I visited Mexican officials in Mexico City to
talk about the opioid crisis and how we could work together
because, as you may know, New Hampshire, my home state, has one
of the highest mortality rates because of the opioid epidemic.
To Senator Kaine's point, the flow of money and weapons
from this country to drug cartels south of us is contributing
to a level of violence that is unprecedented and is a large
driver in the number of people we see coming from places like
Guatemala, where I was in the summer of 1974, I think, doing
public health work.
It is critical that we address the root causes, but even
more critical and more urgent at this time is that we stop
separating families, stop separating children from their
parents. We do not traumatize children to punish parents in the
United States of America and we should stop this policy
immediately. And I hope very much you will take that back to
the Secretary and anyone else in the Administration you talk
to.
With that, on this issue, in New Hampshire, we have 13 340B
hospitals. These hospitals use 340B as intended. They rely on
the Program in order to help them stretch Federal dollars
further, so they can help provide benefits to their
communities.
I want to share a few examples of how New Hampshire 340B
hospitals are using their 340B savings.
Dartmouth-Hitchcock funds substance use recovery coaches in
its emergency department. The coaches assist patients
experiencing an overdose or substance use disorders to connect
them with community programs. The coaches keep in touch with
patients long after discharge to ensure that their needs are
being met.
Androscoggin Valley Hospital in Berlin, New Hampshire
supports their federally Qualified Health Center with a subsidy
that otherwise would not be available if not for the additional
funds received from the 340B Program.
The hospital and FQHC both support the uninsured and
underinsured individuals in their communities with access to
primary care and other services. If those went away, then the
only access to care would be the hospital emergency department.
Support from the 340B Program also allows Valley Regional
Hospital's physician practices in Claremont, New Hampshire to
continue to provide needed primary care in the community at the
right time and the right place for their patients most in need.
For Valley Regional Hospital, the 340B Program also allows
for health care services such as advanced chemotherapy to be
provided locally. Otherwise, Valley Regional's patients would
have to travel far outside their community for this type of
care.
Captain, I know there has been a lot of discussion about
greater transparency in the 340B Program. It is my
understanding that there are robust auditing requirements
currently in place for 340B covered entities.
Can you walk us through the current auditing requirements
for hospitals participating in 340B?
Captain Pedley. The audit process is one where it is
consistent across the board with covered entities. We have a
very specific audit protocol that is used onsite when the
entities are audited. There is a pre-meeting with the covered
entity to ensure they have all the information necessary. They
have to produce records to HRSA.
Senator Hassan. Right.
Captain Pedley. They have to produce their drug dispenses
to HRSA so that we can sample certain prescriptions to ensure
they are meeting the statutory requirements accordingly.
If there are findings related to that audit, a corrective
action plan would need to be submitted to HRSA to ensure they
are correcting any issues that we find. And any repayment is
owed to manufacturers if there are any findings related to a
payment and we would follow them and help them through that
process.
Senator Hassan. Okay, thank you.
My time is running short, but I wanted to point out that
340B covered entities are already operating on thin margins,
and they are using their 340B savings to benefit their
communities and serve more patients.
For them complying with audits and balancing the need to do
that with providing necessary services on a very thin margin
are a concern, and I hope you all will take that need to
balance into consideration.
Lastly, I just wanted to make sure that I understand that
HRSA has done only 12 audits of manufacturers compared to 900
hospitals audits.
Is that about right?
Captain Pedley. That is correct, but the rates, because
there are less manufacturers, we do about 0.8 percent
manufacturer audits and about 1.5 percent on the covered entity
side.
Senator Hassan. Okay. That is helpful. I just want to point
out that we should not let up on the manufacturers either.
Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Smith.
Senator Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Murray.
Thank you, Captain, for being here with us today.
I am really grateful that you brought up this terrible
situation we are seeing on the border, Senator Murray, and I am
very grateful to Senator Alexander for echoing your recognition
that we have a humanitarian crisis. I hope that we can resolve
this quickly because to use cruelty to children as a deterrent
as a public policy of our Government is just so wrong.
I am grateful that we have this chance to talk about the
340B Program because it is so important to hospitals, rural
safety net hospitals especially in Minnesota.
In my state, hospitals especially in rural areas are facing
big challenges. It includes caring for an increasingly aging
population; really on the frontlines of addressing the opioid
crisis and drug overdose epidemic; and also really struggling
to recruit and retain qualified people to work in the hospital.
I appreciate the questions that have been raised about this
delay in enforcement of the manufacturer civil monetary
penalties rule. I wonder if you can just give us some sense of
when you think we can expect that. I understand that you are
holding back as the President's drug blueprint is under
consideration, but what does your timing look like, do you
think?
Captain Pedley. The rule has been finalized and our plan is
for the rule to be effective July 1, 2019. As we take another
look at the policies contained within that rule as it relates
to drug pricing more broadly, and to also look at other 340B
policies that intersect with some of the issues in that
regulation, so that we can take a more comprehensive look at
policy across the board.
Senator Smith. Well, I would just urge you as you do this--
I mean, I am certainly all for accountability in the 340B
Program--I urge you to continue to bring accountability to all
partners in this effort.
I will also just point out that the GAO identified that the
top 25 pharmaceutical companies had an average profit margin of
over 20 percent in 2015. I can tell you that the 340B hospitals
operating in my state are not looking at that kind of profit
margin at all.
I recently was talking with Central Health in central
Minnesota and they are using the 340B savings to make sure that
sexual assault victims, when they visit their emergency room,
are able to immediately start getting preventative HIV
treatment. That is a cost of $3,000 for a 28-day course.
Another great example of what we are doing in Minnesota is
the Essentia Health-Ada in northwestern Minnesota, which is
using 340B savings to help provide diabetes prevention efforts.
I am concerned that delaying this rule will potentially put
a burden on our hospitals. I think it is just so important that
we move forward with it.
I would also like to just mention and I would like to get
your feedback on this. We have 11 tribal nations in Minnesota,
and like the rest of Indian country, they are also dealing with
significant health disparities. One of the ways that they can
tackle these health disparities is through the benefits that
they get through the 340B Program.
Can you tell me about how you are able to work with tribal
governments as you think about changes with the 340B Program?
Captain Pedley. There are certain tribal organizations that
are eligible for the 340B Program. We work with them very
closely upon registration into the Program to make sure there
is no technical assistance needed as they go through the
process necessary to do registration.
We also have an annual recertification process and we
ensure they have the education necessary to go through that
process so that they are not terminated from the Program
because they are not able to, again, recertify.
We also have a lot of different training and education
opportunities, not just for tribal, but for other organizations
through our prime vendor program. We have a Website that has
FAQ's and more information as it relates to how to comply with
the Program. So there are a lot of different efforts that we
undertake.
We have a specific point of contact in the Office that is
able to work with the tribal governments to assist them in any
way possible.
Senator Smith. I think it is so important. Sometimes we
forget. It is so important that we have the right level of
consultation as changes to programs are being considered.
It sounds like you will commit to me that you will be happy
to do that kind of consultation as you move forward with
changes to the Program?
Captain Pedley. Yes, we will and we will continue the
efforts we undertake now to ensure, as well, that they are part
of any of our public comment processes. That we reach out to
them directly to receive that feedback on how it will impact
them specifically.
Senator Smith. Thank you very much.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Casey.
Senator Casey. Thanks so much.
I first wanted to start with a statement. I really
appreciate what Senator Murray said at the beginning of her
opening statement about the child separation policy. I know
that is not the subject of the hearing, but what is compelling
in terms of the arguments against this policy is what we have
heard from professionals, doctors across the country.
``The Washington Post'' yesterday had an article entitled,
``What Separation from Parents Does to Children.'' And then in
quoting a doctor, Captain Nelson, a pediatrics professor at
Harvard Medical School, the effect is, quote, ``Catastrophic.''
That is why you have the American Academy of Pediatrics,
the American College of Physicians, and the American
Psychiatric Association representing a quarter of a million
doctors saying end the policy. Not debate. Not have a policy
discussion. End it.
I hope the Administration will heed those calls from
professionals who do not want to have permanent damage done to
thousands of children because of an American policy that was
put into place recently.
Captain, thanks for your testimony. I wanted to ask you a
couple of questions about hospitals; in particular, one
hospital in our state that is affected by some of the
interpretations. Let me provide some background.
The GAO has recommended that we reconsider the scope of
nonprofit hospital eligibility to participate in the 340B
Program. It seems to me that different hospitals provide care
to uninsured, underinsured, and our seniors in different
proportions.
Some have suggested that qualifications to be a 340B
hospital should be based on so-called, quote, ``charity care,''
alone as the sole determinant. But charity care does not tell
the entire story.
We know that there are only eight hospitals in the country,
only eight, including Temple, the hospital I just referred to,
Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia that has over 80
percent of their inpatient caseload comprised of Medicaid,
uninsured folks, and Medicare patients. So they are in the
unique circumstance.
Hospitals like these have almost no room to shift costs
onto higher paying commercial insurers and they operate on very
thin or even negative margins. In Temple's case, they
technically do not have a lot of ``charity care,'' but they
have no taxing authority and chronically struggle to make ends
meet. Last year, they operated at a loss.
Pennsylvania is also unique because it has no public acute
care hospitals. So I have two questions.
Number one, would you agree that it makes sense to assess
needy hospitals based upon a broader set of metrics than just
``charity care'' and legally recognize bad debt? That is
question number one.
Question number two, have you looked at the idea of varying
the value of the 340B discount based on the relative,
uncompensated care burden of different institutions?
Captain Pedley. The current statute is very specific around
hospitals as it relates to the requirements they must meet and
it relies upon the disproportionate share adjustment
percentage. Certain hospitals have to meet greater than 11.75
percent; others are greater than 8 percent, for example.
In addition to that metric, they have to be one of three
types. They have to have a contract with state or local
government. They have to be owner operated by state government
or they have to have governmental powers.
As HRSA registers hospitals that want to come in to the
340B Program, those are the current things we use to evaluate
whether they would meet the eligibility requirements for the
statute.
If there were changes to be made to those requirements,
such as the utilization of charity care, uncompensated care,
any of those metrics, a statutory change would need to be made
to look at that. We would be happy to serve as a resource to
look at any proposals around that.
Again, very complicated issues as you mentioned, but we
currently implement the Program according to those standards
that I had mentioned.
Senator Casey. How about on the question of varying the
value of the 340B discount based upon the relative
uncompensated care burden of different institutions? Any
commentary on that?
Captain Pedley. That is not something that HRSA has looked
at around whether that should be varied based on the type of
hospital or level of care that they provide.
Senator Casey. Okay. We may send you some follow-up on
this.
Thanks, Captain.
Captain Pedley. You are welcome.
Senator Cassidy. I will take my turn now.
Thank you for being here, Captain.
As you may or may not know, I am a physician. I worked 25
years in a public hospital for the uninsured, similar to what
Temple did, except we were really uninsured, Medicaid, poorly
insured. And so, I understand very well the importance of 340B.
But I do think it is important to move beyond anecdote,
because everyone is quoting articles that quote hospitals in
their district. Of course, the hospital has a vested interest
in the Program maintaining as it currently is.
Senator Murray, in her opening statement, I think I recall,
said that people are alleging that it is actually raising the
cost of insurance. But if I recall----
Senator Murray. No, I did not.
Senator Cassidy. I thought you said that. I apologize.
Because it is, and that is not an anecdote as best I can
tell. I just want to move beyond the anecdote, if you will.
For example, there is a February 2016 blog published in the
``New England Journal of Medicine,'' from the University of
Chicago in which the person speaks about how, ``Reports suggest
that the original program substantially expanded in recent
years to include newly qualified entities, affiliated clinics,
certain contract pharmacy arrangements.''
It is, ``Currently so vast for drugs that are commonly
infused or injected into patients by physicians that their
prices are probably being driven up for all consumers. As
pharmaceutical manufacturers face substantial and expanding
demand for discounts on the acquisition prices of these drugs,
they can, and do, pass the costs of these discounts on to other
payers.''
If you have commercial insurance, you are paying more
because of 340B. Again, a blog post from the University of
Chicago.
Secondly, to point out, there is an article from the ``New
England Journal of Medicine'' which, as the Chairman, I will
submit for the record and so approve.
Senator Cassidy. In which they find that 340B entities are
buying physician practices.
They have an overrepresentation of physicians that infuse
drugs that the cost has been elevated. Importantly, the poor
patients, the Medicaid patients are seen less frequently as a
percent of their business than in the non-340B.
Counterintuitive, but the more you go into business of
providing 340B, proportionally the fewer Medicaid patients you
actually see.
Importantly, they also said that the financial gains for
hospitals have not been associated with clear evidence of
expanded care or lower mortality for lower income patients. As
a doctor, this means a lot to me.
We have raised the cost of care. There is no improvement in
mortality outcomes and indeed, the lower income patient is less
likely to be seen. That is incredibly important for us all.
I will also point out another article from ``The American
Society of Clinical Oncology,'' that despite similar--comparing
those 340B hospitals--inpatient/outpatient for cancer care, the
hospital based care, which is associated with 340B payments is
associated with substantially increased costs.
Another article, which I have lost in my mess, but which
would say that Medicare patients, under Medicare Part B
payments are 10.2 percent higher--again, moving beyond
anecdote--10.2 percent higher among the 340B entities because
they are using higher cost drugs in a higher cost setting. So I
do think it is important that we look at the academic data,
which is objective, as we look at all of this.
You mentioned earlier, and just something to mention,
Senator Hassan asked how many of the covered entities are
audited.
Did I hear you correctly? Only 1.5 percent of covered
entities are audited to make sure they are using the Program
correctly?
Captain Pedley. That is correct.
Senator Cassidy. Now, also for the record, you just
mentioned to Senator Casey the criteria by which someone could
become a covered entity.
But if you have someone that meets that criteria who
subsequently buys, let us just say, a cosmetic surgery practice
in a very rich suburb of that city, and frankly, who do not see
any Medicaid, Medicare.
Is that daughter site, so to speak, allowed to benefit from
the 340B Program?
Captain Pedley. Our standard for eligibility for sites that
are offsite of the main hospital, for example, is that those
clinics have to be reimbursable on the hospital's Medicare Cost
Report for HRSA to consider them an integral part of the
hospital and eligible for the 340B Program.
Senator Cassidy. If they accomplish that, even though it
might have nothing to do with poor folks or not seeing any
Medicaid patients whatsoever, indeed, doing cosmetic surgery
that they can benefit from the 340B Program, getting the
discounted drug, but then charging at the list price for that
medication?
Captain Pedley. If that site meets our eligibility
requirements, then they would be able to participate.
Senator Cassidy. Again, buy them at a discounted rate, but
billing at the normal rate for their cosmetic surgery patient.
Captain Pedley. Yes.
Senator Cassidy. We actually posed that question to CRS,
and they gave me the same answer.
I will submit that CRS report for the record.
Senator Cassidy. I am out of time.
Our next person will be Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Azar and President Trump have been making a lot
of promises about how drug prices are going to come down as a
result of the blueprint that they released this month. They
have been boasting about how they are taking on the drug
companies.
But Americans have not seen their drug prices come down and
when you scratch the surface on the President's tough talk, you
find that the Trump plan lets Big Pharma keep jacking up prices
and keep raking in profits. Part of the Trump blueprint
involves changes to the 340B Program and that is the part that
we are digging into today.
Captain Pedley, you run the 340B Program, and just so we
are all on the same page, this is a Federal program that
requires drug companies to provide discounts on drugs purchased
by eligible hospitals and clinics.
Is that right?
Captain Pedley. That is correct.
Senator Warren. Thank you.
Now, the President's drug pricing blueprint suggests that
the 340B Program, a drug discount program, is causing high drug
prices. The plan asks for input on whether the 340B Program
has, quote, ``Caused cross subsidization by increasing list
prices applicable in the commercial sector.''
This is a bizarre question. Apparently, the argument is
that right now, we are being too hard on the giant drug
companies by forcing them to provide discounts to help children
with cancer get treatment.
We are asked to believe that these discounts, which total
less than 2 percent of the entire U.S. drug market, leave drug
companies with no choice except to raise their prices for
everyone else so that they do not have to take a penny out of
the billions of dollars in profits that they rake in every
year.
Captain Pedley, I am trying to make sense of what the Trump
blueprint is proposing here.
If Congress were to reduce the number of discounts that the
drug companies have to provide, does HRSA expect them to turn
around and reduce prices for everyone else out of the goodness
of their hearts?
Captain Pedley. HRSA's role is to implement the Program
according to the statute.
We work closely with the Department on all 340B policy
matters, in addition to what is in the blueprint, and the
questions that were asked related to the 340B Program so that a
more comprehensive look could be taken across the board for not
only the 340B Program, but all of the other measures that are
part of that Program.
Senator Warren. Okay. I will take that as a no.
Here is what it looks like to me. It looks like the
Administration is trying hard to dig up some excuse to let drug
companies charge hospitals and clinics more for their drugs,
and that is exactly the opposite of what President Trump
promised when he was a candidate. It is also bad policy.
It is not the only way that this Administration is trying
to let Big Pharma off the hook.
Eight years ago, Congress gave HRSA the authority to impose
fines on drug companies that knowingly and intentionally
overcharged health care providers in the 340B Program.
The rule that implements these fines was finalized in
January 2017. That is almost a year and a half ago. But as we
have heard from the Inspector General at our last 340B meeting,
HRSA still has not implemented it.
Captain Pedley, HRSA has delayed this rule five separate
times since 2017.
Why will this Administration not penalize drug companies
that break the law by overcharging for their drugs?
Captain Pedley. HRSA does monitor manufacturer compliance
and when there is an overcharge, they are required to refund
covered entities accordingly.
The rule that you mention is specific to defining how to
calculate that price when the manufacturer knowingly and
intentionally overcharges a covered entity. We are in the
process of looking at the policies within that rule in the
broader context of drug pricing. It is currently set to be
effective July 1, 2019.
Senator Warren. You just keep delaying the rule that would
do exactly what it is we are asking people to do.
I appreciate the work that everyone at HRSA does to
implement the 340B Program, but if the President is truly
worried about the connection between high drug prices and the
340B Program, he could forget his blueprint and simply
implement the law that Congress wrote to make sure the drug
companies do not cheat on their discounts.
It is already available to us in the law. We do not have to
change the Program.
Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Murphy.
Senator Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
We were talking about the difference between anecdote and
data. There are enormous amounts of data to show very clearly
that hospitals that take part in the 340B Program are actually
providing much more charity care, much more uncompensated care
than hospitals that do not.
A recent study, for instance, found that 340B hospitals
provide 53 percent more uncompensated and unreimbursed care
than non-340B hospitals, and that low income patients make up
approximately 42 percent of 340B hospitals' patient load
compared with about 27 percent for non-340B.
Go back a couple of years ago to a 2015 GAO report which
found maybe not as impressive numbers, but similar numbers. The
GAO found that 340B hospitals generally provide a lot more
charity care. 340B hospitals had uncompensated care levels that
are 23 percent higher than non-340B hospitals and charity care
levels that were 62 percent higher.
That is some pretty compelling data to tell us that we
might be trying to find a problem that does not exist at the
acuity levels that might be suggested by this hearing.
Let me just ask you, Captain Pedley, a simple question. One
of the things you have been talking about here today is
increased reporting requirements for these hospitals to prove
that they are using the money in the way that is intended. This
Administration has made a lot of noise about reducing
regulations and paperwork for companies, but here is a proposal
to increase the paperwork requirement on hospitals. So I assume
it is for a good reason.
What is the evidence we have today, the hard evidence, that
we have today that hospitals do not use 340B savings to offset
the cost of uncompensated or undercompensated care? Especially
when we have a GAO report and other datasets that tell us that
they actually are providing higher levels of uncompensated care
than non-340B programs?
What is the data that exists today that leads you to
propose requiring hospitals to report more?
Captain Pedley. The 2011 GAO report does outline how
entities are using their savings, and have shown that the
entities do put that money back into ensuring that patients and
their programs can expand based on the 340B Program.
HRSA has no data related to how they use their savings
because we do not have the authority to both define or collect
that information. So HRSA does not have any specific data as it
relates to that element.
Senator Murphy. Then, you could ask for data on anything,
but are you suggesting that you do not have any data today or
any hard information to suggest that there is a problem? That,
in fact, you have data to the contrary. You have data from the
2011 report suggesting that they do put the money into increase
some uncompensated care.
Normally, when you ask for reports, it is because you have
some evidence that there is a problem that you need to identify
with increased information.
But you are saying here that you do not have evidence that
there is a problem. And, in fact, the evidence you do have is
that they are putting money back into care for uncompensated
populations.
Captain Pedley. HRSA has proposed in the budget to take it
to that next step to ensure that they are using the money to
benefit patients, especially those that are low income and
underinsured. We think that is an important next step to take
so that we can ensure that the intent of the Program is being
served accordingly.
Senator Murphy. However, the impression when you were
asking for that is that there is an existing problem. And so,
again, you do not know that there is an existing problem you
are trying to solve.
When we spend an entire hearing talking about the need to
get this data, it suggests it is because we have evidence of a
problem. But again, we do not have that evidence today. You may
get it in the data that is being submitted, but you do not have
it today.
Captain Pedley. HRSA does not have data as it relates to
savings.
Senator Murphy. Mr. Chairman, I think one of our
frustrations in this Administration is that there is often an
attempt to try to find a solution for a problem that does not
exist.
We are going through this battle over work requirements for
Medicaid imagining that there are scores of Medicaid recipients
who are scoff laws, able to work, not working when the reality
is very different.
Similarly, I worry that we are creating an impression that
these hospitals are providing less uncompensated care, less
charity care when they are, in fact, providing much more
charity care. We have testimony today that suggests there is no
evidence that HRSA holds currently to suggest that there is a
problem necessary of solving.
I appreciate the time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy. I will point out that the GAO study you
reported is entitled, ``Action Needed to Reduce Financial
Incentives to Prescribe 340B Drugs at Participating
Hospitals.'' One quote, ``Twelve percent of the 340B DSH
hospitals were among the hospitals that reported providing the
lowest amounts of charity care across all hospitals in the
GAO's analysis.''
A more complete rendering of that article would suggest
there might be.
That said, I think it is Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me, before I begin, Captain Pedley, let me also add to
the growing chorus of folks thanking the Ranking Member and
Chairman Alexander for their comments concerning what is
happening on the border.
I know a little bit about prosecutions and in this country,
there is something known as prosecutorial discretion, which
this Department of Justice seems to be putting in a lockbox
somewhere and not adhering to.
But prosecutorial discretion will give a prosecutor the
means to either take a case and go to the most extreme way or
go to a much more lenient way. How that prosecutor's office
does that is a matter of policy, not a matter of law. They can
flip a switch. They can send a memo. They can send a phone call
and it will change immediately.
The second thing is the Attorney General should know better
than to simply compare what is going on, on the border with
people in this country who are sent to prison.
When someone goes to prison in this country, we do not send
their children to prison with them or in a separate prison. We
do not do that. Moreover, we have in this country a support
system for the kids who are left behind. There are churches.
There are family services. There are state run services. So to
compare that is just disingenuous.
The Attorney General is a former U.S. attorney. He is a
prosecutor. He should know better than to make those statements
and have the American public believe that.
I will get off of that soapbox and back to the issue at
hand, Captain, and I appreciate your service to this country,
both in your position at HHS as well as the military. So thank
you for that.
The President's budget is calling for user fees for covered
entities to administer the Program.
How much would these user fees cost each of the covered
entities in order to continue their participation?
Captain Pedley. The proposal is 0.1 percent of their
purchases under the Program. So $1 for every $1,000 they spend
under the Program.
Senator Jones. All right. So it is not going to be too
burdensome for a covered entity.
But will that be enough to help cover the administrative
costs of implementing the Program, do you think?
Captain Pedley. HRSA believes that amount would be able to
cover costs and enhance the efforts we are already undertaking
on both the covered entity and the manufacturer side to ensure
they are meeting the Program requirements.
Senator Jones. I would not want to see costs increase,
those user fees increase because that will take away money from
those entities that are doing the right thing in providing
services, or the discounts, or whatever. So $1 for every $1,000
we could probably live with.
But I want to talk a little bit about the impact of the
Program to rural health, which is something I am especially
interested in.
In Alabama, we have been losing hospitals left and right,
12 in just the last few years in our rural areas. We have some
35, I think, entities that are covered and about 28 of those
have negative margins. So I want to make sure that this Program
stays sound to make sure.
Can you just, for the record here, talk about the effects
for the rural hospitals? What would be the effect if we take
away this Program from our rural hospitals and our covered
entities?
Captain Pedley. The law was amended in 2010 to add many new
rural types of hospitals to participate in the Program. Prior
to that, the rural hospitals were not eligible.
But since that time, we have enrolled many of those rural
hospitals into the Program whereby they can now benefit from
the discounts that are offered that are required by the
manufacturer so they can have that savings for their patients
and their communities.
Senator Jones. All right. I know this has been asked, but
is it your position that in order to be more transparent and
require these covered entities to show how they are spending
the money, that is going to take legislation?
Is there not rulemaking ability at HHS to require some more
transparency? Because I think everybody wants to make sure
there is transparency and that the moneys are going and being
spent the way they should be. Does HHS not have that authority?
I know you do a lot of things. This Administration is doing a
lot of things without talking to the Congress about it.
Do you not have that authority to require something along
those lines?
Captain Pedley. HRSA does not currently have that authority
under the 340B Program to either require what they do with that
savings, or to audit, or to receive, or collect that
information.
Senator Jones. All right.
Captain Pedley. Statutory change would be necessary.
Senator Jones. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I am running out. We may
have some additional questions for the record.
Senator Jones. Thank you. Thank you, Captain Pedley.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member.
I want to begin, as I have in each of these hearings on the
340B Program, by sharing a couple of stories from my home State
of Wisconsin to underscore the benefit of the 340B Program that
it provides to hospitals, patients, and our communities.
Door County Medical Center is a critical access hospital in
northeast Wisconsin and it has relied on its savings from the
340B Program to expand its dental clinic to serve uninsured and
Medicaid-eligible adults and children full time.
Previously, the dental clinic could only serve these
vulnerable patients on a very, very limited basis which, of
course, impacted their overall health.
Last hearing on this topic, I shared a concern of one of
Wisconsin's 340B hospitals. This hospital regularly faces
instances when drug companies refused to provide them with the
340B price of a drug, but do allow them to purchase the drug at
whole cost. These drug manufacturers typically claim the drug
is in short supply, but only at the 340B price or they provide
no excuse at all.
Dr. Draper from the GAO told me to speak to you about this
noting that this was a problem the GAO identified in earlier
reports, but that it should no longer be happening according to
HRSA's updated nondiscrimination guidance.
HRSA issued clarified guidance in 2012, but I am concerned
that hospitals in Wisconsin continue to experience these
problems today.
Captain Pedley, what is HRSA doing to positively resolve
these problems when experienced by hospitals? And, does your
agency have the authority it needs to prevent manufacturers
from unfairly gaming the system in this way?
Captain Pedley. We work very closely with covered entities
with respect to this issue. We have specific tools they can use
to contact HRSA or report to HRSA when they are having any
issues related to either not being able to obtain the drug at
all or not able to obtain the drug at the 340B price, so that
we can further investigate what the issue is.
As we do that, we do allow manufacturers under GAO's
recommendation to produce what is called a limited distribution
plan for drugs that are in short supply. They submit that
information to HRSA and what we look for in those manufacturer
plans is to ensure they are treating 340B covered entities the
same as their commercial customers when they are limiting that
supply.
If it is not the case that they are doing that, we would
follow-up with the manufacturer to make sure they are doing so,
so that they are complying with the statute.
We want to hear from entities if they are not receiving the
340B price, even though that drug may be available in the
market at some other price because there could be an issue
there that we would look into.
Senator Baldwin. Modernizing oversight is also an integral
part of strengthening the 340B Program to ensure that it
fulfills its purpose. However, any oversight efforts should be
balanced and address all Program participants.
HRSA has conducted almost 1,000 audits of 340B entities
like hospitals, but has only conducted 12 audits of
manufacturers. What is more, the agency has issued numerous
compliance improvement documents, guides, and Webinars for
hospitals, but there are no similar public compliance Webinars
or guides for manufacturers. I continue to hear concerns from
hospitals in Wisconsin that this uneven playing field persists.
Can you describe HRSA's plans to issue more compliance
measures or create more resources, such as Webinars, to
encourage manufacturers to play a larger role in ensuring the
integrity of the 340B Program?
Captain Pedley. HRSA's role around manufacturer compliance
is multifaceted.
As you mention, we do conduct audits of the manufacturers,
but we also do release program guidance documents. We have a
lot of educational resources and Webinars, not only through
HRSA, but through our contracted prime vendor program to ensure
they are also complying with the statute.
What is unique about the manufacturers versus the covered
entities is the manufacturers only have one core obligation
under the statute, which is to charge the 340B ceiling price,
unlike the covered entities, who have a lot of requirements in
the statute.
Naturally, the oversight is different when it comes to
entities and the education we provide is in greater detail
because they have more requirements than what the manufacturers
do. But we do everything we can as it relates to the
manufacturers.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I have run out of time, but will submit some
follow-up questions. Thank you.
Senator Cassidy. We will have a second round now. I will
start.
Again, moving beyond anecdote, if you will, Senator Murphy
quoted a GAO study. I pulled up the summary of that study and I
think there are a couple of other things to point out.
Significantly, as we have mentioned, in the articles that I
previously quoted, 340B, according to academicians,
incentivizes hospitals to prescribe more expensive medication
and drives up cost for both commercial and for Medicare
programs. That is important.
Medicare is going bankrupt in 8 years and we should be
aware of anything which is driving up the costs for the Federal
taxpayer, but also for the patient as she is paying a higher
co-pay.
All this is important. I am just taking the perspective of
what about the patient?
Here we see, though, just to quote specifically. ``In 2012,
the average per beneficiary spending at a 340B DSH hospital
was,'' and DSH hospitals are 340B's, ``Was $144 compared to
approximately $60 at a non-340B hospital. The difference did
not appear to be explained by the hospital characteristics.''
It goes on to say, ``Therefore,'' this is GAO, ``There is a
financial incentive at hospitals participating in the 340B
Program to prescribe more drugs or more expensive drugs to
Medicare beneficiaries. Unnecessary spending has negative
implications, not just for the Medicare program, but for the
beneficiary who would be financially liable for larger
copayments as a result of receiving more drugs or more
expensive drugs.''
I will also say as a physician, if you give more drugs to
somebody, you are more likely to have complications. And if the
patient is our primary priority, we should not be
overprescribing because we are exposing her to a greater
potential for complications. I mean, that is just, bad things
happen.
Just to say, that seems to be the same GAO study that
Senator Murphy was referring to earlier. So I do think that we
have an issue.
The rule that was put out by the Administration, is it not
my understanding that rule actually redistributed some of the
benefits from the 340B Program to rural hospitals? Are you
familiar with that rule, Captain?
Captain Pedley. I believe you are referring to the CMS
rule----
Senator Cassidy. Yes.
Captain Pedley.--as it relates. That is a rule under CMS
authority and not under HRSA authority.
Senator Cassidy. Are you familiar with it at all?
Captain Pedley. I am familiar with the rule.
Senator Cassidy. You are familiar.
Captain Pedley. [Nonverbal affirmative response.]
Senator Cassidy. Okay. So Senator Jones was talking about
340B hospitals not doing as well, but it is my understanding
that rule redistributed benefits to rural hospitals. It was net
neutral in terms of the cost to the Program. But again, it just
redistributed so that rural hospitals benefited more.
Is that your understanding as well?
Captain Pedley. I am not that closely familiar with the
details of the rule.
Senator Cassidy. Yes.
Captain Pedley. But I would be happy to connect you----
Senator Cassidy. I am fairly confident of that, and so to
Senator Jones' point, that would actually be a benefit of that
rule.
Now, you mentioned, and this I do not know the answer to,
you mentioned that you audited 1.5 percent of the covered
entities and 28 percent of the manufacturers.
What problems have you found among covered entities that we
should be concerned about?
Captain Pedley. With covered entities, we focus on their
statutory requirements as first that they remain eligible in
the Program when we audit them.
Senator Cassidy. You had mentioned that earlier.
What are the issues that you have found? What percent of
that 1.5 percent you have audited have had problems?
Captain Pedley. In total, based on our audits, about 70
percent of the entities had findings. However, based on how we
choose these audits, they are at higher risk for having
findings.
For example, we target audit entities that already have
known issues and we go in and audit to better understand what
is happening on the ground.
Senator Cassidy. Seventy percent of those whom you audited
who are covered entities have issues, but granted, it is a
select population.
What about the pharmaceutical companies? What percent? Now,
I am asking. I do not know the answer to any of this. What is
the percent of pharmaceutical companies that have issues?
By the way, going back to the covered entities, there is
going to be a level of severity. There is going to be a
grammatical error that you should have put a comma here, not
there, and then there are some that are really significant.
Is there any way? Can you give us any kind of sense of
whether these are significant issues or not significant issues?
Captain Pedley. They do vary across the board from minor
data base issues, to diversion of drugs to patients who were
not eligible.
About 60 percent of the audits had required repayment to
manufacturers. But again, even within that repayment, it might
have been one drug that was found versus----
Senator Cassidy. I am almost out of time.
What about the pharmaceutical companies? What percent of
those whom you audited are there problems and what is the
severity of the issues?
Captain Pedley. We have not found issues in the
manufacturer audits. Again, we audit based on that one core
obligation to ensure they are charging the ceiling price and we
have not found any related to their statutory requirement.
Senator Cassidy. Got it. Okay. I am out of time and I think
now, Senator Murray, would you like to?
Senator Murray. Let Senator Kaine proceed.
Senator Cassidy. Okay.
Senator Kaine. Thank you and thanks again, Captain Pedley.
One question I did not get to, actually a couple.
In your written testimony, we talked about manufacturer
audits and we have talked about provider audits. You also
mentioned if an arrangement with a contract pharmacy is found
to be out of compliance with 340B Program requirements, HRSA
may terminate the contract pharmacy arrangement from the data
base.
Has that been done with any contract pharmacies to your
knowledge?
Captain Pedley. We have removed contract pharmacies from
the program if the entities are not appropriately overseeing
those pharmacies. I do not have the specific numbers in front
of me, but I can get them back to you.
Senator Kaine. I will ask that for the record, then.
Let me ask this. Virginia, just in the last month, finally,
thank goodness, embraced Medicaid expansion. Four hundred
thousand Virginians are going to have the opportunity to have
Medicaid who did not have it before. Many of whom will have
health insurance for the first time in their lives because of
the action of our state legislature.
I know that HRSA is doing some studies about 340B
utilization in states that have expanded Medicaid and those
that have not.
What effects, so far, do you know that Medicaid expansion
has had on covered entities in states that have expanded
Medicaid?
Captain Pedley. That is not an area that we have
specifically looked at.
Senator Kaine. You are correct. I thought you were doing
it, but the GAO is currently examining differences between 340B
hospitals in states that have or have not expanded Medicaid.
But you do not have your own sense of that from the vantage
point of HRSA?
Captain Pedley. No, we do not.
Senator Kaine. Let me just state something to you that my
own staff's research uncovered.
Congress expanded the 340B Program in 2010 to allow
additional hospitals and other entities to participate in the
Program. That was an expansion that was at the same time as
part of the Affordable Care Act.
This did result in increased access to care and services to
needy patients, but even with the addition of these new covered
entities, 340B sales as a percent of total drug sales grew by
less than 1 percent between 2012 and 2016. In other words,
while the Program has grown and serves more patients, it is not
responsible for increased drug costs.
Would you agree with that statement?
Captain Pedley. The data we do have is around the sales in
the Program and the percent of the market that it represents.
In 2017, sales were $19.2 billion, which represented about 4.3
percent of the prescription drug market.
Senator Kaine. The statement that I read to you generally
agrees with the drift of that. That even though the ACA
dramatically expanded the number of providers, the increase in
cost in this Program, even with that expanded number of
providers, has not been significant as a percentage.
Captain Pedley. The sales has grown. I have not looked at
it specifically related to the percentage of entities that have
been added, but that is one of the reasons that the sales have
increased.
Senator Kaine. Yes, thank you. Appreciate it.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Baldwin.
Senator Baldwin. Thank you.
The city of Milwaukee has recently experienced a large
cluster of HIV and syphilis cases that require a robust
response from our city leaders and community health
stakeholders.
Our AIDS Resource Center is a 340B grantee and also a Ryan
White Clinic. The AIDS Resource Center has been able to help
address this crisis in real time by extending testing hours and
expanding mobile testing capacity thanks to their 340B savings.
But these clinics continue to face increasing burdens with
the rise of opioid abuse and related sexually transmitted
infections.
In order to ensure that our community providers can meet
the challenges related to addressing the opioid epidemic, is
HRSA considering changes to its Program income standards to
allow for greater flexibility in how these savings are used by
clinics across the country?
In light of the ravaging opioid crisis, are there policy
changes that we ought to be considering to help increase our
effectiveness in combating the opioid crisis?
Captain Pedley. As it relates to Program income, that is
actually a requirement under their grant, which is another part
of HRSA that oversees their grant requirements as part of how
they participate under Ryan White. That is not under the 340B
statute or my specific authority.
I would be happy to connect you with the right folks to get
you an answer on that, but I would be unable to provide any
information on that.
Senator Cassidy. Senator Murray.
Senator Murray. Yes. Captain Pedley, I just wanted to
clarify.
How many audits has HRSA conducted on drug manufacturers in
the last 5 years?
Captain Pedley. Twelve.
Senator Murray. Out of 600.
Captain Pedley. Correct.
Senator Murray. How many on covered entities?
Captain Pedley. In total, 981.
Senator Murray. Out of 12,000. Correct?
Captain Pedley. It is 12,700, I believe.
Senator Murray. Safety net providers including their child
sites and contract pharmacies are getting audited at almost
twice the rate of the drug companies. I just wanted to make
that clear.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for doing the hearing.
I just wanted to say, I am really concerned the
Administration is cutting back on oversight. They are cutting
the Program with a nearly 30 percent reduction in payments to
340B hospitals this January and they are suggesting in their
recent drug pricing blueprint that this crucial discount
program is responsible for high drug prices, which does not
make sense to me.
Integrity, transparency, accountability are critical to any
program, and I believe that we can strengthen the 340B Program
by increasing accountability for drug companies that currently
have very little. We should focus on that and not on efforts to
rollback the 340B Program that provides help for patients and
families across the country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Cassidy. The hearing record will remain open for 10
days. Members may submit additional information for the record
within that time, if they wish.
Senator Cassidy. Thank you for being here today.
Captain, thank you very much.
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
