- CDM, THE FUTURE OF FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
CDM, THE FUTURE OF FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JANUARY 17, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-44
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
30-190 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania
William R. Keating, Massachusetts
John Katko, New York
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas
Filemon Vela, Texas
Martha McSally, Arizona
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
J. Luis Correa, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
John H. Rutherford, Florida
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Ron Estes, Kansas
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Steven S. Giaier, Deputy Chief Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
John Katko, New York
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex
(ex officio)
officio)
Kristen M. Duncan, Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
Statements
The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
2
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana:
Oral Statement.................................................
3
Prepared Statement.............................................
4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
5
Prepared Statement.............................................
6
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................
7
Witnesses
Mr. Frank Dimina, Area Vice President, Federal, Splunk:
Oral Statement.................................................
8
Prepared Statement.............................................
10
Mr. Dan Carayiannis, Public Sector Director, RSA Archer:
Oral Statement.................................................
12
Prepared Statement.............................................
14
Mr. Gregg T. Mossburg, Senior Vice President for Strategic
Operations, CGI Federal:
Oral Statement.................................................
19
Prepared Statement.............................................
20
Mr. A.R. ``Trey'' Hodgkins, III, Senior Vice President, Public
Sector, Information Technology Alliance for Public Sector:
Oral Statement.................................................
23
Prepared Statement.............................................
25
CDM, THE FUTURE OF FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY
----------
Wednesday, January 17, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:09 p.m., in
room HVC-210, Capitol Visitor Center, Hon. John Ratcliffe
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Gallagher, Bacon,
Fitzpatrick, Katko, Richmond, Thompson, Demings, Langevin, and
Jackson Lee.
Also present: Representative Thompson.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Good afternoon. The Committee on Homeland
Security Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Protection will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to receive testimony
regarding the implementation and future of DHS's Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation, or CDM, program. I now recognize
myself for an opening statement.
In providing effective cybersecurity, the ability of the
Federal enterprise to monitor and assess the vulnerabilities
and threats to its networks and systems in real time or as near
real time as possible is paramount. This is what the Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation, or CDM, program at DHS is all
about, understanding what and who is on Federal networks so
that we can achieve true visibility into the Federal
Government's digital ecosystem.
Phase 1 of CDM is to provide visibility into Federal
networks and information systems by working to identify what
was on Federal networks. It was a simple question, really. What
hardware and software was on the systems an agency or
department was running? This was about taking stock of those
internet-connected assets. As DHS has moved through Phase 1,
they found an incredible amount of devices connected to our
networks that agencies were not previously aware of.
How can you protect what you cannot see? How can you
modernize your technology if you do not even know what
technology you have? It is no secret that the Government has
trouble buying technology. Old and outdated technology is not
only a barrier to the Federal Government completing its mission
to serve the American people in a digital world, but brings
with it insecurities and raises serious cybersecurity risks for
each and every agency and department.
DHS began Phase 1 in 2012. While I understand that setting
up new Government programs, buying new and advanced
technologies, and deploying those technologies across a massive
Federal environment is not easy, the threats to Federal
agencies, however, continue to grow every minute. The maturity
of the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program has to
move at the pace of new technologies and innovations, not at
the pace of bureaucracy.
To most effectively carry out oversight, we must educate
ourselves. While DHS is working with 70-plus Federal agencies
and departments from the 24 CFO Act, agencies down to dozens of
smaller bureaus and offices, this committee must work to better
understand the pace at which cybersecurity technologies are
advancing and how programs like CDM are working to protect the
dot-gov.
Does DHS have access to the cybersecurity platforms,
technologies, and services necessary to make effective
continuous monitoring a reality in 5 years, not in 15 years? We
must work with the experts leading these charges in the private
sector to find ways for more agile adoption of the tools and
services we need to defend our networks and our data.
As we have seen with both the private sector and Government
data breaches, the identities and privacies of millions of real
Americans are at risk here. The Federal Government must work to
protect the data of these citizens, including the employees
that work within. That is why we are here today: To learn what
we are doing right and to learn what we could be doing better.
To a certain extent, what does success look like? The
rapidly-evolving threat landscape of modern information age
means that the Government must change its processes to ensure
that we are not gathering more data than we can really protect.
As we continue this conversation, I look forward to hearing
from stakeholders throughout the Federal IT space, including
technology companies, DHS, and the Federal agencies that they
serve. We begin with the private-sector experts joining us
today.
CDM is the ambitious program that I believe if implemented
well and over a reasonable time line provides the American
people with the kind of Federal cybersecurity defense that they
deserve. I want to thank the witnesses for their time and I
look forward to their testimony today.
[The statement of Chairman Ratcliffe follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Ratcliffe
January 17, 2018
In providing effective cybersecurity, the ability of the Federal
enterprise to monitor and assess the vulnerabilities and threats to its
networks and systems, in real time or as near real time as possible, is
paramount.
This is what the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation--or CDM--
program at DHS is all about. Understanding what and who is on Federal
networks so that we can achieve true visibility into the Federal
Governments' digital ecosystem.
Phase One of CDM is to provide visibility into Federal networks and
information systems by working to identify what was on Federal
networks.
It was a simple question really: What hardware and software was on
the systems an agency or department was running? This was about taking
stock of those internet-connected assets.
As DHS has moved through Phase One, they found incredible amounts
of devices connected to our networks that agencies were not previously
aware of.
How can you protect what you can't see?
How can you modernize your technology if you don't even know what
technology you have?
It is no secret that the Government has trouble buying technology.
Old and outdated technology is not only a barrier to the Federal
Government completing its mission to serve the American people in a
digital world--but brings with it insecurities and raises serious
cybersecurity risks for each and every agency and department.
DHS began Phase One in 2012, while I understand that setting up new
Government programs, buying new and advanced technologies, and
deploying those technologies across a massive Federal environment is
not easy, the threats to Federal agencies continue to grow every
minute.
The maturity of the Continuing Diagnostics and Mitigation Program
has to move at the pace of new technologies and innovations, not at the
pace of bureaucracy.
To most effectively carryout oversight, we must educate ourselves.
While DHS is working with 70-plus Federal agencies and departments--
from the 24 CFO Act agencies down to the dozens of smaller bureaus and
offices--this committee must work to better understand the pace at
which cybersecurity technologies are advancing and how programs like
CDM are working to protect .gov.
Does DHS have access to the cybersecurity platforms, technologies,
and services necessary to make effective continuous monitoring a
reality--in 5 years not 15 years?
We must work with the experts leading these charges in the private
sector to find ways for more agile adoption of the tools and services
we need to defend our networks and data.
As we have seen with both private-sector and Government data
breaches, the identities and privacy of millions of real Americans are
at risk. The Federal Government must work to protect the data of these
citizens, including the employees that work within.
That is why we are here today. To learn what we are doing right and
what we could be doing better.
And--to a certain extent--what success looks like.
The rapidly-evolving threat landscape of the modern information age
means that Government must change its processes to ensure that we
aren't gathering more data than we can protect.
As we continue this conversation I look forward to hearing from
stakeholders throughout the Federal IT space, including technology
companies, DHS and the Federal agencies that they serve.
We begin with the private-sector experts joining us today.
CDM is an ambitious program that I believe, if implemented well and
over a reasonable time line, provides the American people the kind of
Federal cybersecurity that they deserve.
I want to thank the witnesses for their time and I look forward to
their testimony.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I now recognize the Ranking Minority Member,
Mr. Richmond, for any opening statement that he might have.
Mr. Richmond. Good afternoon, and thank you to Chairman
Ratcliffe for today's hearing on the Department of Homeland
Security's Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program, CDM.
Today, DHS is working to protect Federal networks by
administering two signature programs, Einstein and CDM. These
programs work in tandem to keep out unauthorized traffic and
provide on-going monitoring and mitigation of cybersecurity
risk. Through CDM, the Department works with Federal agencies
to procure cybersecurity tools and services to empower them to
fend off cyber attacks.
As initially envisioned, CDM will provide each agency with
the information and tools necessary to protect its network by,
among other things, identifying the assets on the agency's
network that warrant protection, bolstering access controls to
various elements of an agency's network, and improving
situational awareness about activities on an agency's network.
Implementation of CDM, however, has been slower than DHS
originally anticipated. Challenges inherent to the size and
scope of the task for accounting for all assets on the Federal
network, confusion about whether DHS or a customer agency was
responsible for footing the bill for CDM-related expenses, and
technology gaps in the commercial off-the-shelf markets have
collectively slowed the process.
That said, today about 20 agencies have their internal
dashboards up and running, two agencies have connected to the
Federal dashboard, and by next month, DHS expects that all 24
of its target agencies to be connected to the Federal
dashboard. As more agencies connect to the Federal dashboard,
DHS will have greater visibility across Federal networks and
will be better positioned to identify and mitigate malicious
activity, including complex coordinated attacks.
As representatives of vendors who work directly with DHS on
CDM, the witnesses here today have a unique perspective on how
to ensure Federal agencies continue to prioritize cybersecurity
investments, how the Federal Government can implement the
lessons learned over the past 5 years to improve the program,
and whether contracting personnel have the training necessary
to deploy CDM quickly.
I also hope the witnesses can speak to how the Department's
failure to name a permanent under secretary for the National
Protection and Programs Directorate, along with on-going chief
information officer vacancies across the Federal Government,
are affecting the implementation of CDM.
Our adversaries have made their interest in breaching
Federal networks crystal clear. Just last week, Trend Micro
reported that Fancy Bear, the same Russian-backed hacking group
that breached the Democratic National Committee in 2016, has
been targeting the Senate's network. Although Congressional
networks do not participate in CDM, this troubling report
serves as a reminder that the interest in breaching U.S.
Government networks persists and that the Federal Government
must act more quickly to protect itself.
On a final note, this subcommittee is also responsible for
ensuring that Federal policies support private-sector efforts
to secure critical infrastructure. Last summer, reports emerged
that hackers successfully penetrated domestic energy companies
and nuclear power plants. In light of the growing cyber threats
across critical infrastructure, I will be interested in
learning whether the private sector can benefit from
implementing elements of CDM, like the dashboard, and whether
efforts to implement CDM-like programs are already under way.
I look forward to the insight of our panelists today and I
thank you all for being here. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Richmond follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Cedric L. Richmond
January 17, 2018
Today, DHS is working to protect Federal networks by administering
two signature programs--EINSTEIN and CDM. These programs work in tandem
to keep out unauthorized traffic and provide on-going monitoring and
mitigation of cybersecurity risks. Through CDM, the Department works
with Federal agencies to procure cybersecurity tools and services to
empower them to fend off cyber attacks.
As initially envisioned, CDM would provide each agency with the
information and tools necessary to protect its network by, among other
things, identifying the assets on an agency's network that warrant
protection, bolstering access controls to various elements of an
agency's network, and improving situational awareness about activities
on an agency's network.
Implementation of CDM, however, has been slower than DHS
anticipated. Challenges inherent to the size and scope of the task of
accounting for all assets on the Federal network, confusion about
whether DHS or a customer agency was responsible for footing the bill
for CDM-related expenses, and technology gaps in the commercial-off-
the-shelf markets have collectively slowed the process.
That said, today about 20 agencies have their internal dashboards
up and running and two agencies have connected to the Federal
dashboard. And by next month, DHS expects that all 24 of its target
agencies to be connected to the Federal dashboard.
As more agencies connect to the Federal dashboard, DHS will have
greater visibility across Federal networks and will be better-
positioned to identify and mitigate malicious activity, including
complex, coordinated attacks.
As representatives of vendors who work directly with DHS on CDM,
the witnesses here today have a unique perspective on how to ensure
Federal agencies continue to prioritize cybersecurity investments, how
the Federal Government can implement the lessons learned over the past
5 years to improve the program, and whether contracting personnel have
the training necessary to deploy CDM quickly.
I also hope to witnesses can speak to how the Department's failure
to name a permanent under secretary for the National Protection and
Programs Directorate, along with on-going chief information officer
vacancies across the Federal Government, are affecting implementation
of CDM.
Our adversaries have made their interest in breaching Federal
networks clear. Just last week, Trend Micro reported that Fancy Bear,
the same Russian-backed hacking group that breached the Democratic
National Committee in 2016, has been targeting the Senate's network.
Although Congressional networks do not participate in CDM, this
troubling report serves as a reminder that the interest in breaching
U.S. Government networks persists and that the Federal Government must
act more quickly to protect itself.
On a final note, this subcommittee is also responsible for ensuring
that Federal policies support private-sector efforts to secure critical
infrastructure. Last summer, reports emerged that hackers successfully
penetrated domestic energy companies and nuclear power plants.
In light of the growing cyber threats against critical
infrastructure, I will be interested in learning whether the private
sector can benefit from implementing elements of CDM and whether
efforts to implement CDM-like programs are already under way.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Minority Member of the full committee,
the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for an opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member. I want to thank both of you for your on-going work to
assess and improve the Department of Homeland Security's
efforts to secure Federal networks.
Over the past decade, hackers have breached networks across
the Federal Government, including the State Department, the
Department of Commerce, the Department of Justice, Department
of Energy, and the Office of Personnel Management. These
hackers show no sign of slowing down. Instead, their tactics
are growing more aggressive and more sophisticated.
Congress has charged the Department of Homeland Security
with important responsibilities associated with taking on
evolving threats to Federal networks. Chief among these
responsibilities is helping Federal agencies improve visibility
of network assets and prioritize efforts to correct
vulnerabilities. Initiated in August 2013 and formally
authorized in 2014, the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
program, commonly called CDM, is supposed to do just that.
Through four phases of implementation, CDM will help
agencies understand, No. 1; what assets are on that network;
No. 2, who is on their network; No. 3, what is happening on
their networks; and, No. 4, how to protect data on their
networks. Unfortunately, despite the security benefits CDM can
provide, implementation has been slow.
As of last month, nearly 5 years after CDM was launched,
only 8 Federal agencies had transitioned to operation and
management of Phase 1. A number of reasons have been offered to
explain why CDM implementation lagged behind expectations,
including ambitious programmatic goals, challenges in
reconciling diverse agency structure and architecture, and
resource and leadership challenges, among others. The Ranking
Member of the subcommittee just talked about the fact that top
people are not in place to provide some of the absolute
necessity for direction.
There are a number of other things, Mr. Chair, that I could
talk about, but I look forward to the testimony and ultimately
an opportunity to ask some questions. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
January 17, 2018
Over the past decade, hackers have breached networks across the
Federal Government, including the State Department, the Department of
Commerce, the Department of Justice, the Department of Energy, and the
Office of Personnel Management.
These hackers show no signs of slowing down. Instead, their tactics
are growing more aggressive and more sophisticated.
Congress has charged the Department of Homeland Security with
important responsibilities associated with taking on evolving threats
to Federal networks.
Chief among these responsibilities is helping Federal agencies
improve visibility of networked assets and prioritize efforts to
correct vulnerabilities. Initiated in August 2013 and formally
authorized in the 2014, the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
Program (CDM) is supposed to do just that.
Through four phases of implementation, CDM will help agencies
understand: (1) What assets are on their networks; (2) Who is on their
networks; (3) What is happening on their networks; and (4) How to
protect data on their networks.
Unfortunately, despite the security benefits CDM can provide,
implementation has been slow. As of last month--nearly 5 years after
CDM was launched--only 8 Federal agencies had transitioned to
operations and management of Phase 1.
A number of reasons have been offered to explain why CDM
implementation lagged behind expectations, including ambitious
programmatic goals, challenges in reconciling diverse agency structures
and architectures, and resource and leadership challenges, among other
things.
Indeed, so many explanations for slow CDM implementation have been
offered that it is hard to suggest a silver bullet solution. What is
clear, however, is that the threats to our Federal networks are far
outpacing agency implementation of CDM.
Is critical that we understand why implementation has been so slow
so we can give the Department the resources, support, and authority it
needs to resolve ongoing implementation challenges.
That is why the expertise of the panelists today is so valuable.
I will be interested in understanding what you all view as the
lessons learned from the implementation of Phase 1 that can be applied
to improve future implementation of the program.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. Other Members of the
committee are reminded that opening statements may be submitted
for the record.
[The statement of Hon. Jackson Lee follows:]
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
January 17, 2018
Chairman John Ratcliffe and Ranking Member Cedric Richmond, thank
you for today's hearing on ``CDM: The Future of Federal
Cybersecurity.''
This hearing will provide Members of the Committee on Homeland
Security with the opportunity to learn more about the Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program, a key component of the
Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) overall effort to protect
Federal network.
The Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program is an active
approach to fortifying the cybersecurity of Government networks and
systems.
The task of installing CDM across the Federal Government was too
large a task for one contractor so DHS divided the work among several
contractors and subcontractors.
Our witnesses will provide valuable insight in the process of
installing of CDM throughout the Federal Government:
witnesses
Dan Carayiannis, Federal director, RSA;
Gregg Mossburg, senior vice president, Federal Strategic
Operations Group, CGI;
Frank Dimina, associate vice president, Federal Civilian
Sales, Splunk; and
Mr. A.R. ``Trey'' Hodgkins, III, senior vice president,
Public Sector, Information Technology Alliance for Public
Sector (Democratic Witness).
The security of Federal agency networks has been a major concern of
mine since I chaired Subcommittee on Transportation Security, which at
that time had jurisdiction over cybersecurity issues.
Earlier this month, the House passed H.R. 3202, the Cyber
Vulnerabilities Disclosure Act, which I introduced to address the need
for effective and aggressive action to deal with the threat of Zero Day
Events.
H.R. 3202 requires the Secretary of Homeland Security to submit a
report on the policies and procedures developed for coordinating cyber
vulnerability disclosures.
The Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation or CDM provides Federal
departments and agencies with the tools needed to identify
cybersecurity risks on an on-going basis, prioritize these risks based
upon potential impacts, and enable cybersecurity personnel to mitigate
the most significant problems first.
The Congress established the CDM program to provide adequate, risk-
based, and cost-effective cybersecurity and more efficiently allocate
cybersecurity resources.
It is true that each Federal agency is responsible for protecting
its own information systems; however, some agencies, including DHS,
play a larger role in Federal network security.
Under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act, DHS is
required to deploy technologies to continuously diagnose or mitigate
cyber threats and vulnerabilities and make such capabilities available
to agencies upon request.
The law essentially codified the CDM program, which DHS is
implementing.
DHS entered into partnership with GSA in 2013 to meet the statutory
obligation of the Federal Information Security Modernization Act, which
facilitated agencies' purchase of consistent, compliant technologies
that offered ``Information Security Continuous Monitoring Mitigation''
(ISCM).
The first contract was awarded on August 12, 2013, to 17 companies,
supported by 20 subcontractors, that received awards under a $6
billion, 5-year companion Continuous-Monitoring-as-a-Service to deliver
diagnostic sensors, tools, and dashboards to agencies.
CDM is an essential part of the Department of Homeland Security's
overall effort to protect the civilian Federal network.
Implementation of CDM is being phased in under the process
established by DHS using several contractors and subcontractors.
There have been a number of challenges to the process of
implementing a Federal-wide CDM program.
DHS encountered a number of unexpected challenges during the
rollout of Phase 1.
For example, neither DHS nor the customer agencies anticipated how
difficult it would be to identify all the hardware and software assets
associated to a network and grossly underestimated the number of
agency-connected devices, which delayed the purchase and installation
of the necessary sensors.
In May 2016, GAO reported that most of the 18 agencies covered by
the CFO Act that had high-impact systems were in the early stages of
CDM implementation, and many were proceeding with plans to develop
their own continuous monitoring-strategies, independent of CDM.
Further, only 2 of the 17 agencies reported that they had completed
installation of agency and bureau or component-level dashboards and
monitored attributes of authorized users operating in their agency's
computing environment.
Due to these unexpected challenges the early estimates of
completing Phase 3 by 2017 were not met.
These issues as well as the urgency of protecting Federal agency
networks makes it imperative that we have DHS before the committee to
provide an update on the CDM program.
I look forward to hearing the testimony from today's witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. We are pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today on this very important topic.
Mr. Frank Dimina is the area vice president for Federal at
Splunk. Mr. Dimina's entire 20-year career has been within the
cybersecurity industry, including several years as a security
operations center director and consultant, providing advisory
services and incident response support to public sector and
commercial organizations. Thanks for being here.
Mr. Dan Carayiannis is the public sector director for RSA
Archer. I noticed in your bio nearly 30 years of IT management
and security experience, and I look forward to having the
benefit of your insights on that today. I know the full
committee does, as well.
Mr. Gregg Mossburg is the senior vice president for
strategic operations at CGI Federal. Mr. Mossburg served as a
commissioner on the Tech America Foundation 2011 commission on
the leadership opportunity in U.S. deployment of the cloud, or
cloud 2.0. Migrating to more shared service is certainly an
important aspect of the CDM program, and so we are grateful to
have you as a witness here today.
Finally, Mr. A.R. ``Trey'' Hodgkins is the senior vice
president for the public sector at the Information Technology
Alliance for Public Sector. I saw, Mr. Hodgkins, that you
received some awards for your work in IT procurement reform.
That experience is one that I think will be very relevant to
today's conversation.
I would now like to ask each of you witnesses to stand and
raise your right hand so I can swear you in to testify.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. Please let the record reflect that each of
the witnesses has been sworn and answered in the affirmative.
You may be seated.
The witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Dimina for 5 minutes for
his opening statement.
STATEMENT OF FRANK DIMINA, AREA VICE PRESIDENT, FEDERAL, SPLUNK
Mr. Dimina. Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond,
and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to appear today to discuss the Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation program at the Department of Homeland Security. My
name is Frank Dimina, and I am area vice president of Federal
for Splunk.
In this role I have worked with Federal agencies, including
DHS, on multiple cybersecurity and data analytics projects. My
entire 20-year career has been within the cybersecurity
industry, including several years as a security operations
center director.
Splunk is a fast-growing software company in San Francisco
with a similar mission: Make machine data accessible, usable,
and valuable to everyone.
More than 13,000 companies, Government agencies,
universities, and other organizations are using the Splunk
software. In the cybersecurity arena, Splunk's software
platform often serves as the nerve center of an organization's
security operation center.
In my testimony today, I will provide my views on three
main topics: The progress to date of the CDM program;
opportunities to modernize and enhance the CDM program; and
supporting CDM's continued success.
The CDM program has made significant progress over the last
several years in providing Federal agencies with capabilities
that identify cybersecurity risks on an on-going basis,
prioritize those risks based on potential impacts, and enable
cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant
threats first. That progress is due to the dedication and hard
work of the CDM team at DHS and the support that this program
has received from Congress and DHS leadership.
Phase 1 of CDM, which is focused on determining what is on
the network, has helped Federal agencies to identify endpoints
on their networks and raise awareness of the extent of their
cyber footprint. After deploying Phase 1 tools, some Federal
agencies found a significant number of additional endpoints
within their enterprise. As a result, those agencies are now
carrying out efforts to bring those endpoints into the program.
Phase 2, which focuses on determining who is on the
network, is just now rolling into production. DHS and the
General Services Administration, or GSA, are in the process of
procuring CDM phase 3 and 4, which focuses on determining what
is happening on the network. Once fully implemented, phases 3
and 4 will give Federal agencies the ability to move from
legacy, time-based system accreditation to dynamic, risk-based,
and event-driven authorization. This will vastly improve the
overall security posture of the Federal civilian government.
Building on the progress to date, I believe there are
important opportunities to further modernize and enhance the
CDM program. One key opportunity is to better leverage the
existing data collected throughout CDM. In our view, DHS should
transform the existing CDM integration layer into a common data
analytics fabric that is standardized across the program. The
data analytics fabric would serve as a platform for collecting
security-relevant data across Federal agencies at scale, while
enabling DHS to perform flexible search queries, build robust
visualizations, and provide real-time reporting of the results.
There are several key benefits to this approach. First, a
common data analytics fabric would improve the granularity of
data available to Federal cyber analysts. Today, CDM data
presented in the Federal dashboard is summary data. Like a
photograph, summary data provides a snapshot in time, but lacks
the fidelity of a live video feed. Providing DHS analysts with
greater detail and drill-down capability would significantly
enhance their ability to protect the homeland.
Second, this would provide DHS and security teams across
Federal agencies with access to data at machine speed. Across
Government, there is a clear need for real-time access to cyber
data from the analyst up to the executive.
Third, a common data analytics fabric would provide the
foundation to correlate CDM data with security data from other
shared service initiatives like Einstein. Allowing the analysts
at DHS to connect information from Einstein and CDM would be a
mission enabler and provide a level of visibility that is not
possible today. This approach might also result in additional
economic benefits for the Government by standardizing CDM
components, reducing human capital expenditures, and enabling
operational efficiencies across CDM.
Promoting CDM's continued success over the next several
years will require continued funding through appropriations,
robust oversight by Congress, and sustained leadership from
DHS. Success also requires a smart acquisition strategy that is
flexible and encourages participation by innovative
cybersecurity companies.
Thoughtful design of the next phase of CDM could help DHS
future-proof the program. CDM must allow for additions of new
technologies that enable risk-based monitoring and protection
for emerging information technology, such as the internet of
things, cloud, and micro-services.
In closing, I will reiterate that the CDM program has made
important strides. Now is the time to look at modernizing the
approach and enhancing the capabilities of this program.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you
today. I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dimina follows:]
Prepared Statement of Frank Dimina
January 17, 2018
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
subcommittee to discuss the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM)
program at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
My name is Frank Dimina, and I serve as the area vice president,
Federal for Splunk Inc. In this role, I oversee Splunk's Federal
civilian government business. I originally joined Splunk as the
director of the homeland security and law enforcement team. During my
tenure at Splunk, I have worked with Federal agencies, including DHS,
on multiple cybersecurity and data analytics projects. My entire 20-
year career has been within the cybersecurity industry, including
several years as a Security Operations Center director and as a
cybersecurity consultant providing advisory services and incident
response support to public sector and commercial organizations.
Splunk is a fast-growing software company based in San Francisco
with a singular mission: Make machine data accessible, usable, and
valuable to everyone. Machine data is produced by every digital device,
including computers, mobile devices, networks, sensors, software
applications, and many other sources. Machine data contains valuable
information that is used for security, anti-fraud, IT operations,
compliance, business analytics, internet of things (IoT), and other use
cases. More than 13,000 companies, Government agencies, universities,
and other organizations are using the Splunk software platform. In the
cybersecurity area, Splunk's software platform often serves as the
nerve center of an organization's security operation center, providing
a single pane of glass view for security analysts across an
organization's entire security posture. Many Federal agencies,
including DHS, currently use Splunk.
Before I proceed with the rest of my testimony, I would like to
recognize this subcommittee's leadership on the issue of cybersecurity.
Cybersecurity is a rapidly-changing landscape, with threat actors and
technology providers evolving daily. Legislation and robust
Congressional oversight will be critical as we all work in partnership
to strengthen cybersecurity on a national, State, local, enterprise,
and consumer level.
In my testimony today, I will provide my views on three main
topics:
The progress to date of the CDM program;
Opportunities to modernize and enhance the CDM program; and
Supporting CDM's continued success over the next several
years.
progress of the cdm program
The CDM program, which was established by Congress to provide risk-
based and cost-effective cybersecurity across the Federal Government,
has made significant progress over the last several years. Through the
CDM program, DHS has taken significant steps to provide Federal
agencies with capabilities and technologies that identify cybersecurity
risks on an on-going basis, prioritize those risks based on potential
impacts, and enable cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most
significant threats first.
This progress is due to the dedication and hard work of the CDM
team at DHS and the support that the program has received from Congress
and DHS leadership. CDM has raised the bar for security and provides a
solid foundation for achieving a baseline of protection across the
Federal IT landscape.
Members of the Splunk team have been involved with CDM from the
very beginning of the program. Currently, Splunk software is deployed
as a part of the CDM program at all 24 civilian CFO Act agencies. We
have witnessed both the early challenges and the more recent steady and
consistent implementation of CDM across Federal agencies. Since the
beginning, Splunk has worked with various system integrators supporting
the CDM program. That viewpoint has given us unique insights into the
operational challenges, successes, and needs of the program.
A critical decision made during the genesis of the CDM program was
the adoption of a phased approach. Phase 1 of CDM, which is focused on
determining what is on the network, has helped Federal agencies to
identify the endpoints on their networks and raise awareness of the
extent of their cyber footprint. After deploying phase 1 tools, some
Federal agencies found a significant number of additional endpoints
within their enterprise. As a result, those agencies are now carrying
out efforts to bring those endpoints into the program.
Phase 2, which focuses on determining who is on the network, is
just now rolling into production. We believe the goal of phase 2,
building a master user record for users of Federal networks, will be
essential to threat mitigation and risk awareness across the Federal
Government.
DHS and the General Services Administration (GSA) are in the
process of procuring CDM phase 3 and phase 4, which focus on
determining what is happening on the network, via the Dynamic and
Evolving Federal Enterprise Network Defense (DEFEND) Task Order series.
Once fully implemented, phases 3 and 4 will give Federal agencies the
ability to move from legacy, time-based system accreditation to
dynamic, risk-based, and event-driven authorization. This will vastly
improve the security posture of the Federal cyber landscape.
modernizing and enhancing cdm
Building on the progress to date, I believe that there are
important opportunities to further modernize and enhance the CDM
program. One key opportunity is to better leverage the existing data
collected throughout CDM.
In our view, DHS should enhance the existing CDM integration layer
so it becomes a common data analytics fabric that is standardized
across the program. The data analytics fabric would serve as a platform
for collecting security-relevant data across Federal agencies at scale,
which would enable DHS to perform flexible search queries, build robust
visualizations, and provide real-time reporting of the results. There
are several key benefits to this approach.
First, a common data analytics fabric would improve the granularity
of data available to Federal cyber analysts. Today, CDM data presented
in the Federal dashboard is summary data. Like a photograph, summary
data provides a snapshot in time, but lacks the fidelity of a live
video feed. Providing DHS analysts with greater detail and drill-down
capability would significantly enhance their ability to proactively
hunt for malicious activity.
Second, a common data analytics fabric would provide DHS and
security teams at Federal agencies with drill-down access to granular
data at machine speed. Across the Government, there is a clear need for
real-time access to cyber data from the analyst up to the executive.
Moving this access to machine speed will strengthen the effectiveness
of the Government's response to attacks against Federal systems.
Third, a common data analytics fabric would provide the foundation
to integrate CDM data with security data from other shared service
initiatives like EINSTEIN, the DHS program that provides perimeter
defense for Federal agencies. Allowing the analysts at DHS to correlate
EINSTEIN and CDM data would be an important step as it would provide a
level of visibility that is not possible today.
The approach I have described would enhance efficiencies in
cybersecurity and information sharing within DHS and between DHS and
agency partners. It might also result in additional economic benefits
for the Federal Government by standardizing CDM components, reducing
human capital expenditures, and enabling operational efficiencies
across CDM.
supporting cdm's continued success over the next several years
Promoting CDM's continued success over the next several years will
require continued funding through appropriations, robust oversight by
Congress, and sustained leadership from DHS.
Success also requires a smart acquisition strategy that is flexible
and encourages participation by innovative cybersecurity companies. One
positive step is the decision by DHS and GSA to move to the GSA Special
Item Number (SIN), reflecting lessons learned from the procurements
associated with the CDM Blanket Purchase Agreement (BPA). This change
instills a flexible approach that allows for CDM technical capabilities
to evolve through the Request For Services (RFS) model. We believe the
continued adoption of this acquisition strategy will help to keep CDM
agile, innovative, and competitive.
Thoughtful design of the next phase of CDM will help DHS to better
position the program for the future. CDM must be able to evolve quickly
and allow for additions of new technologies that can enable risk-based
monitoring and protection for modern practices such as cloud and micro-
services.
The future of the CDM program has critical implications for the
security and resilience of the Federal Government's infrastructure. CDM
can also set a positive example for large organizations outside of the
Government, since some of the key concepts of the CDM program have
applicability in the private sector.
conclusion
In closing, I will reiterate that the CDM program has made
important strides. Now is the time to look at modernizing the approach
and enhancing the capabilities of this program.
We look forward to our continued role in the Government-industry
partnership that will move CDM forward to the next level.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I look
forward to answering any questions you might have.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Dimina.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Carayiannis for 5 minutes for
his opening statement.
STATEMENT OF DAN CARAYIANNIS, PUBLIC SECTOR DIRECTOR, RSA
ARCHER
Mr. Carayiannis. Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member
Richmond, Ranking Member Thompson, committee, thank you very
much for the opportunity to testify today on the Department of
Homeland Security's Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
program. I commend the committee's initiative to better
understand this mission-critical program.
My name is Dan Carayiannis, and I have spent over 30 years
in the information technology industry. Currently, I am the RSA
Archer public sector global director for RSA security, part of
Dell Technologies. I also lead the RSA Archer CDM dashboard
program and Archer's initiatives in the Federal, State, local,
and the international public sector.
RSA has been in the cybersecurity industry and a leader in
that industry for over 30 years, serving more than 14,000
global customers and many sectors of the economy. RSA solutions
help detect, investigate, and respond to advanced attacks. We
confirm and manage identities. We ultimately reduce
intellectual property theft, fraud, and cyber crime.
What is Archer as it relates to CDM today? RSA Archer is
the commercial off-the-shelf software solution chosen for the
CDM dashboard. The platform is approximately 1,400 global
deployments, including many Fortune 100 companies, as well as
Government entities. Archer is a flexible, browser-based,
scalable, easily deployed, and fully integrated within a
comprehensive dashboard architecture meeting DHS's current and
future dashboard requirements.
RSA is committed to the continued success of CDM. We meet
regularly with key stakeholders within the DHS itself, prime
contractors to ensure our technology is well aligned with
current and anticipated needs of the program. We have provided
flexible licensing arrangements and have undertaken several
leases of our products and enhancements that map directly to
DHS requirements. We are supporting the CDM program through the
dashboard contractor and again also through the various prime
contractors.
As a result of our experience and involvement with DHS and
the CDM program, we would like to propose the following
recommendations. First, we strongly encourage DHS to maintain
on-going control of the dashboard. We see the DHS dashboard as
both a strategic executive risk management visualization tool
as well as an agency operational tool. Standardization and
consistently across the Government is critical to programs'
success. Having a standardized risk management approach with
one organization, DHS, responsible for managing cybersecurity
risk across the civilian Government is key and a reason we
believe that the program is succeeding and will succeed.
Centralized management and standardized risk scoring provides
confidence and consistent measurement and representation of
risk across all Government departments and agencies.
Second, we encourage DHS to continue facilitating a shared
vision approach for program success. Continued dialog among
DHS, RSA, and dashboard end-group prime contractors allows us
to reflect on our base software and the architecture and its
design and plan for future software enhancements to benefit the
program going forward.
Third, we encourage an active, on-going training program as
part of the DHS initiative. The contractors who have invested
in RSA Archer training have accelerated their learning curve on
Archer and increased their deployment successes. We also
recommend DHS personnel participate in Archer training so they
can better understand how they can get more benefit out of the
RSA Archer platform as it relates to CDM.
Fourth, we urge the subcommittee to continue its current
and strong support of the CDM program and ensure DHS has the
necessary authorization and funding to build upon the current
implementation.
Finally, we encourage CDM information be analyzed for
Government benefits beyond the initial CDM scope. One of the
byproduct benefits of CDM and the program that it is serving is
the agencies can leverage data aggregated across the Government
that are currently out of scope requirements. For example,
agencies can enhance their assessment and authorization, or
continuity of operations capabilities and processes, by
leveraging existing CDM data. Both data elements can be
leveraged by agencies to enhance their security posture, their
capabilities, and their reactions to threats.
In closing, we believe the CDM program is having a very
positive impact on how Government, as well as commercial
organizations, think about managing cyber risk. RSA believes
the CDM program is well-positioned to help the Federal
Government better understand and react to cyber threats. Thank
you very much for the opportunity to testify today. I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carayiannis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dan Carayiannis
January 17, 2018
introduction
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation (CDM) program. I applaud the committee's efforts to improve
cybersecurity across the Federal Government and commend the committee's
initiative to better understand this mission-critical program.
My name is Dan Carayiannis and I am the RSA Archer global public
sector director for RSA Security, part of Dell Technologies. I have
been part of the RSA Archer business unit for 10 years and I'm the RSA
lead for the DHS CDM Dashboard. I also lead Archer's initiatives in the
Federal, State, local, and international public sector. I have spent
over 30 years in the information technology industry.
RSA has been a cyber industry leader for more than 30 years. The
more than 14,000 global customers we serve represent many sectors of
the economy. Our business helps enable those we work with to
effectively detect, investigate, and respond to advanced attacks;
confirm and manage identities; and ultimately reduce intellectual
property theft, fraud, and cyber crime.
Today, I want to explain how RSA Archer is designed and deployed,
how it helps DHS drive greater cybersecurity, and our CDM program
recommendations.
about rsa archer
RSA Archer is a commercial off-the-shelf technology platform that
allows organizations to manage multiple domains of risk in a
configurable, integrated software system. RSA Archer is the software
solution the CDM program is using as a basis for both the agency and
Federal dashboards. Our platform and solutions support a range of needs
to include a flexible data architecture, integration capabilities,
reporting and dashboards, analytical functions as well as notification
and workflow functionality. These capabilities provide users with the
ability to interact, gather information, and manage data beyond merely
cataloging records. With RSA Archer, risk and compliance teams can
better manage risks, escalate issues, streamline processes, and make
decisions based on the improved organization of data.
RSA Archer has been a technology solution provider in the
Governance, Risk, and Compliance industry since 2000. The platform has
approximately 1,400 deployments globally, including many of the Fortune
100 companies and Government entities. RSA Archer is used in a variety
of applications and methods, ranging from global, cross-functional
programs such as enterprise-level risk management to single function or
regional implementations to support defined-use cases.
Risk and security management in today's world must be approached as
an integrated business solution for a complex business challenge. The
RSA Archer Suite includes multi-disciplinary risk management solutions
and use cases that address the most critical domains of business risk.
RSA Archer solutions incorporate industry standards to quickly
implement the processes to achieve the visibility business and
technology leaders need. Our use cases have adopted best-practice
standards derived from our extensive customer base and industry
standards including NIST 800-53, NIST 800-30, NIST CSF, FISMA,
ISO31000, ISO27000, COSO, ISO22301, and more. RSA Archer solutions are
also designed with a maturity-driven approach that enables
organizations to implement risk management processes over time. Our use
case model allows customers to target the organization's most pressing
needs by mixing and matching use cases as the business requires.
All RSA Archer solutions are implemented on the RSA Archer
platform, allowing an organization to build a consolidated
technological approach to managing security, risk, and compliance
processes. We understand risk, security, and compliance programs
require a flexible, sustainable approach and our technology is designed
to be highly configurable and customizable. The RSA Archer platform
enables organizations to modify RSA Archer use cases to meet their
unique requirements with functionality such as configurable workflows,
risk calculations, standard and ad hoc dashboard and reports and
flexible technology-agnostic data ingest capabilities. Customers are
able to tailor applications to meet their business requirements without
the need for extensive coding or development skills all of which is of
significant benefit to the DHS CDM program. To meet more advanced
needs, customers can leverage RSA Archer APIs and integrate external
products to meet unique requirements.
RSA Archer features the following key capabilities:
An integrated reporting engine and does not require external
reporting tools;
Persona-driven reports and dashboards are built into the
solutions, along with the ability to create ad hoc reports and
dashboards to meet users' needs;
User interface designed to satisfy both frequent users
(risk/compliance/security teams) and infrequent users (business
users/first line of defense);
Integration capabilities that allow organizations to
consolidate data from external systems and range from data
import to scheduled data feeds to an API;
Data ingest capabilities that allow for integrations with
external information sources without major code/development
efforts to quickly consolidate and map external data to RSA
Archer applications;
Flexible risk-scoring functionality as well as robust
workflow and notification capabilities enable customers to
automate business process.
rsa archer and cdm
The Federal Government is challenged with a broad range of
continuous monitoring security maturity levels and efforts across a
wide range of agencies. To address these challenges, CDM provides a
framework that enables consistent and automated compliance monitoring
and reporting, helps agencies understand risks and vulnerabilities that
could impact the security and operation of their enterprise, and does
so in a consolidated and accelerated time frame.
RSA Archer provides the base software solution for CDM that is
commercial off-the-shelf technology that's flexible, browser-based,
scalable, easily deployed, and can be fully integrated within a
comprehensive dashboard architecture to meet DHS's current and future
dashboard requirements. The RSA Archer Continuous Monitoring software
solution was built to meet the needs of Federal agencies as well as
commercial organizations by providing mission-critical capabilities
essential to the Continuous Monitoring program. In the case of CDM, the
software is being configured and customized to support program
requirements by MTV, the dashboard prime contractor under DHS's
direction. These essentials are:
Enabling near-real time visibility into the security posture
of targeted devices across the enterprise;
Managing with a risk-based approach by prioritizing security
risk data and focusing on ``worst first'';
Maintaining a common operational cyber landscape with
aggregation and correlation of data to stay current with latest
requirements;
Having real-time alerting capabilities, and advanced
reporting and dashboards at multiple levels of the organization
in order to help protect infrastructure across network endpoint
such as laptops, desktops computers, and servers;
Protecting sensitive information such as security
configurations and vulnerability information while providing
access to the proper individuals to mitigate risks;
Tracking and reporting compliance across vulnerabilities,
configurations, assets, and applications; and
Leveraging and maximizing existing and new agency
infrastructure CDM tools.
The CDM project is segmented into multiple phases and functional
areas as the DHS diagram below illustrates.
RSA Archer can support the functional areas as outlined by the
scope of CDM. The following are examples of how RSA Archer is being
used to support the phase 1 CDM functional area:
Functional Area--Hardware Asset Manager.--RSA Archer helps
to manage a repository of hardware information assets as a
result of its integration with the chosen hardware asset
management tool. We are designed to help agencies determine
asset classification ratings and required retention periods,
determine asset risk, associate the assets with responsible
individuals, locations, organizational units, processes they
support, facilities where they are housed, and associated with
applications they support. RSA Archer can leverage its
notification and workflow functionality to support remediation
efforts associated with hardware assets and can represent this
information in reports, dashboards, and web forms and permit
access permissions down to the field level so that multiple
levels and views are available to the appropriate organization
and personnel for action. In addition, RSA Archer enables
agencies to perform on-line assessments to support
organization/agency-wide data calls to determine classification
ratings and required retention periods.
Functional Area--Software Asset Manager.--RSA Archer helps
to manage a repository of software information assets as a
result of its integration with your chosen software asset
management tool. RSA Archer is designed to help agencies
determine asset classification ratings and required retention
periods, determine asset risk, associate the assets with
responsible individuals, locations, organizational units,
processes they support, facilities where they are housed, and
associated with applications they support. RSA Archer can
leverage its notification and workflow functionality to support
remediation efforts associated with software assets and can
represent this information in reports, dashboards, and web
forms and permit access permissions down to the field level so
that multiple levels and views are available to the appropriate
organization and personnel for action. In addition, RSA Archer
enables agencies to perform on-line assessments to support
organization/agency-wide data calls to determine classification
ratings and required retention periods.
Functional Area--Configuration Management.--RSA Archer
consolidates data, helps determine asset, application and
system risk, and associates configurations with controls,
responsible individuals, locations, organizational units,
processes they support, and facilities where they are housed.
RSA Archer can leverage its notification and workflow
functionality to support remediation efforts associated with
configuration issues and can represent this information in
reports or dashboards. RSA Archer provides an approach for
documenting, identifying, managing, and reporting on
configuration data at every level of the organization. RSA
Archer allows agencies to consolidate controls across multiple
regulatory and business requirements into one integrated
framework.
Functional Area--Vulnerability Management.--RSA Archer
consolidates threat data and reports on threat remediation
activities and enables a consistent, repeatable threat
management process. RSA Archer consolidates vulnerability,
malicious code, and patch information from security
intelligence providers, and captures vulnerability results from
scan technologies into one threat-management system. RSA Archer
then cross-references this information with applications,
assets, individuals, and organizational units. RSA Archer
leverages its notification and workflow functionality to
support remediation efforts associated with vulnerabilities and
can represent this information in reports, dashboards, and web
forms and permit access permissions down to the field level so
that multiple levels and views are available to the appropriate
organization and personnel for action.
In summary, RSA Archer is critical in helping DHS realize its goal
of comprehensive CDM across the .gov landscape. This includes a
hierarchical deployment of agency-level dashboards rolling up summary
results to the Federal dashboard. RSA Archer's role is to aggregate
summary data collected from various technologies and data stores,
calculate and score risk, notify users of changing data, and enable
workflow business processes. This aligns specifically with the concepts
of RSA Archer as a system of engagement (gathering data and enabling
processes) and system of insight (providing aggregated data for
decision support).
Additionally, RSA Archer is helping DHS CDM address the many
different personas interacting with the ``systems of engagement'' and
``system of insight.'' A simple way to think of this is to use the
concepts of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Lines of Defense (``LoD''). This concept,
referenced in operational risk management strategies, provides a
straightforward method to stratify the risk management program and
using Archer is being applied by DHS.
In terms of the CDM project, RSA Archer takes the rollup of data
from 1st LoD (sensors, endpoints, etc. via a variety of technologies)
to inform and drive mitigation activities at the 2nd LoD at the
individual agency-level dashboards and facilitating oversight and
visibility to the 3rd LoD at the DHS Federal Dashboard level.
cdm implementation and recommendations
RSA is committed to CDM as its commercial software manufacturer and
technology partner. We have actively worked with the DHS CDM Project
Management Office (``DHS'') as the ``customer,'' as well as with the
dashboard and prime contractors. We have ensured that our leadership is
engaged with project and progress updates, have provided flexible
licensing arrangements, and continue to evolve our technology strategy
to meet CDM requirements today and anticipate future needs. We meet
regularly with key stakeholders within DHS and prime contractors to
ensure our technology is aligned to DHS's requirements.
To this end, we have expanded several of our development plans to
ensure DHS benefits from the CDM program improvements. DHS, CDM, and
Archer are pushing the boundaries on how a large enterprise should
think about, manage, and respond to today's security threats as well as
prepare for tomorrow's unknowns. This project not only benefits our
Nation's security but provides significant private-sector security
benefits as well.
To date, we have undertaken and released several product
enhancements aligned with DHS's requirements. For example, in the 6.3
version of our platform, released in October 2017, several improvements
and architectural changes were made based on feedback from DHS and its
contractors to accelerate data ingest processes. We are also working on
additional changes to ensure RSA Archer meets its design goal of
flexibility and also enhanced performance for data management and
calculations which will help DHS make risk-based decisions in near-real
time.
We are supporting the CDM program through the dashboard contractor
MTV and also through the various prime contractors. This support is
being provided through our Technical Support, Services, and Engineering
organizations. While we are the software manufacturer, we fully
recognize the role and functional elements of the agency level as well
as the Federal dashboard and continue to fine-tune our base software
solution and platform to accommodate defined and anticipated
requirements.
As a result of our experience and involvement with DHS in the CDM
program, we propose the following recommendations:
First, we strongly encourage DHS to maintain on-going control of
the dashboard.--We see the CDM dashboard as both a strategic executive
risk management visualization tool as well as an agency operational
tool. Standardization and consistency across the Government is critical
to program success and having a standardized risk management approach
with one organization, DHS, responsible for managing cybersecurity risk
across the civilian government marketspace is a primary reason we
believe the program is succeeding. DHS may not be able to respond in a
timely fashion without a centralized management approach or if it is
being constrained by a distributed agency funding model. Once fully
deployed, we believe this highly-controlled approach will render more
consistent and accurate metrics across the Government, better cyber
risk-based decisions, where necessary faster remediation and encourage
standardization and a common consistent measurement and expression of
risk across the Federal Government. Regardless of the deployed tools
and data stores used, centralized management and standardized risk
scoring methodology provides a true ``apples-to-apples'' comparison
from agency-level dashboards to the Federal-level dashboard, giving the
Government confidence in consistent measurement and representation of
risk.
Second, we encourage DHS to continue facilitating a shared vision
approach for program success.--Continued dialog among DHS, RSA, and the
dashboard and group prime contractors allows us to reflect on our base
software architecture and plan for future software enhancements to
benefit the program going forward. We also recommend DHS continue to
allow RSA to participate in DHS and its dashboard prime contractor
technical exchange meetings on a quarterly or semi-annual basis so we
can stay current with anticipated requirements.
Third, we encourage an active, on-going training program as part of
the CDM initiative.--The contractors who have invested in RSA Archer
training have accelerated their learning curve on Archer and increased
their deployment success. As DHS CDM dashboards are fully deployed
across the Federal civilian agencies, we believe its critical agency
prime contractors have RSA Archer administrators with the skills and
experience necessary to maximize dashboard capabilities.
We also recommend DHS personnel participate in RSA Archer training
to better understand the RSA Archer platform as it relates to the DHS
CDM program and in the future. With the successful rollout of
dashboards across all Government agencies, we recommend agency
personnel ``user'' training to maximize the value DHS and the
Government are getting out of its dashboard investment such as embedded
training videos, on-line training and more.
Fourth, we recommend careful considerations be put in place during
the dashboard re-compete process.--We believe the follow-on dashboard
prime contract holder should have the necessary RSA Archer skills and
capabilities to accept dashboard responsibilities ``mid-stream'' and
continue to manage, configure, and customize the dashboard without
issue. Given the learning curve we have seen the dashboard contractor
go through to configure and customize RSA Archer to support DHS CDM
dashboard requirements, ensuring technical personnel are fully trained
and experienced is a prudent and necessary element of continued
success.
Fifth, we urge the subcommittee to continue its strong support of
the CDM program and ensure it has the necessary authorization and
resources for full and expanded implementation.--It is essential DHS
has the necessary funding for the on-going phases of CDM to build upon
the current implementations and success.
Finally, we encourage CDM information be analyzed for benefits
beyond the immediate CDM scope.--One of the bi-product benefits of the
DHS CDM program is that agencies can leverage CDM aggregated data to
support other ``out of scope'' agency requirements. For example,
agencies can enhance their assessment and authorization and continuity
of operations processes by leveraging critical data elements CDM has
captured. We believe this saves the Government not only time but also
funding.
conclusion
In closing, we believe the CDM program is having a very positive
impact on how governments as well as commercial organizations think
about managing cyber risk. In today's world, cyber threats are real,
coming from multiple vectors, and constantly changing. RSA believes the
CDM program is well-positioned to help the Federal Government better
understand and react to these cyber threats.
Thank you Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member Richmond and all
Members of the subcommittee for your dedication to addressing
cybersecurity and to the CDM program. I thank you for the opportunity
to be here today and I look forward to working with you and your
colleagues in Congress as cybersecurity remains at the forefront of so
many policy decisions we face. I'd be happy to answer any questions the
subcommittee may have.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Carayiannis.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Mossburg for 5 minutes.
STATEMENT OF GREGG T. MOSSBURG, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR
STRATEGIC OPERATIONS, CGI FEDERAL
Mr. Mossburg. Good afternoon, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking
Member Richmond, and other distinguished Members of the
subcommittee. My name is Gregg Mossburg. I am the senior vice
president for strategic operations at CGI Federal.
On behalf of CGI Federal's 6,000-plus dedicated employees
providing services to over 100 Federal departments and
agencies, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the
progress being made to better secure the Federal Government's
systems through Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation.
CGI Federal plays an important role in the CDM initiative,
in providing credential management to users at all 23 CFO Act
agencies and three others to enable greater visibility.
Providing security to any single network is a challenge.
Recognizing the enormity of scaling across the entire Federal
environment, DHS is using an incremental approach to identify
and deploy capabilities to participating agencies.
The first phase of the CDM program began in January 2013.
CDM Phase 1 examined what was on the network. Through discovery
tools, a Federal agency can identify all of its hardware and
software. Using policies and rules, a determination can be made
about whether an asset should be on the network. Next, CDM
tools can be used to install patches, continuously scan for
vulnerabilities, and ensure software is configured properly and
securely.
Studies have shown that cyber hygiene--including asset
management, scanning, patching, and proper configuration
controls--can stop up to 85 percent of cyber attacks. At the
completion of Phase 1, every device in the Federal Government
will have a Master Device Record, allowing increased visibility
and management.
In June 2016, DHS began rolling out CDM Phase 2, focusing
on who is on the network. This phase applies the same concept
of cyber hygiene to users, collecting and aggregating
information about users from multiple systems into a central
location from which agencies are able to monitor different
aspects about their network users. This data is important
because research continues to show that many security breaches
are linked to improper use of credentials, including access
through accounts that should have been terminated. Further,
this information will permit Federal agencies to verify that
only authorized users with the proper credentials are accessing
their networks.
Soon, DHS will be rolling out Phases 3 and 4, which focuses
on what is happening on the network and how the data itself is
protected. Data from all CDM phases is channeled to agency-
level dashboards for display and action. Information from these
agency dashboards is aggregated into a Federal-level dashboard
to provide a Government-wide view of how agencies are
performing and identify the greatest areas of risk.
I am especially pleased that the subcommittee has both
tools and systems integration represented at the table today.
CDM often is discussed in the context of tool acquisition, and
yet the integration and consulting services provided are key to
Federal agency success, given the shortage of cybersecurity
professionals, the vast number of security products available,
and competing IT priorities. CDM provides not only cyber
expertise, but also training, testing, and governance support.
In structuring the CDM acquisitions, DHS has had the
difficult task of balancing the customized solutions for each
agency with leveraging economies of scale and solution
repeatability. DHS also needed to balance the benefits of using
a single integrator with deep solution expertise versus
multiple integrators with agency-specific knowledge. As a
result, DHS and their contracting partner at GSA, a group known
as Fedsim, carefully evaluated and addressed these trade-offs
in the new series of CDM acquisitions called Defend. The new
Defend strategy provides a variety of benefits that I would be
glad to discuss during the Q&A period.
As noted earlier, CGI Federal currently is delivering the
credential management solution to 26 agencies under a 2-year
task order. To date, this complicated IT implementation effort
has enjoyed remarkable collaboration among CGI Federal, the
agencies, and DHS, supported by GSA Fedsim. In fact, early
deployments already have provided agencies with insight into
potential issues that can now be addressed.
While everyone feels the urgency brought on by continuous
cyber attacks, it is important to not lose sight of the fact
that providing security to networks as large and complex as
those of the U.S. Government is an enormous undertaking that
requires a solid foundation on which to build advanced
capabilities. CDM is one of the first efforts of its type, and
we should recognize the impact that it is having.
Let me close first by thanking the folks at DHS and GSA's
Fedsim office for their partnership and urgency in supporting
the CDM implementation. All are focused on schedules, budgets,
and a relentless drive to get the best from industry. I also
want to thank the subcommittee for making CDM a priority. Mr.
Chairman, I look forward to answering any questions that you or
the subcommittee may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mossburg follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gregg T. Mossburg
January 17, 2018
Good afternoon, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and
other distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection. My name is Gregg Mossburg. I am the senior
vice president for Strategic Operations for CGI Federal Inc. (``CGI
Federal'').
CGI Federal, a wholly-owned U.S. operating subsidiary of CGI Group
Inc., is dedicated to partnering with Federal agencies to provide
solutions for defense, civilian, health care, and intelligence
missions. Founded in 1976, CGI Group Inc. is the fifth-largest
independent information technology and business process services firm
in the world. CGI Group Inc.'s approximately 71,000 professionals serve
thousands of global clients from offices and delivery centers around
the world, leveraging a comprehensive portfolio of services including
high-end business and IT consulting, systems integration, application
development and maintenance, and infrastructure management, as well as
150 intellectual property-based services and solutions.
On behalf of CGI Federal's 6,000-plus dedicated employees providing
services to over 100 departments and agencies across the Federal
Government, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the
subcommittee on the progress being made to better secure the Federal
Government's systems through Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation--
otherwise known as CDM.
CGI Federal plays an important role in the CDM initiative,
providing credential management (``CREDMGMT'') to users at all 23 Chief
Financial Officer (``CFO'') Act agencies and 3 other agencies to enable
greater network visibility. In the next few minutes, I would like to
elaborate on the CDM program in general and some of the key factors
that have led to very positive collaboration and progress among CGI
Federal and its various Federal agency clients.
cdm: risk-based, cost-effective cybersecurity across the federal
government
As you know, cyber threats are growing and evolving continuously.
While it is not possible to eliminate or even block all cyber threats,
it is critical that the Federal Government and its contractors focus on
identifying security risks, allowing leaders to allocate resources
where they will have the greatest impact. To this end, Congress
established the CDM program to provide risk-based, cost-effective
cybersecurity across the Federal Government.
The U.S. Government operates some of the largest and most critical
networks in the country. As a result, providing security to any one
network is a challenge and scaling across the entire Federal
environment is even more daunting. Consequently, DHS is using an
incremental CDM approach to identify and deploy capabilities to
participating Federal agencies.
the four-phase rollout
The first phase of the CDM program began in January 2013. CDM Phase
1 examined what is on the network. Through discovery tools, a Federal
agency can identify all of its hardware and software. Using policies
and rules, a determination can be made about whether an asset should be
on the network. If it shouldn't be on the network, then it can be
removed. If it should be on the network, then CDM tools can be used to
install patches, continuously scan for vulnerabilities, and ensure that
software is configured properly and securely.
While it may not sound as glamorous as penetration testing and
cyber threat hunting, studies have shown that cyber hygiene, which
consists of four essential activities--i.e., effective asset
management, scanning, patching, and proper configuration controls--can
stop up to 85 percent of cyber attacks. At the completion of Phase 1,
every device in the Federal Government will have a Master Device
Record, allowing increased visibility into these activities.
In June 2016, DHS began rolling out CDM Phase 2. Phase 2 focuses on
who is on the network. This phase applies the same concept of ``cyber
hygiene'' to users and helps measure how well agencies comply with
existing Federal mandates such as the Federal Information System
Management Act (``FISMA'') and the Homeland Security Presidential
Directive (``HSPD'') 12. The Phase 2 solutions collect and aggregate
information about users from multiple systems into a central location
from which agencies are able to monitor different aspects about the
users on their respective networks. The centralized Master User Record
(``MUR'') provides information about individual users to include the
degree of vetting, training completed, and credentials issued. This
data is important because research continues to show that many security
breaches are linked to improper use of credentials (including access
through accounts that should have been terminated). Not only will the
information collected through the CREDMGMT system allow agencies to
understand who is on their network, but it will permit Federal agencies
to verify that only authorized users with the proper credentials are
accessing their networks.
Soon, DHS will be rolling out Phase 3 of the CDM program. Phase 3
is focused on what is happening on the network and looks to protect the
network by monitoring traffic across the boundary and performing
software code inspection, application weakness detection, development,
and supply chain risk management. Phase 3 also seeks to help agencies
manage security events by preparing for and responding to security
incidents using a new automated risk assessment process to replace the
current manual, time-intensive process.
The requirements for CDM Phase 4 are still evolving, but DHS has
indicated that it will focus on how data is protected through
technologies such as micro-segmentation, digital rights management, and
other advanced data protections.
Data from all phases of the CDM program is channeled to agency-
level dashboards for display and action. Information from these agency
dashboards is aggregated into a Federal-level dashboard to provide a
Government-wide view of how agencies are performing and identify the
greatest areas of risk for corrective action. This data also can be
analyzed and presented in meaningful ways to various consumers and
decision makers such as senior leaders interested in trend analysis and
technical experts looking to take a deep dive into the detailed
technical information.
deployment across agencies
Not only is DHS incrementally rolling out cyber capabilities, it
has taken a staggered approach to deploying those capabilities to all
Federal agencies. In Phase 1, agencies were divided into buying groups
of 5-7 agencies (Groups A, B, C, D, E, and F) with a single integrator
responsible for deploying a solution to agencies in each group,
typically over a 3-year period. For Phase 2, DHS issued 2 task orders
each with a 2-year duration. The first task order addresses privileged
users (i.e., users with extra power or control over the computer system
who have the ability to do the most harm) at 65 Federal agencies. This
task order effort is commonly referred to as the privilege management
(or ``PRIVMGMT'') task order. The second task order--which CGI Federal
currently is delivering--is CREDMGMT, which has a 2-year duration and
covers all users at 23 CFO Act and 3 other agencies.
The CDM program often is discussed in the context of tool
acquisition. Yet, the integration and consulting services provided are
key to Federal agency success. Given the shortage of cybersecurity
professionals, the vast number of security products available, and
competing IT priorities, Federal agencies often are in need of
cybersecurity experts and skilled IT resources. The CDM program
recognizes these needs and provides not only cyber expertise, but also
services for training, testing, and governance to help agencies develop
processes and policies.
a new cdm acquisition strategy
As with all programs of this size, there are trade-offs to be
considered. For example:
the economies of scale and repeatability of using a
consistent solution across the Federal Government versus
tailoring to a specific agency's existing infrastructure and
processes;
using a single integrator with deep expertise in a solution
across a large number of agencies may speed overall deployment,
but delay agency-specific process changes; and
a single integrator supporting an agency for a long period
of time will have a deep understanding of the agency's
environment, but may not have the required expertise in all
cyber products.
As a result, DHS and GSA-FEDSIM carefully evaluated these trade-
offs with the lessons learned on the original CDM contract and
addressed them in the new series of CDM acquisitions, called Dynamic
and Evolving Federal Enterprise Network Defense (or ``DEFEND'').
Some of the benefits of the new DEFEND strategy include:
Providing a longer period of performance to encourage a
strategic partnership between the integrator, agency, and DHS
while helping to address the challenge of processing background
investigations for multiple integrators;
Creating a separate acquisition process for tools and
implementing a CDM Approved Products List (``APL'') to remove
the tool vendors' dependency on integrators;
Providing flexible funding scenarios, such as incremental
funding, allowing agencies to jointly fund efforts with DHS,
and surge options; and
Providing agencies at different levels of maturity with the
flexibility to address their most pressing needs.
a collaborative partnership
As noted earlier, CGI Federal currently is delivering the CREDMGMT
solution to 26 agencies under a 2-year task order. To date, this
complicated IT implementation effort has enjoyed remarkable
collaboration among CGI Federal, the agencies, and DHS (supported by
GSA-FEDSIM), allowing the team to make great progress. In fact, early
deployments already have provided agencies with insight into potential
issues that now can be addressed.
an impressive undertaking
While everyone feels the urgency brought on by continuous cyber
attacks, it is important to not lose sight of the fact that providing
security to networks as large and complex as those of the U.S.
Government is an enormous undertaking. This is one of the first efforts
of its type; therefore, it is critical to lay a solid foundation on
these programs before building more advanced capabilities.
CGI Federal is proud to support the CDM program and help its
Federal agency clients protect our country's networks, assets, and
information. CGI Federal relishes this rare opportunity to work across
the entire Federal Government to identify trends and connect agencies
to share best practices and lessons learned.
Let me close first by thanking the folks at DHS, and particularly
the National Protection and Programs Directorate, for their partnership
and urgency in supporting the CDM implementation. It would be an
understatement to say that DHS is responsible for overcoming numerous
critical challenges in the protection of our country every day. CGI
Federal respects DHS's focus on schedules, budgets, and its relentless
drive to get the best from industry. I also want to thank this
subcommittee for its continued oversight to ensure the continued
success of the CDM program. Mr. Chairman, I look forward to answering
any questions that you or the subcommittee may have.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Mossburg. Chair now
recognizes Mr. Hodgkins for his opening statement.
STATEMENT OF A.R. ``TREY'' HODGKINS, III, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT, PUBLIC SECTOR, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ALLIANCE FOR
PUBLIC SECTOR
Mr. Hodgkins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Richmond, and Members of the committee. On behalf of the
members of the IT Alliance for Public Sector, or ITAPS, thank
you for the opportunity to share our perspectives today on the
Department of Homeland Security Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation program.
ITAPS represents almost 90 of the most innovative companies
offering IT goods and services in the Federal public sector. We
applaud the committee's efforts to understand and explore the
CDM program, the state of CDM tool acquisition, and what
barriers and policy or practice exists for rolling out CDM
across the Federal Government.
Last year, ITAPS provided the administration with numerous
recommendations to modernize Federal cybersecurity practices,
including how to protect Federal networks through accelerated
adoption of EINSTEIN and the CDM program. These recommendations
include requiring regular automated vulnerability scanning of
Federal networks, updating procurement guidance to reflect the
fleet of cyber threats, expanding existing programs to recruit
and retain a strong cybersecurity work force, and leveraging
new technology and integrating security tools into IT
deployments.
DHS is implementing recommendations included in the
President's IT modernization report. These range from securing
Government systems and commercial clouds, something not
included in the original CDM plan, to completing the
acquisition strategy for new long-term task orders that offer
CDM life cycle support to agencies. ITAPS suggests that
Congress focus on the following.
No. 1, accelerate procurement cycles to keep pace with
cyber threats. The committee should work to ensure that there
are sufficient numbers of adequately trained contracting
personnel to deploy CDM tools in a timely fashion to keep up
with the evolving threat landscape.
No. 2, accelerate adoption of CDM through oversight. The
committee should exercise oversight to ensure that agencies are
prioritizing funding for CDM solutions, because agencies are
reluctant to contribute to funding their own security. Many do
not put a line item in their budget requests and seek to solely
rely upon DHS funding for CDM deployment. Unpredictable Federal
appropriations substantially contribute to this condition, as
agencies are not able to effectively plan, identify, acquire,
and deploy cyber tools in truncated budget cycles.
No. 3, experienced personnel with appropriate skill sets
and vendors with proven success at an enterprise scale are
critical to the success of CDM. The committee should work with
DHS to ensure that the acquisition plan for Phase 3
contemplates the skills necessary for effective implementation,
the budget to attract and retain individuals with such skills
and vendor qualifications based on experienced success.
No. 4, protect data, protect Federal data. It has been
almost 3 years since the OPM data breach, and DHS has yet to
implement Phase 4 of CDM, to provide data-level protection
capabilities, such as digital rights, management, micro-
segmentation, and data masking.
No. 5, enhance accountability for agency adoption and
deployment of CDM through robust use of the CDM dashboard. The
Federal dashboard compiles summary feeds from all the agencies
regarding their adoption and deployment of CDM. This tool will
eventually provide a broad view of the Government's cyber
posture to help DHS and OMB determine where resources are
needed to strengthen agency systems. The CDM dashboard is also
one specific means for Congress to hold agencies accountable
for their progress.
No. 6, the CDM program office should educate State, local,
and Tribal governments about the CDM tools and capabilities
available. States, localities, and Tribal governments are
facing similar cyber challenges and threats, and governments
have made cybersecurity a top priority, but many need help with
protecting their data and networks. The committee should work
with DHS to create an outreach program to ensure that these
other government jurisdictions are aware of CDM, the tools and
capabilities that are available, and how they can acquire CDM
capabilities for their own use through Schedule 70 at GSA.
No. 7, ensure adequate means to attract and retain a cyber
skilled work force. Congress should create innovative means to
attract cyber skilled applicants and retain them once hired. It
should also look to rapidly draw down the security clearance
backlog. Imagine what the Government cyber work force would
look like and could do if just 10 percent of the over 700,000
employees and contractors awaiting investigations could get
cleared.
To close, Mr. Chairman, the technology sector supports the
CDM program and its various phases as an important and
effective means to secure the Federal Government networks and
systems. More improvements can be made, though, and I hope that
our recommendations can help the committee focus on making CDM
better. We look forward to the opportunity to work with
Congress and the Department on this important issue, and I am
happy to answer your questions at the appropriate time.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hodgkins follows:]
Prepared Statement of A.R. ``Trey'' Hodgkins, III
January 17, 2018
introduction
On behalf of the members of the IT Alliance for Public Sector
(ITAPS), we appreciate the opportunity to share our perspectives on the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation (CDM) program. We applaud the committee's efforts to
understand and explore industry perspectives on the CDM program, the
state of CDM tool acquisition, and what barriers there are, in policy
or practice, to rolling out CDM across the Federal Government to
improve cybersecurity across the Federal Government as cyber threats
evolve.
Last year, ITAPS, with its members, undertook an effort to provide
the Trump administration with numerous recommendations to modernize
Federal cybersecurity practices, including how to protect Federal
networks through accelerated adoption of EINSTEIN and the CDM program.
With the interconnected and global nature of today's digital
environment, strong cybersecurity must be a fundamental underpinning of
any effort to transform Federal IT systems and is essential to
realizing the expected economic and efficiency benefits of IT
modernization.
The diversity of recommendations contained in our final report
reflects the reality that enhancing cybersecurity requires a
comprehensive strategy that leverages people, processes, and
technological innovations to actively prevent cyber attacks, and
holistically reduce enterprise cybersecurity risks. These
recommendations outline actions that can be taken now to enhance the
Federal Government's cybersecurity posture, such as requiring regular,
automated, vulnerability scanning of all Federal network environments,
updating procurement guidance to reflect the speed of cyber threats and
the rapid evolution of security technologies, and expanding existing
programs to recruit and retain a strong cybersecurity workforce.
Importantly, our report also offers key themes and recommendations
focused on taking advantage of new evolutions in technology and
natively integrating strong security tools into IT deployments. To
succeed in new shared service and cloud-based environments, it is
critical for Government to prioritize implementing security
technologies that can work together in an automated, holistic way to
actively prevent, not just detect, cyber attacks across the entire
Federal Government's network infrastructure. To keep up with the pace
of modern cyber attacks and reduce risk on an enterprise-wide basis,
security tools must be capable of automatic reprogramming based on new
threat data to deliver consistent security across the entirety of the
network, including all cloud and endpoint environments.
Adopting IT systems with agile security technology that can protect
digital infrastructure at scale is vital, because the Federal
Government simply cannot continue to divert people and resources toward
manually maintaining antiquated systems or manually correlating
cybersecurity incidents. Indeed, new, and emerging technology trends--
including the increased adoption of cloud, shared services, and
virtualized networks--also present critical opportunities to
fundamentally simplify and automate how the Government consumes and
delivers cybersecurity tools to reduce enterprise risks. The emergence
of shared, cloud-based marketplaces where security capabilities can be
seamlessly tested and deployed as application-based software--an
alternative to time-intensive hardware procurement, evaluation,
installation, and system integration cycles--represents the agility the
Government must evolve to.
Similarly, there must be a focus on making information sharing as
automated and actionable as possible. This means collapsing the amount
of time between when an organization receives a technical indicator and
the implementation of a preventive control to enforce security based on
that threat information. Further, Government and industry must mature
information-sharing processes to focus on sharing more than isolated
indicators of compromise and incentivize the sharing of correlated
threat indicators that link together multiple steps of the adversary's
playbook, aligned to each phase of the attack life cycle--including
reconnaissance, weaponization, delivery, exploitation, and command-and-
control.
Finally, our recommendations offer opportunities for continued
public-private partnership. An integrated approach between Government
and industry can enhance everyone's collective cybersecurity by
fostering a shared understanding of the cyber threat landscape,
facilitating a more robust and systemic public-private threat
information-sharing environment, jointly developing effective policies,
and partnering to raise education, awareness, and overall levels of
cybersecurity skills. Private-sector innovation will be critical in
replacing legacy Federal IT systems with next-generation solutions that
both spur greater efficiencies and strengthen the security of the
Nation's digital infrastructure.
For this testimony, we will focus on our CDM recommendations from
the report and concerns raised by our members regarding Phase 3 and 4.
As you know, the 4-year-old CDM program is delivering capabilities to
agencies in four phases: Phase 1 (What is on the Network?), Phase 2
(Who is on the Network?), BOUND (Protecting the boundaries), Phase 3
(What is happening on the Network?) and Phase 4 (Protecting the data on
the Network). On May 15, 2017, DHS reported at an industry briefing
that 24 major and almost 40 small agencies were engaged in implementing
CDM Phases 1 and 2 requirements. DHS is planning for these agencies to
transition to operational status by the end of fiscal 2018. The
Department is also implementing recommendations included in the
President's IT modernization report. These changes range from
addressing securing Government systems in commercial clouds--something
not included in the original CDM plan--and completing the acquisition
strategy for new, long-term task orders to offer CDM life-cycle support
to agencies. Finally, they are now providing solution development and
implementation for Phases 3 and 4, in addition to future work. DHS and
GSA have also added supply chain risk management into the program,
requiring vendors to complete a questionnaire to provide DHS
information on how their product was manufactured and to help the
agency understand the supply chain of the products vendors are offering
to be included on the CDM approved products list. We would recommend
that Congress focus on the following:
Cybersecurity threats to the U.S. Government are outpacing the
Federal acquisition process, creating vulnerabilities. ITAPS has
recommended to both the administration and the Congress that the path
to increased cybersecurity protections for Government networks is
through IT modernization, and that acquisition reform is essential to
the ability to modernize IT in the Government and attain greater cyber
assurance. In other words, we cannot have cybersecurity without IT
modernization, and we cannot acquire the goods and services we need for
either of these goals without changing the way we acquire IT. To make
progress on this goal, ITAPS makes the following recommendations:
1. Encourage Full Utilization of and Update Government Procurement
Rules to Enable Agencies to Compete with Hackers
Current procurement rules in place at various Federal Government
agencies preclude them from effectively countering the hacker threat in
a timely manner. It is critical that DHS and other Federal agencies
have access to the same tools. This can only be achieved by encouraging
full use of current procurement rules, and by looking for opportunities
to update those rules where necessary. Currently, there are numerous
ways Federal agencies can acquire products and services rapidly
including:
Through the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994
(FASA), Congress mandated, to the maximum extent practicable,
the use of simplified acquisition procedures (SAPs) for
products and services not exceeding the simplified acquisition
threshold.
The Competition in Contracting Act of 1984 (CICA) allows
Federal agencies to accelerate the acquisition process where
there is an urgent need, or where requiring full and open
competition could compromise National security.
The U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) maintains a
supply schedule for information technology (Schedule 70), where
pre-vetted vendors with pre-negotiated terms offer
cybersecurity products.
Congress authorized the Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation (CDM) program at DHS, which allows Federal agencies
to expand their CDM capabilities through the acquisition of
commercial off-the-shelf tools, with robust terms for technical
modernization as threats change.
Congress has granted 11 agencies (including DHS) the ability
to enter into ``other transaction agreements,'' which generally
do not follow a standard format or include terms and conditions
normally found in contracts or grants, in order to meet project
requirements and mission needs.
In addition to encouraging Federal agencies to fully use these
procedures, procurement policy, and acquisition procedures must evolve
more rapidly to match the pace of information technology development
and adoption by hackers, criminals, and other bad actors. Currently,
little guidance exists in the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR)
regarding the procurement of cybersecurity technology; rather, the FAR
leaves cybersecurity implementation to each individual Federal agency.
Agency officials and contractors must consult a myriad of different
agency regulations to ascertain if and how other agencies have
implemented their acquisition regulations regarding cybersecurity. This
diversity in agency cybersecurity regulations undermines security
requirements and policies governing Federal procurements. Harmonizing
cybersecurity acquisition requirements would allow agencies to: (1)
Target security to highest-priority data and threats; (2) obtain
greater value through reduced compliance obligations and increased
contractor focus on high-value cybersecurity investments; and (3)
enhance agency cybersecurity through the adoption of best practices,
tempered through public review and comment.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB),
in consultation with the administrator of the Office of Federal
Procurement Policy (OFPP), as key National priorities should:
(1) Provide clear direction to security and acquisition
officials across Government that cybersecurity solutions should
be acquired and implemented rapidly; (2) advise and train
security and acquisition officials on existing authorities
available for the rapid acquisition and implementation of
cybersecurity solutions; (3) expeditiously identify impediments
to the rapid acquisition and implementation of cybersecurity
solutions that need to be addressed by Congress and report
those impediments to the relevant committees of jurisdiction
for redress; and, (4) provide reciprocity of security
clearances for cybersecurity professionals to deploy CDM from
agency to agency .
The administration should assess disparate cybersecurity
acquisition requirements across agencies and make
recommendations to harmonize requirements to the greatest
extent possible.
2. Protect Federal Networks through Accelerated Adoption of Einstein
and Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM)
A significant number of recent Federal breaches resulted from
compromised identities, including those of privileged users. The
EINSTEIN and Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) programs, when
fully deployed,\1\ will help Government agencies acquire vital security
capabilities and tools to better secure Government networks and
systems. The EINSTEIN program is designed to detect and block cyber
attacks from compromising Federal agencies, and to use threat
information detected in one agency to help other Government agencies
and the private sector to protect themselves. The CDM program provides
Federal departments and agencies with capabilities and tools that
identify cybersecurity risks on an on-going basis, prioritize these
risks based upon potential impacts, and enable cybersecurity personnel
to mitigate the most significant problems first.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ As evidenced by GAO-16-294, DHS Needs to Enhance Capabilities,
Improve Planning, and Support Greater Adoption of Its National
Cybersecurity Protection System, thoughtful deployment has to consider
compatibility with newer/modern technology adoption so agencies can
reflect a holistic security risk posture while aligning with the
administration's IT modernization goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our primary recommendations in this space are the need for
deployment, procurement flexibility, and improvements in the workforce
development process. Currently, Federal agencies recognize the value in
deploying CDM solutions. They also recognize, however, that these
deployments could be paid for by DHS in the following appropriations
cycle. Agility and speed are very important in this context.
Ultimately, a plan and a strategy are inconsequential without
deployment. There is a distinct risk of a moral hazard where agencies
will fail to prioritize cyber funding in the short term, thinking that
the associated costs will be borne by DHS, as the cybersecurity
executive agency, leaving them susceptible to risk of a significant
breach in the interim. Further, DHS partners with GSA on the
development of contract vehicles for these programs, and there is a
need for more trained contracting personnel to accelerate deployment of
these new contract vehicles.
Most departments and agencies have already deployed a variety of
authentication and authorization solutions as part of both their
internal and citizen-facing applications. ITAPS recommends that any
Government-wide solution add value and not create disruption and
unintended expense by replacing the existing work that has been done.
The applications that have been built and secured with these existing
Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management (FICAM) solutions
are servicing millions of people today. Agencies should be encouraged
and funded to do what is best for meeting their business requirements:
Leveraging APIs to further extend their baseline solutions and adding
additional safeguards, like privileged account and shared account
management. Any new policies coming out of this program should consider
and augment the investments and the services already being provided,
not direct them to new platforms and distract them from the ancillary
opportunities.
In the wake of the OPM breach, Government officials worked
tirelessly to improve systems. These are committed individuals, and the
sense of urgency following the breach resulted in quick and decisive
action to resolve significant challenges that became immediately
apparent. Long-term success in implementing those decisions, however,
may be hamstrung by backlogs in the procurement process. Reacting to
specific events to shore up defenses is different than proactive
planning. As we look forward, we believe there is opportunity for DHS
and its partner agencies to leverage the lessons learned in the cyber
sprint and apply them proactively to enhance overall cyber posture
across the Federal Government.
3. CDM Capability Deployment: Recommendations based on earlier CDM
Phases.
DEFEND/Phase 3 has yet to be delivered as only one Task Order
Request (TOR) has been awarded and work has yet to begin. DEFEND is a
significant departure from prior iterations having incorporated
feedback received from agencies during earlier phases to offer greater
choice and increased flexibility.
Due to the heterogeneity of large enterprise environments the
technologies to secure, monitor, and maintain an agency's enterprise
systems vary widely. Similarly, the ability of many vendor solutions to
properly scale to support complex environments and integrate with
existing toolsets may be unproven. Issues with the deployment of
technologies to address CDM requirements not only impacts the project
schedule, but consumes limited agency resources and hinders the overall
success of CDM within a given agency.
We recommend that the CDM program should endeavor where possible to
recommend solutions that can demonstrate past performance of successful
implementations at enterprise scale. Additionally, due to the size and
complexity of any given agency, the CDM program should recommend vendor
subject-matter experts be incorporated into the procurement of any new
CDM tool deployment initiative over a certain size. The inclusion of
experienced, trained, and vetted resources will greatly increase the
likelihood of a timely, successful implementation with minimal user
impact.
The CDM program should also drive real change in cybersecurity. We
need a different approach where technology--enabled by strong
collaboration--can be deployed rapidly to security platforms so they
can communicate with each other over open communication protocols.
Organizations in both the public and private sector need security tools
that are interoperable and interchangeable to protect against existing
and prospective threats. As cybersecurity solutions become
interoperable, they become more efficient and cost-effective. They also
become easier to maintain than an IT environment of disparate systems.
Over time, more interoperable cybersecurity systems will also
contribute to closing the skills gap, as these systems become more
widely deployed, require less manual intervention and rely upon more
consistent skill sets.
Customers deserve the ability to deploy best-of-breed security
solutions, but if they need to install a complete infrastructure just
to do so, then agencies lose. By having interoperable standards for
interface and exchange formats, the industry could move to a more plug-
and-play capability for security products. This has been successful in
the past with efforts such as the Security Content Automation Protocol
(SCAP), currently in use in the Host-Based Security System (HBSS) and
CDM programs. SCAP provides a wide variety of vendors the ability to
exchange compliance and patch validation content.
We encourage the Government to work with the private sector to make
the vision of a truly open and interoperable cybersecurity ecosystem
become a reality. Such an ecosystem promotes a great deal of
competition and innovation. At the same time, it also promotes
collaboration--making sure that systems work together. The real benefit
is an environment that promotes enough competition to deliver
innovative solutions, coupled with collaboration to ensure that these
new and innovative solutions can work together. Much like the railroad
industry that agreed on basic rules of the road--e.g., size and gauge
of the tracks and right of ways--the security industry needs rules of
the road to allow cooperation, so that firms can compete on
implementations to allow for as much innovation as possible.
4. DHS must develop a strategy to evolve and extend CDM protections
beyond the network to include protecting Federal data and
assets.
In the wake of the OPM data breach in June 2015, OMB and DHS
reviewed the state of cybersecurity across Government and developed the
Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan (CSIP), the
Cybersecurity National Action Plan (CNAP), the revised OMB Circular A-
130 and a host of other Federal policies such as the Cybersecurity Act
of 2015 aimed at improving our cyber posture. One of the key findings
and requirements included in these Federal cyber policies and the
fiscal year 2017/fiscal year 2018 DHS Continuous Diagnostics &
Mitigation (CDM) budget requests was to evolve the CDM program beyond
network security to include data-level protection capabilities (digital
rights management, micro-segmentation, data masking, etc.) for 70+
agencies.
The recent DHS CDM program update (attached) and the fiscal
year and fiscal year DHS CDM Congressional budget
justifications (attached) states its intention to move to a new
Phase 4 of ``data level protection capabilities'' to ``include
additional tools and services to protect sensitive and high
value assets data'' for Federal Government agencies.
The 2018 White House Federal IT Modernization Report to the
President also stresses the importance for Federal agencies
with high-value assets and sensitive information to deploy
``data-level protection capabilities and shared services within
180 days.''
It's been almost 3 years since the OPM data breach and,
unfortunately, the Department has yet to provide any data-level
protection capabilities via Phase 4 or any other phase of CDM. In light
of the numerous data breaches experienced by the Federal Government in
recent years, it is critical for DHS to begin implementing CDM Phase 4
as soon as possible, in order to ensure sensitive and high-value
information is protected. We are aware that the Department is focusing
on full implementation of CDM Phase 2 & 3, but we believe it should be
deploying CDM Phase 4 simultaneously, in order to improve our
Government's cybersecurity capabilities and protect high-value assets
at the data level. We encourage DHS to focus on building awareness with
agency CDM leaders on how to get funding and support for rolling out
data protection/Phase 4 capabilities.
Considering the current state of the acquisition capabilities of
the CDM program and the cyber threat landscape that Federal ``.gov''
agencies face, we recommend posing the following questions to DHS, GSA,
and any other agencies that have identified high-value assets:
What is your acquisition time line to roll out Phase 4 or
``data-level protection'' capabilities in fiscal year 2018?
Have DHS and GSA considered accelerating the adoption of
Phase 4 capabilities for all Government agencies? What is
delaying the release of Phase 4 task force orders?
What CDM training is taking place to ensure Federal agency
Chief Information Officers (CIOs) and Chief Information
Security Officers (CISOs) are prepared to deploy Phase 4 CDM
protections?
How are CIOs and CISOs planning and budgeting to adopt such
``data-level protection'' capabilities?
Can agencies that are ahead of the curve utilize CDM program
funding to deploy data-level protection capabilities right now?
5. Encourage DHS to continue progress with the CDM Federal dashboard
and educate Federal agencies on the use and benefits.
We recommend that DHS continue and expand the use of the CDM
Dashboard to help agencies with their vulnerability management.
Developing the Dashboard features and values, highlighting those
benefits, and providing the values through the Dashboard across the
variety of Federal infrastructures is one challenge. The other obvious
challenge is to normalize any score or ``grade'' that the agency
receives fair and relevant. Because of the: (1) Variation in network
infrastructure, (2) the variety of measurement tools, and (3) the
qualitative nature of the scoring, DHS will be challenged to develop a
methodology that appears ``fair'' and delivers actual value to the
agencies as well as the entire Federal infrastructure. Historically,
FISMA and FITARA scores were honed through time. We expect CDM scoring
to take a similar path.
The Federal dashboard will compile summary feeds from all the
agency dashboards, which will give the administration a broad view of
the Government's cyber posture. Eventually, the Federal dashboard will
help DHS and OMB decide where best to direct their resources to
strengthen agency systems. The CDM dashboard is one specific area where
transparency and public disclosure of agency performance can drive
accountability for their progress.
6. DHS and GSA should work with State/local and Tribal governments to
educate them on their access to the CDM tools for network
monitoring and security through GSA's Schedule 70.
State/local and Tribal governments are facing similar cyber
challenges and threats. The Governors have made cybersecurity a top
priority, but they need help with protecting their data and networks.
Purchasing has not been high by State/local and Tribal governments, so
DHS and GSA should conduct an outreach campaign to assist State/local
and Tribal governments with using the CDM catalog.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share these thoughts. If you
have any questions, please feel free to let me know. We look forward to
working with the committee and your colleagues in Congress to improve
the cyber posture for Federal networks and the private sector.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Hodgkins. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Gallagher, for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all
the witnesses for taking the time to be with us on this
important topic.
It sounds like everyone shares a relatively optimistic
assessment of CDM so far. So I would just--to put it in plain
terms, given that in Phase 1 we have basically learned how many
devices were on Federal networks that Federal agencies did not
know about to the sort-of shadow IT phenomenon, which presents
a huge problem for all of us, I just--for whoever wants to take
the question, do you feel confident that we have a total
picture of what is on Federal networks at this point? If not,
how long will it take to have total visibility into what
devices are connected and connecting to our networks? Do not
all jump at once. We can just go--we can go from here that way,
yes.
Mr. Hodgkins. I can go first, Gregg. Just share that we do
not believe the Government has total visibility into the assets
it possesses on its networks and systems. It has done
inventories for specific purposes, for example, risk
mitigation, but it does not understand everything it owns.
One of the things that we have identified in the
procurement process that can help change that is, No. 1, the
Government should create the inventory, but, No. 2, it should
begin to keep track of the things it is buying and deploying as
it buys them. Currently, the systems that are used to acquire
these tools, for example, in CDM and any other capability the
Government acquires do not inventory those goods and services
as they are acquired.
So there is no running track, no running inventory, no
automated means of keeping track of what we are buying and what
perhaps we are retiring. So we think that would be an area that
could be improved, yes.
Mr. Gallagher. Sir?
Mr. Mossburg. Go down the line in order?
Mr. Gallagher. Yes.
Mr. Mossburg. So I would echo, I do not think that we have
got the complete picture yet of all of the IT assets, but the
point is, as--or the goal is, as Phase 1 is completed, that you
would get to a point where you had a complete inventory. I
think what Trey said is very important. It does not end, right?
We are going to keep buying and keep adding to the inventory,
and so the process has got to be kept in place and it is got to
be an on-going vigilance to achieve that.
The other element I would add is, the scope is--as
addressed in Defend, which is the next phase of CDM, has got to
expand between on-prem, or on-premises, inventory out into the
cloud and mobile devices to make sure that we are really
drawing the circle around the right goal, if you will.
Mr. Gallagher. Sure, sure.
Mr. Carayiannis. I think that was one of the challenges
that the beginning of the program people encountered was a lot
of the agencies--there was more there than they thought. I
think people had to kind-of step back, understand that,
document all that, before they can progress and move forward.
Certainly, if you have all that data of all those assets,
all that information and collecting all that, there is a lot of
interesting things you could do about that and report on it and
track it. Tracking not just an individual asset, but
potentially even someday component parts that make up that
asset, which will also be important from a cybersecurity threat
perspective.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
Mr. Dimina. I agree with everything said so far. I will
just add that continuous monitoring should be looked as a
journey, not a destination. There has been great success so
far, and that visibility is not complete, but there is a solid
foundation for cybersecurity program here. That data can
provide immense value both from a risk-scoring perspective and
for the ability for agencies and DHS to respond to incidents
and perform threat analytics.
So I agree with the comments that there is more progress to
come, but I think there is a success story here and the
foundation has been built.
Mr. Gallagher. Sure. Then obviously as that Phase 1 journey
continues and evolves, we want to make sure we are making
progress on the other phases. Mr. Hodgkins, I think you
mentioned something about Phase 4, and I just wonder, could you
tell me, how would a delay in implementation of Phase 3 and 4
impact our ability to protect the Federal.gov domain? Besides
adequate funding levels, what does the CDM program need to make
sure that we are reaching our goals in those subsequent phases?
Mr. Hodgkins. Well, I touched on a number of elements that
Congress could perhaps focus on to improve. One is that
agencies now are--they seem to be relying on the pool of money
that Congress gives to DHS for this activity as a means of
funding all of the CDM activities even within the agencies. The
inconsistent budget process has also contributed, because
agencies cannot begin to spend dollars until they are
appropriated. If their planning, their execution, their
identification of contractors, identification of which tools
they need happens and we end up with a fiscal year where only 5
months are actually appropriated, it is too short of a time
frame to effectively complete that, deploy the activity, and
get the dollars obligated for a contractor.
So it creates tremendous challenges. Those are some areas
that delay the implementation of a lot of programs, including
CDM. Delaying CDM in the way that you are talking about Phase 3
and 4 do not get us to the end point that we have all discussed
or raised in some form or fashion as fast as we need to get
there. The threats are happening now, and we need to move
forward. I mentioned accelerating acquisition cycles. There is
a variety of ways that we can do that to try and improve that.
Mr. Gallagher. Well, I have run out of time, but thank you
for raising the budgetary picture. I know we are grappling with
that this week, and we tend to talk about it only in the
context of hard defense, but it impacts everything the Federal
Government does. So, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Member, Mr. Richmond, for his questions.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. I will start with all the
witnesses. There is a work force component to CDM, in that
agencies need to organize their cybersecurity and other
personnel to implement the use of CDM. How is the shortage of
skilled cyber professionals throughout the Federal Government
impacting CDM performance? In any order?
Mr. Hodgkins. It is actually having a tremendous impact,
Mr. Richmond. I noted, for example, that it is a challenge for
both the Federal Government and contracting employees to be
deployed when they can not get their clearances through that
process in an efficient and timely fashion. There are over
700,000 sitting there. Truly, imagine what we could do if we
could get just 10 percent of that through and deploy those
people for work for the cyber work force.
We also have challenges in that, you know, people come into
the Federal Government, they learn skills, and then they move
into the private sector. People from the private sector is also
a challenge getting them to come back in. There are a number of
exercises underway now to try and identify incentives for
companies to lend, if you will, their best and brightest to
come and work on some of these problems in the Federal
Government.
The center of excellence exercise that is going on now
through the White House to deploy the IT modernization plan is
an example of trying to implement that, where they are seeking
to bring in subject-matter expertise from outside to help
address and define requirements to solve problems like
cybersecurity and then they can execute internally with their
own employees and they can also bring in additional contract
personnel.
Mr. Mossburg. Thank you. Thanks for the question,
Congressman. As I noted in my opening remarks, I was very
appreciative that this committee had both tool vendors and
systems integration at the table. I think that is an important
part to consider in addressing the skills gap that you raised.
There is no question that there is a skills challenge in
the Federal Government and also in the private sector, and it
really is going to take continued collaboration between them
both to make sure we have got the necessary skills to implement
successfully the CDM program.
Mr. Richmond. Well, but you also mentioned in your
testimony about the learning curve. I guess my next question
would be: Is there a need for more training on how to use CDM
capabilities like the dashboard and then, No. 2, do agencies
need help developing or updating their internal governance to
make sure it is compatible with CDM?
Mr. Mossburg. Yes, I think the answer to both questions is
yes. The scope of both training and governance is included in
the CDM program so that as these technologies are implemented
and processes are put in place, that training and governance is
part of the individual task orders and agency implementations.
Mr. Richmond. OK.
Mr. Carayiannis. Congressman Richmond, as it relates to the
dashboard specifically, absolutely there is a need for training
to ensure that once it is fully operationalized at the agency
level and even at the Federal level that personnel are trained
to get the maximum value out of what it is presenting, the risk
scores, calculations that are occurring, understanding what
threats might be out there. Having to have trained personnel to
be able to understand and act on that is critically important.
So an on-going training element just around the dashboard
itself I would highly recommend, and that was in my opening
remarks.
Mr. Dimina. So I would add to that that--the private sector
is dealing with the same problem. The cyber skills shortage is
real and across the board, and it is impacting Government, it
is impacting private sector. I do think there are opportunities
to look at how can we--and that problem would not be solved in
the short term. That is going to take a while to solve across
the board between industry and Government, and that continued
partnership.
I do think there are some things the industry can do from a
technology perspective to help offset some of those challenges.
There is work on-going in part of the cybersecurity industry in
a space called orchestration automation. Those tools are
maturing. While that would not solve the problem completely,
those can help add efficiencies to the program.
Additionally, what the core of our testimony from Splunk
and my testimony today is about is leveraging what has already
been invested and leveraging the data that is already present
in the CDM system to gain greater efficiencies and to enhance
the mission at DHS. Speaking from personal experience in my
time working in cyber operations, the data being collected
today is being used for risk profiling and for risk
prioritization and for visibility, and that is great. That is a
core requirement of the security program. But there is an
opportunity to also use that data from an operational
perspective and to assist in the mission for threat hunting and
understanding the tactics and techniques of APTs out there.
So I do believe that is a problem, and I do believe
technology can help. It would not completely solve it, but
there are ways to improve the productivity of the investments
made today.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes
myself for questions.
So following up on your comment earlier, Mr. Dimina, about
CDM being a journey, not a destination, and some of the
testimony that we have already heard, I mean, I think at Phase
1 not having full visibility, that is understandable.
Obviously, we all want it to be rolled out to all four phases
more quickly, and I know there is challenges with respect to
that. But I guess as we approach sort-of the halftime or
intermission of this program, if you will, I guess I want to
hear on the record from all of you that once we get to Phase 4,
as fully implemented, do we still foresee CDM as a program that
will be effective and agile and nimble enough to deal with the
cyber threats that we are facing at that point in time? I will
just go across the board.
Mr. Dimina. So there is a lot to that question. I think--
and thank you for the question, sir. I think regarding
specifically Phase 4, you know, the requires are not still
defined there, so I think there is some work that still needs
to be done to figure out what is going to be accomplished, how
it is going to be accomplished to offer data protection.
I think the challenge and an issue that needs to be
addressed there, is there are major disruptions occurring in
the private sector to the way IT is delivered and handled.
Traditional IT is being replaced by server-less models, the
rise of micro-services and containers and software-defined
networking. So as DHS and team and CDM leadership figure out
their approach for Phase 4, I think that is an issue and
question that will need to be addressed, because where does
data reside in a server-less architecture? That is a challenge
ahead.
Beyond that, I think looking at continuous monitoring as a
program and to answer your question about where does it go, you
know, today we have a foundation. You cannot secure what you
cannot see. But the vision would be something that is near real
time. To Congressman Richmond's point in his opening remarks,
providing situational awareness. You could envision a State
where we have the equivalent of a cyber weather map, whereas
meteorologists today look at atmospheric data to predict
weather threats and weather patterns across the country, once
we reached that State and we have successful real-time
monitoring and being able to access data at a granular level,
we could predict from activity occurring in one part of the
Government or see warning signs that would happen at other
parts.
You know, in a perfect world, and if we take that one step
further, you know, we could have the equivalent of a tornado
warning, where attacks against one part of the Government are
being seen and reacted to in real-time, and then the cyber
defenders in our Government can take proactive actions to
defend in advance of those attacks.
Mr. Carayiannis. Congressman, I guess a couple thoughts
around that. First, I think once we get to Phase 4 and
potentially beyond, an opportunity that I think CDM provides is
the tuning of it and extracting more value out of it over the
course of time, kind-of from moving from more of a cyber
hygiene program to more of a highly-tuned response program
where I could quickly interact with anything and everything
that I have from an information source perspective, be able to
leverage that information to react, rather than days and weeks
to hours to minutes.
I think one of the challenges that CDM has identified--and
you have heard some of the comments about that today--and one
of the opportunities that CDM presents is to really orchestrate
a highly-defined environment that could accelerate people's
time to action and in time to action dealing with a threat that
is out there. The threat will continue. It will continue to
progress and become more nimble, and so we need to able to do
the same thing. I think CDM is a great start to do that. It is
tuning that environment and making it more productive over the
course of time for all.
Mr. Mossburg. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. I
will just put a small fine point on this. I think that it truly
is a journey, not a destination. I do not think this is
something that we need to think about as getting to done. I
think this is something that we need to continually improve and
remain vigilant on.
I think we ought to strive for a vision that is not even
real-time or predictive, but really gets--or, excuse me, not
even real-time, but predictive in nature and begins to look at
behavioral analytics and some of the activities that can be
correlated across the domain or the enterprise to begin to
predict where we may run into problems, both internal to an
agency and external to an agency. I think that is the vision
that we ought to strive for.
Mr. Hodgkins. I would just add, to echo the comments, that
CDM will survive if it can evolve. It has got to keep pace with
the threats. It has also got to keep pace with the evolution of
technology, the innovation of technologies, you know, as was
noted, new forms of computing capabilities as they come down
the pike.
Then it has also got to--this is not an operation occurring
in isolation. The Federal Government is undertaking significant
strides to modernize specific networks and systems, and those
will begin to incorporate new cybersecurity capabilities that
can then be connected with CDM or can share information with
CDM in new ways that we cannot do today.
Mr. Ratcliffe. My time is expired, but I have a question I
want to ask, and if you can answer it quickly and if not
incorporate some answers into some of the other Members'
questions, but, you know, to this theme of CDM being a journey,
my question I guess is for all of the folks up here: What is
the low-hanging fruit for us as legislators? Where can we work
to make effective changes to make the CDM journey faster and
better and more effective, whether that is programmatic
authorities or the parameters or acquisitions or appropriations
with respect to CDM?
I know, Mr. Carayiannis, you intimated almost a Phase 5,
looking at something to that effect. So I would appreciate your
thoughts on that.
Mr. Carayiannis. Well, maybe thinking beyond CDM itself,
what it is today and the four phases, one of the concepts we
have kicked around and thought about is: How do you extend what
the Government is doing around CDM to the community around the
Government that is supporting the Government on an on-going
basis? If you think about the Government doing more outsourcing
on an on-going basis, you are now more dependent on those
resources.
So consequently, I think one thought that the CDM and the
committee here should think about is how do we extend some of
those principles and guidelines, guidance that you are giving
and directives you are giving agencies today around CDM to some
of the community that is closest to the Government and helping
the Government perform its mission?
Mr. Ratcliffe. Anyone want in?
Mr. Dimina. I will agree. I will add to that. I think there
is--going back to my testimony today, there is untapped value
in CDM today. The data--the intent of the data being collected
today is for risk scoring and for asset visibility, and that is
great and that is important. That same data could be incredibly
valuable for analysts working at DHS, the teams working with
EINSTEIN in their mission.
One area where I would suggest additional policy review or
oversight is working with DHS to ensure the appropriate rules
are in place to access that data for that purpose.
Mr. Mossburg. A quick comment on the pace and the speech
with which we can continue the journey with CDM. My colleague,
Mr. Hodgkins, has mentioned the security clearance issue writ
large a couple of times. I think in particular to CDM, when it
comes to the contractor community working with DHS to implement
for agencies, looking at the reciprocity of security clearances
between DHS and the individual agencies, would go a long way to
speeding time of delivery on the projects.
Mr. Hodgkins. Mr. Chairman, I also noted several things in
my opening statements. The committee can exercise oversight of
the appropriations that the agencies take and ensure that they
are putting in that line item to fund their CDM activities,
where today we do not see that consistently. The committee can
look to ensure that appropriate acquisition work force skills
are both created and then deployed and that there are
sufficient numbers, and then the committee can work both on
this program and more broadly across Congress to think about
how the Government can acquire commercial capabilities in a
more rapid fashion.
We have created a substantial number of Government-unique
requirements that have slowed that process down, and those
reviews are under way as we speak through various means, but
that is a way that we can also look to improve the process the
committee can participate in and looking to accelerate.
The cyber work force also we have identified that there is
a shortage of those skills, and that is a long-term solution.
Then, finally, just oversight of the program, making sure that
the different phases are advancing in the way that they are
intended and they are advancing in the time frames that are
intended.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank you all and I appreciate the panel's
indulgence. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Florida, Ms. Demings.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and also to
our Ranking Member and to our witnesses today. Thank you so
much for being here.
As we learned from the OPM hack in 2015, agencies need a
strong secure system for managing who is authorized to access
sensitive data. To address this, CDM Phase 2 calls for the
creation of a centralized master user record, among other
things, to help agencies manage credentials and privileged
access.
This question is for any or all of you. How effective do
you think the master user record will be? Are there areas in
Phase 2 where it is currently--and how it is currently designed
where it falls short?
Mr. Mossburg. I will take the first. I do think that the
Phase 2, the credential management and the privilege management
aspects of Phase 2 are very effective, have the potential to be
very effective, not only in the creation of the master user
record, but in the policy enforcement of having both the
credentials that you and I are used to and a user ID and login,
something that we know to access a system, but also a physical
asset that we have and a PIV card, or a little ID card. The
combination of both will go a long way to preventing the
situations like we had with OPM or things that you are familiar
with in the private sector, like the Target breach last year.
Mrs. Demings. Others?
Mr. Dimina. I agree with Mr. Mossburg. The only footnote I
will add to that is, it is my understanding that the identity
data is key and having information on user behavior is
important. I think the challenge there is bringing it all
together.
My understanding is the identity data is not currently
feeding into dashboard or being correlated with the existing
CDM data, and the real power of this program is the ability to
do analytics on this data. If that data is not brought together
and analytics has not happened, it is a missed opportunity.
Mr. Carayiannis. If I could add, data is key to everything
here, so that master user record, the concept of being able to
obtain data from not only one agency, but all agencies, being
able to access that, bring all that together and associate that
to an individual, it is key. So the concept of, you know, if I
have very little data, then we are going to have a challenge
being able to relate all that to a record, so that is critical
in terms of the aggregation of that information to be able to
leverage it.
Mrs. Demings. Anyone else want to speak on it? OK, thank
you. Also, for any or all of you, from your perspective, what
examples do you believe already exist that you feel best
demonstrates the value of CDM?
Mr. Carayiannis. I will take that one first. So, thank you,
Congresswoman. There was a recent example during the last
WannaCry event that occurred where some of the agencies who
have been making good progress leveraging and accessing,
bringing data together, as a part of CDM was able to leverage
that data quickly, do a report on all the information that they
had of what systems would potentially be impacted by it and be
able to quickly put an action plan in place to address that,
and therefore, you know, not have to deal with a very painful
experience.
So it was--the good news is, in a very immediate way, while
everything is not deployed immediately across the board--we
have not gone through all the phases, where are we seeing some
agencies get benefit from this by DHS directive, and I think
there will be a lot more of that to come as the program
continues to build and roll out.
Mrs. Demings. That is great.
Mr. Dimina. I will add to that. As I mentioned in my
testimony, during Phase 1 deployments, there are several
agencies that discovered they had additional end-points than
they were aware of. So in one perspective, that can be looked
at as a challenge. I see it as a positive. I see it as a
success story.
The first part of an effective cyber strategy is
understanding your footprint and understanding your security
posture. That information and that intelligence is a success
story and step forward for those agencies in being able to
appropriately defend their assets.
Mrs. Demings. That is great. Others? Mr. Mossburg.
Mr. Mossburg. I agree wholeheartedly with those two. I will
take it from a slightly different angle. I think one of the
biggest successes that the CDM program has demonstrated is an
incorporation of lessons learned. After going through Phase 1
and Phase 2, DHS and their partners at GSA and Fedsim changed
the approach of the program to--in what is now called Defend to
accommodate a couple of things.
One very important one was an expanded access to the latest
and greatest from industry, in particular with software
products, by changing the way those software products could be
procured by the agency through the integrator. So it enables
greater access to that.
The second was an expansion of the period of performance
with the individual projects that will be executed in Phase 3
and Phase 4. What is important about that is, as you have a
longer relationship between integrator and agency to deploy the
solution, you have greater re-use of the staff from a security
clearance standpoint than you had previously. So it gets past
some of those obstacles from a pace standpoint around the
security clearance.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you. Mr. Hodgkins.
Mr. Hodgkins. I would just add that the program--one of the
things that we would see as success is that it is something
that can be applied in a relatively uniform fashion across the
Government. It is not common to find consistent uniformity for
Government requirements in contracting or in plans and
protection programs of this nature, so it is a success that
this is being rolled out in a consistent, uniform fashion. We
have a repeatable activity and a repeatable successes, and
measurable, repeatable conclusions that we can draw across
agencies.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentlelady. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my first time in
the committee, so it is good to be part of the subcommittee. It
is an honor.
Mr. Ratcliffe. We are glad to have you.
Mr. Bacon. I am a retired 30-year Air Force guy with
signals intelligence, and worked a little bit in cyber. One
thing I took away from that is we have some of the best cyber
capabilities in the world, particularly in the intelligence and
the offensive side, but we also had the most vulnerabilities,
and I--which you are working that part of it. So thank you for
what you are doing.
I heard one of our senior generals say once that we have
the biggest rocks, but we also live in the largest glass house
when it comes to cyber. So it is a two-edged sword there,
right?
Mr. Mossburg, I know you talked a little bit about hygiene
or the right cyber hygiene. Could you just talk a little more
succinctly, what does that really mean? Where are we at in
getting to that proper hygiene?
Mr. Mossburg. Sir, I think--and I first referenced it with
regard to Phase 1 and the focus on what is on individual
networks, and after creating a master device record, an
inventory of the assets that exist on the network, a rigorous,
constant patching of that software and maintaining the proper
configuration is that hygiene.
So we are well into Phase 1, but as I think in early
responses, not complete. We do not have that complete inventory
yet. But you heard some of the responses here a second ago,
with even some of the more recent issues and attacks that we
have encountered from WannaCry to some of the recent hardware
attacks, our agencies were better prepared because of the--one,
the patching that was occurring, the hygiene that was occurring
on the devices that had been identified, but also the data that
had been collected for even when those devices were not yet
being patched or having the proper hygiene applied to them, we
at least knew about them, and then the agencies could
prioritize their reaction to addressing them and prevent those
attacks from causing harm.
Mr. Bacon. You are having to do that with all 24 Federal
agencies?
Mr. Mossburg. Yes, that--all 24 will roll through the Phase
1.
Mr. Bacon. Do you have--is the software that you are using,
is it the same for all 24? Because I think that would be pretty
challenging.
Mr. Mossburg. Well, and I think the goal of the CDM program
is to have a common approach in these. Quite honestly, CGI is
engaged in Phase 2 in the credential management. I would defer
to the vendors that are rolling out Phase 1 on the specifics
there.
Mr. Carayiannis. I can make a comment about that,
Congressman Bacon. At the end of the day, one of the challenges
for a lot of the primes, taking the dashboard, deploying it
within respective agencies, but to your question, lots of
different technologies that will be used by a lot of different
agencies. So I think that was one of the complicated elements
of what CDM was trying to tackle was leveraging what was
already out there, augmenting what was there, and putting into
best practice and use of those to deal with the master user
record, being able to populate it, have accurate information
there. So that is been a big challenge I think for a lot of the
prime contractors.
Mr. Bacon. Some of these countries are so advanced in this
area, it just takes one device that we have not had the patch
for to find a vulnerability on, would you agree with that
statement?
Mr. Carayiannis. Yes, sir, I would.
Mr. Bacon. Mr. Carayiannis, what is the Federal
enterprise--where is the Federal enterprise in developing their
CDM dashboards from your perspective? Are the barriers to fully
implementing and using the dashboard technical, or is it
administrative?
Mr. Carayiannis. I would basically say that I think it is a
combination of the two, so we have worked very hard to stay as
close that we can with DHS, with the dashboard prime, as well
as the prime contractors working within the agencies. We are
learning a lot of what people need the dashboard to be able to
do at the agency level, as well as the Federal level. We have
been augmenting our software on an on-going basis. We have a
release schedule at least twice a year. The idea around that is
to continue to add additional components, upgrades,
enhancements to our software to enable them to progress and to
do more work, the work that they need to do to drive CDM to
success.
Mr. Bacon. I appreciate your challenge. I come from the Air
Force. We tried to do a dashboard. That was hard enough for the
Air Force, because you have different major commands underneath
it, airlift, fighter, space. But those dashboards you are
building is going to be a one-size-fits-all for all 24
agencies.
Mr. Carayiannis. So the current architected approach--and I
think it is the right one--I made that comment in my opening
remarks--one of the key elements of this is having consistency
from a dashboard tool across the entire agency-level dashboards
and at the Federal level. Having consistency, having DHS
maintain that consistent approach ensures that you are seeing
similar information types, risk scores, et cetera, rolling up
to the agency and to the Federal level.
If you did not do that, you have everybody doing something
slightly different, to your very point about within the DOD
environment, you know, you start seeing a lot of apples and
oranges and lots of different variations. So consistency is
paramount, in our judgment, from a dashboard perspective, to a
CDM program success.
Mr. Bacon. I just think with all the different missions,
that is a challenge, because everybody has a different mission
area and different unique requirements. But yet I understand
you have got to standardize if you want to be able to defend
the system better, so I had some more questions, but my time is
out. Thank you for your expertise and thank you for your
service.
Mr. Carayiannis. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all
of our witnesses for your participation, testimony here today.
Mr. Hodgkins, if I could start with you, obviously, this is
a very important topic and appreciate all the contributions you
have made to this discussion. But, Mr. Hodgkins, the
administration has recently released the report to the
president on Federal IT modernization that pushes strongly
toward greater adoption of cloud-based applications and
services.
Now, CDM has traditionally been focused on identifying and
protecting Federal assets within our Federal networks. As
Federal assets are deployed in cloud architectures, how well is
CDM positioned for this new paradigm? How does the program need
to change to ensure it continues to be effective?
Mr. Hodgkins. Well, as I noted in my testimony, Mr.
Langevin, cloud deployment of Federal assets was not really a
major focus of CDM when it was first formulated and put
together. So that is an element that as we--and as I noted
about the question on evolution, as those new technologies come
into play, as those new efficiencies are identified and the
Government adopts those, CDM will need to evolve to address the
new risks that might occur because we are moving in different
directions with new capabilities.
Mr. Langevin. OK. As a follow-up, are certain CDM phases
more or less effective in protecting cloud assets? I certainly
would welcome comment from some of the other witnesses on the
next question. Does DHS's ability to maintain situational
awareness change with respect to cloud solutions?
Mr. Hodgkins. On your first question, sir, the effort to
identify the users should be something that can be transferred
over when those activities move to the cloud so that you should
still have the same type of identification and authentication
capabilities, and those should be reusable, if you will. I am
not aware that the others are positioned or directly thinking
that the vendors at the table may be able to more directly
answer that question for you.
Mr. Carayiannis. I was going to make a comment about that,
Congressman. So at the end of the day, I made some comments
earlier about this universe of contractors or support elements
in and around the Government, so if you think about the cloud
environment itself, you have organizations that are providing
Federally-certified cloud environments, which is a good thing.
But I do think that some of the underlying principles and
elements of what CDM is should be driven out more broadly to
some of those suppliers so they are inheriting some of the
inherent capabilities of and underlying tenets of what CDM is
trying to do for the Government itself.
Mr. Dimina. So I will add to that. I think there has been
some progress with regards to how we secure the cloud, how do
we monitor cloud, and this is where FedRAMP comes into play. I
think DHS is looking at that. Cloud has been with us for some
time, and it is not going anywhere. So I think that is a
problem that is going to be solved.
I think the bigger challenge is, what is going to happen as
we move into the internet of things, where every device is
connected? How do we secure and monitor mobile devices as we
move and solve the human capital gaps we have in our work force
and have more people work remotely? How do we deal with the
changes and disruptions that are occurring from things such as
containerization, and when traditional data centers do not
exist anywhere, and where we are in a server-less environment?
So I think those are the bigger challenges ahead. Cloud is
certainly important, will be the mechanism for delivery of a
lot of these technologies, but those are the ones that if you
look longer term, 1 to 3 years out, that will need some proper
planning. I think the most important piece here, if you look at
the future CDM, is that careful and thoughtful planning has to
go into the design decisions made today, because the worst
possible outcome would be if a decision made now would prevent
the use of some future yet-to-be-released cybersecurity
technology or information technology asset. I think some of the
delays in Phase 1 were a result of that heavy lift of a lot of
those design decisions that had to happen, and we are seeing
phases hopefully accelerate now as some of that design work is
complete.
Mr. Langevin. Well, this is a good follow-up, good segue
into my next question. While CDM now provides a method to
streamline acquisition of cybersecurity tools across agencies,
it is still incumbent upon each agency to define and execute a
risk management strategy and process. How are individual
agencies utilizing the tools provided by CDM to create an
overall risk management strategy and prioritize their
acquisition of cybersecurity tools? Have you observed any
changes or improvements since CDM has been implemented? Mr.
Hodgkins, if we can maybe start with you.
Mr. Hodgkins. Well, I think the answer to your last
question is, yes, there have been improvements since CDM has
been deployed. I think that agencies are required to make a
different set of assessments and determine their risks more
effectively, and CDM is deploying toolsets that helps them try
to address and protect against those risks and threats.
I believe that there is obviously room to grow, and I think
that agencies can always do a better job of assessing their
risks. But we are seeing improvement, and CDM is one of the
factors that is contributing to that improvement and their
ability to identify those risks and trying to position
themselves to protect or defend against it.
Mr. Langevin. OK.
Mr. Mossburg. I would just briefly say I agree that we have
seen the results since the beginning of the CDM program, but I
think it is with the Defend portion that is recently and
currently under way where we have got the streamlined
acquisition process for the tools where we have the potential
to see the greatest benefit for individual agencies to get
quicker access to the tools that are specific to their agencies
and also as technology evolves with the threats, take advantage
in a more--in a quicker fashion some of the latest technology.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I have
some additional questions I will submit for the record. If I
could have our witnesses respond to them, that would be
helpful. Thank you all very much. With that, I will yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
Ranking Member, Ranking Member Richmond. This is an important
hearing. In fact, the constant oversight of our cybersecurity
system is really crucial for the defense of this Nation and, as
well, the important responsibilities that are driven by the
cyber system.
I heard the words careful and thoughtful planning, and I
think that is clearly the framework in which we should be going
forward. I have a series of questions, but the thoughtful and
careful planning causes me to want to pose a question to you.
Even as I know that the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
program deals with the attempt to ensure that the Federal
network is healthy, but it is the constant changing system--and
there are many parts of it that are impacted by the human
element.
So just take--you are obviously in the private sector. You
know that we are querying about the incident that occurred in
Hawaii. Certainly it was a cyber system of sort. Would you
speculate on the--what might have been needed, how that
translates into what good the system that we are dealing with
is trying to do? We are obviously--all of us are paying
attention in terms of the massive investigation that is going
forward, not only State, but I certainly believe a full Federal
investigation should occur, because we have a very important
role in the network that States have, as well.
So would you take a moment to comment on how that could
have happened and how in the instance of our system it is
intended to avoid that? Who wants to start first?
Mr. Hodgkins. I will answer, Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you for
the question. The only commonality that comes to mind based on
the reporting that I have seen is human error. Human error is
still one of the primary drivers for cyber vulnerabilities,
whatever system you are looking at, and so we have to continue
to address that with additional training, additional
acquisition of more skills, bringing in more people with those
skills, and make sure that we try to diminish the opportunity
to human error to occur.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Gentlemen, please.
Mr. Carayiannis. Congresswoman Lee, as I think about your
question, I think quite a bit about what CDM is trying to do,
which is to automate as many processes as possible and try to
take the human factor out of the situational analysis around
assets, vulnerabilities, configurations, whatever the case may
be. So to the extent that if you try to relate one of the
other, yes, the incident as it was reported in the paper, it
looks like it was a human error. I think there will always be a
human element to what goes on. But CDM is itself--to relate it
back which I think was the premise of your question--relate it
back to what CDM is about, by taking more control from an
automated perspective of your environments, and being able to
do something in a very automated way, I think you start to
minimize the impact that the human element might have.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Mossburg. I will take a slightly different--sorry about
that.
Mr. Dimina. Go ahead.
Mr. Mossburg. Slightly different angle. I think another
part of the CDM program overall scope will be remediation when
an issue occurs. There will always be human elements that
factor--as you mentioned, that will come into play, and there
will always be that cause. We will continually be adapting to
situations such as this.
Our ability to remediate or mitigate when an issue does
occur and then put processes in place to prevent it from
occurring again and learn those lessons are as crucial as the
automation and processes that we can implement.
Mr. Dimina. So I am not an expert on the incident that
happened, but I think a perspective I can give you that might
help is what is going on in private sector to deal with the
shortages in the human workers and skills and resources and
training that has been discussed today.
There is two trends that are under way. The private sector
is certainly doubling down its investment in software
approaches to these problems. Two of those trends are occurring
on--so one I mentioned earlier today about automation
orchestration. How do we add as much automation and adaptive
capabilities to the system so we are not so dependent on
humans? CDM certainly could benefit from that.
On the second trend is the adoption of technologies such as
machine learning and data analytics to understand--to help us
as practitioners filter through the noise, so that only the
important signals get through and our human time is spent more
efficiently so that there is less burden on our human resources
and less likely of an accident or an incident. These
technologies are all receiving major investments in the private
sector and will continue to in the near future.
Ms. Jackson Lee. It is clearly important because of the
large percentage of the infrastructure that is in the private
sector. Let me quickly ask this question, if I might. CDM will
be the first Government-wide effort to centralize the
assessment of the cyber health of the Federal computer system.
As we well know, it is massive, it is massive, more massive
than Hawaii, more massive than another State or the collective
States. It is the Federal Government impacting so much.
How well-prepared do you think we are to correctly
interpret the information that we will be receiving? Obviously,
there is a human element there in receiving and interpreting
that information.
Mr. Dimina. So thank you for that question. I think it is a
very important question, and it centers around the theme of my
testimony today. CDM provides us a visibility of assets within
Government perimeters. What is going on inside the network?
There are additional programs out there such as the
Einstein program that provides visibility into what is coming
in and out of the network, that perimeter viewpoint. Both of
these programs satisfy a critical and necessary need, but today
there is no integration between the data of these programs.
So I think to your question is: How do we increase the
value we are getting from these investments? One of the ways is
by allowing DHS and agencies to benefit from tools such as data
analytics to fuse some of the information that they are getting
from two programs to more effectively enable the mission to
hunt for bad actors and identify the techniques and tactics
that are used by these actors.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I think it is a roadmap that we need to
follow. If I could just--Mr. Chairman, indulge me for Mr.
Hodgkins, a follow-up question that Mr. Richmond asked, let me
combine a question here. Defending against cyber threats is an
ever-changing landscape. Can CDM adjust to the rapid changes in
technology and applications?
The question I want to follow up, Mr. Hodgkins and Mr.
Richmond, is by teaching our youngsters code, as you well know,
there is a--you may know, there is an effort to teach code in
minority communities, to increase the opportunity. Is that an
element of providing for the work force? Is that a productive
use as it relates to this kind of work? But the first question
is, are we able to adjust to the rapid changes in technology
and applications? Then, is training in code productive?
Mr. Hodgkins. Thank you for the question. To your first
question, yes, I think the program--it does have the ability to
evolve and to position itself as technologies move forward. We
have talked about some of that and my counterparts have also
shared some elements of that, so I think that the system and
the processes that are being put in place--and as we move into
Phase 3 and Phase 4, in contract for those, we continue to re-
evaluate what does the environment look like, what are the
threats, the new threats that perhaps did not exist when we
were contracting for Phase 1, how do we incorporate those
capabilities? How do we move forward? So the processes that are
put in place to implement through phases CDM will continue to
evolve and help the program evolve, as well.
Our industry has been very strongly supportive--in answer
to your second question--of a variety of programs to try and
increase the level of interest in STEM activities across the
board, and coding in particular. It is essential that we try
and get to students early on. There is multitudes of research
that have been shown that getting to students early on and
securing their interests before other factors come into play
and detract their--distract them, if you will, from taking a
STEM-type career path or course path is important, and coding
is an element that seems to attract a lot of attention and get
a lot of attention of a lot of younger people who grew up in a
computer world as a way that they can interact and build a
successful career. So we have been supportive and will continue
to be supportive of that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I too
have additional questions that I would like to submit for the
record. Thank you very much to all the witnesses. Thank you for
your testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentlelady. That concludes our
hearing today. I thank the witnesses for your valuable
testimony and your insights today. I thank the Members for
their questions. As indicated, some Members of the committee
have additional questions for the witnesses, and we will ask
you all to respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
remain open for a period of 10 days. Without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:31 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[all]