- CFIUS REFORM: EXAMINING THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
[Senate Hearing 115-213]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 115-213
CFIUS REFORM: EXAMINING THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
=======================================================================
HEARING
before the
COMMITTEE ON
BANKING,HOUSING,AND URBAN AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
EXAMINING THE ESSENTIAL NATIONAL SECURITY ELEMENTS UNDERLYING A
COMPREHENSIVE PROPOSAL TO REFORM THE REVIEW PROCESS USED BY THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES (CFIUS)
__________
JANUARY 18, 2018
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs
Available at: http: //www.govinfo.gov/
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-914 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2019
COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho, Chairman
RICHARD C. SHELBY, Alabama
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio
BOB CORKER, Tennessee
JACK REED, Rhode Island
PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
DEAN HELLER, Nevada
JON TESTER, Montana
TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia
BEN SASSE, Nebraska
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts
TOM COTTON, Arkansas
HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota
MIKE ROUNDS, South Dakota
JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
DAVID PERDUE, Georgia
BRIAN SCHATZ, Hawaii
THOM TILLIS, North Carolina
CHRIS VAN HOLLEN, Maryland
JOHN KENNEDY, Louisiana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JERRY MORAN, Kansas
DOUG JONES, Alabama
Gregg Richard, Staff Director
Mark Powden, Democratic Staff Director
Elad Roisman, Chief Counsel
John V. O'Hara, Chief Counsel for National Security Policy
Kristine Johnson, Economist
Elisha Tuku, Democratic Chief Counsel
Colin McGinnis, Democratic Policy Director
Dawn Ratliff, Chief Clerk
James Guiliano, Hearing Clerk
Shelvin Simmons, IT Director
Jim Crowell, Editor
(ii)
C O N T E N T S
----------
THURSDAY, JANUARY 18, 2018
Page
Opening statement of Chairman Crapo..............................
3
Prepared statement...........................................
33
Opening statements, comments, or prepared statements of:
Senator Brown................................................
5
WITNESSES
John Cornyn, a U.S. Senator from the State of Texas..............
1
Prepared statement...........................................
34
Dianne Feinstein, a U.S. Senator from the State of California
Prepared statement...........................................
37
Christopher Padilla, Vice President for Government and Regulatory
Affairs, IBM Corporation; and Former Under Secretary for
International Trade, Department of Commerce....................
7
Prepared statement...........................................
38
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Crapo...........................................
67
Senator Cotton...........................................
68
Senator Menendez.........................................
70
Senator Warner...........................................
71
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
72
Scott Kupor, Managing Partner, Andreessen Horowitz, and Chair,
National Venture Capital Association...........................
9
Prepared statement...........................................
43
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Crapo...........................................
73
Senator Menendez.........................................
75
Senator Warner...........................................
76
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
77
Gary Clyde Hufbauer, Ph.D., Reginald Jones Senior Fellow,
Peterson Institute for International Economics.................
11
Prepared statement...........................................
53
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Crapo...........................................
79
Senator Menendez.........................................
79
Senator Warner...........................................
80
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
81
James Mulvenon, Ph.D., General Manager, Special Programs
Division, SOS International....................................
12
Prepared statement...........................................
56
Responses to written questions of:
Chairman Crapo...........................................
82
Senator Menendez.........................................
82
Senator Warner...........................................
83
Senator Cortez Masto.....................................
83
Additional Material Supplied for the Record
FIRRMA-related documents--summaries, letters, quotes, and
background papers--submitted by Senator Cornyn.................
85
Prepared statement of the Rail Security Alliance.................
125
CFIUS REFORM: EXAMINING THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
----------
THURSDAY, JANUARY 18, 2018
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met at 9:47 a.m. in room SD-538, Dirksen
Senate Office Building, Hon. Mike Crapo, Chairman of the
Committee, presiding.
Chairman Crapo. This hearing will come to order.
This morning, we are going to go immediately to Senator
Cornyn for his statement, and then we will return back to
Senator Brown and myself to give opening statements and then go
to the witnesses.
So, Senator Cornyn, without any further ado, you may begin
your statement at any time.
STATEMENT OF JOHN CORNYN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF
TEXAS
Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Brown and Members of the Committee. I appreciate your holding
this hearing to consider mine and Senator Feinstein's proposal
called the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act, or
FIRRMA.
I will make abbreviated remarks, and I would ask consent,
Mr. Chairman, to have my full testimony put in the record along
with a written statement by Senator Feinstein who could not be
here because she is Ranking on Judiciary and has a conflicting
engagement.
Senator Cornyn. Senator Feinstein and I spent months
working on FIRRMA based in part on troubling information we
both regularly hear as members of the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence. The bill takes a targeted approach at
addressing specific national security problems while aiming not
to unnecessarily chill foreign investment. I support foreign
investment in the United States.
I would like to take a moment to highlight the list of
people who we have worked with, we have consulted with to try
to improve this legislation and who have announced their
support for it. It includes, of course, Members of the
Committee like Senator Scott who introduced this bill with us,
and it includes current and former U.S. national security
leaders like Secretary of Defense James Mattis; Secretary of
Treasury Steve Mnuchin; Attorney General Jeff Sessions; Admiral
Harry Harris, Commander of U.S. Pacific Command; former
Secretaries of Defense like Donald Rumsfeld and Bill Perry;
former Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff; former
DNI, Director of National Intelligence, Admiral Dennis Blair;
and other distinguished retired four-star generals and
admirals.
It also includes industry players such as Ericsson, Oracle,
and several other companies and trade groups from across the
country.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask consent to submit for the record
their letters and quotes as well as several summary and
background documents on FIRRMA.
Chairman Crapo. Without objection.
Senator Cornyn. The context for this legislation is
important, and it is easily misunderstood, so I want to
hopefully correct some misconceptions. The context for this
legislation is about China. I am an ardent supporter of free
trade, and I strongly support foreign investment in the United
States, consistent with the protection of our national
security. China, however, has significantly altered the threat
landscape for the United States.
General Joe Dunford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
says that by 2025, China will pose the greatest threat to U.S.
national security of any other nation. China poses a threat
unlike anything the United States has ever faced before--a
powerful economy with coercive, state-driven industrial
policies that undermine the free market, married up with an
aggressive military modernization and the intent to dominate
not only its own region but potentially beyond.
China uses both legal and illegal means to turn our own
technology and knowhow against us and erase our national
security advantage. One of these tools is investment, which
China has weaponized to vacuum up U.S. industrial capabilities
in dual-use technologies.
Unfortunately, the jurisdiction of the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States that reviews such transactions
is limited, and China has studied the law and found gaps to
exploit. To circumvent CFIUS review, China pressures U.S.
companies into arrangements like joint ventures, coercing them
into sharing their capabilities and their intellectual property
and enabling Chinese companies to acquire that and then the
knowhow that goes along with it and replicate them on Chinese
soil, which undermines our defense industrial base.
China has been able to exploit minority position
investments in early stage technology companies to gain access
to cutting-edge intellectual property as well as trade secrets
and key personnel. The Chinese have figured out which dual-use
emerging technologies are still in the cradle, so to speak, and
not yet subject to export controls.
I want to quickly debunk three flawed arguments advanced by
some who have opposed our efforts. First, they say the bill
represents regulatory overreach, which really misses the point.
CFIUS is not a normal regulator by any means. It is a part of
our national security apparatus, and the Federal Government has
no higher duty--I would argue no American has a higher duty
than to protect and to maintain our national security.
Second, opponents claim that the export control system can
already address these national security risks. Well, under
FIRRMA, export controls would remain the first line of defense
when it comes to technology transfers, but that system has
inherent limitations, so we need a second line of defense. And
CFIUS and export controls are designed to be interactive and
complementary and not mutually exclusive.
What is more, FIRRMA includes safeguards to ensure that
CFIUS would review transactions only when necessary. Many
transactions would be exempted where there are other
authorities, such as export controls that adequately address
national security risks.
CFIUS would also create a safe list of certain allied
countries for which these new types of transactions would be
exempt.
Third, some opponents argue that FIRRMA will flood CFIUS
with too many transactions, seemingly questioning whether
addressing real national security threats is worth the time and
expense. Well, it is, and I am fully committed to securing the
necessary resources working together with my colleagues because
this is a national security priority.
So, in closing, Mr. Chairman, I want to ask those who
perhaps are skeptical of what we are trying to do here to
withhold judgment until you have heard the front-line
perspectives of key member agencies of CFIUS. The time, I
believe, to modernize CFIUS is now. Our adversaries and rivals
around the world are on the march, and they are vacuuming up
our cutting-edge dual-use technology, which not only cuts our
technological advantage when it comes to national security but
undermines our industrial base here at home, as I have said.
The time to modernize CFIUS is now, and we must not allow
ourselves to be the frog in the pot of boiling water, so to
speak. So I urge you to advance this bill for the sake of our
long-term national security.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I really appreciate the
opportunity to present these remarks and the cooperation that
you and others on the Committee and other colleagues have shown
in trying to address this vital national security issue.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator, Cornyn. We appreciate
both you and Senator Feinstein bringing this critical issue to
us and the work that you have put into it, and we appreciate
your testimony here today.
You are obviously facing a pretty busy schedule and are
free to leave at any time you wish. Thank you, and thanks again
for bringing this to us.
OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
Chairman Crapo. Today the Committee will begin to evaluate
the essential national security elements underlying a
comprehensive proposal to reform the review process used by the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or CFIUS.
Again, thanks go to Senators Feinstein and Cornyn for their
testimony and work on their bipartisan Foreign Investment Risk
Review Modernization Act of 2017.
The bill was first introduced by Senators Cornyn and
Feinstein on November 8th to modernize and strengthen CFIUS to
more effectively guard against the risk to the national
security of the United States posed by certain types of foreign
investment.
The Senators and their staff have worked well over a year
with concerned national security officials, the Treasury
Department, and various affected industry representatives.
This comprehensive bill could be the first update to the
body of the CFIUS law in more than a decade. It would expand
the reach of current law in a number of respects, while
codifying some current administrative practices, and result in
significant changes to jurisdiction, process, and enforcement.
A study produced for the Pentagon's DIUx unit, which
enlists startups to find solutions for the military's most
advanced technology-related requirements, is credited as being
the catalyst for much of the impetus behind this CFIUS reform.
The DIUx study highlights the problems arising from the
fact that the U.S. Government does not currently monitor or
restrict venture investing nor stop potential transfers of what
is known variously as early stage, foundational, or critical
technology knowhow, particularly with regard to certain types
of Chinese investment in the United States.
Today's hearing also draws witnesses from one perspective
of the private sector that is concerned not only with inbound
investment but also outbound transactions and from the venture
capitalists that support American innovation.
We are also joined by two long-time CFIUS analysts with
particular expertise in regard to China's economy, its trade
practices, and national security objectives.
The Committee will benefit from learning more about the
types and numbers of transactions that may be circumventing
CFIUS and if any are believed to have already transferred
critical technology.
Many of us are interested in learning more about the ways
China acquires U.S. technology and which improvements to the
current system are warranted, particularly with regard to those
investments that fall short of a foreign person's actual
ownership or control.
We are also interested in the issue of emergent critical
technology and the witnesses' input on how it would be defined
and applied by CFIUS.
Additionally, we hope to hear more on the impact on U.S.-
based multinational corporations as a result of CFIUS
unilaterally restricting U.S. outward investment and associated
technology and whether U.S. companies would lose the ability to
compete to allied companies or others in third-country markets.
It is also important to study the question of necessary
resources for any proposed reform to CFIUS. While CFIUS
certified about 260 applications last year, the Committee looks
forward to testimony on the changes contemplated by S. 2098 and
their impact on the number of reviews, staff needs and
resources going forward, and the impact that, in turn, would
have on U.S. national security if the resources fell short.
CFIUS is but one leg of a triad that secures national
security-related technology and the defense industrial base.
The other two are the U.S. export control regime and Federal
investment itself in research and development that keeps the
industrial base resilient and innovative.
The Committee must be mindful that in pursuing its mandate
to assure the national security interests of the United States
under CFIUS that it not create a situation where it chills a
wide range of commercial activities that have traditionally
been controlled through export control laws.
The United States is both the world's largest foreign
direct investor and beneficiary of foreign direct investment,
and it ranks among the most favorable destinations for FDI
which plays an important role in not only the U.S. economy but
specifically in the innovation of its industrial base and,
therefore, its national security.
It is clear that the current CFIUS system is itself under
stress. Moving forward, the Committee must prepare itself to
thoughtfully consider all of the recommendations made by S.
2098 and other CFIUS legislation, with the full awareness of
the national security and economic stakes at heart.
It is a new world. The laws, regulations, and policies
currently exercised by CFIUS may no longer protect U.S.
technology from illicit transfers as they did in the past.
We must work together as a Congress first to assure the
national security of the United States by granting the
Administration all the authority it needs to confront this
growing threat, but then not exceed that grant to the detriment
of maintaining a free, fair, and open U.S. investment policy.
Senator Brown.
STATEMENT OF SENATOR SHERROD BROWN
Senator Brown. Well, thank you, Chairman Crapo, and thank
you to the witnesses for joining us. I comment Senators Cornyn
and Feinstein for their work on this issue.
A dozen years ago, I was serving in the House of
Representatives when we learned the Bush administration had
signed off on the sale of the operations at more than 20 U.S.
ports, including major ones from New York and New Jersey to New
Orleans, to Dubai Ports World.
Congress responded the next year by adopting FINSA, the
Foreign Investment and National Security Act, to give our
Government a greater ability to respond to foreign investment
that could pose a threat to national security and to protect
critical infrastructure.
In the intervening years, the interagency group that
implements the law, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States has quietly worked to try to ensure that foreign
purchases of assets in the United States does not undermine our
national security--obviously not an easy task, as our witnesses
will describe, our adversaries are constantly working to narrow
the gaps between our capabilities and theirs, through
legitimate and illegitimate means.
Over the past decade, we have seen China become more
aggressive. The evidence stretches from the OPM servers to the
South China Sea. We know that CFIUS has a limited mandate, and
we know the distinction between economic security and national
security is not an easy one to make.
Foreign direct investment can be a real positive for our
country. It was a French company, for example, that built the
first rolling mill in Youngstown, Ohio, in decades.
But today we will hear testimony that some foreign
investors are not interested in capturing market share in auto
or oil country tubular goods or any other industry. Instead,
they seek to capture the intellectual property of leading edge
technology companies in our country for their home country's
military uses.
We attempt today to prevent this type of technology
transfer through a system of multilateral and unilateral export
controls. This system, a product of the cold war, identifies
dual-use products, technology, and software that may not be
exported.
The question is, is this approach sufficient, or do we need
to intervene at an earlier stage of product or technology
development to prevent the building blocks of the next
generation of advances from being expropriated by foreign
investors?
I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks the failure of
the Bush administration to block the sale of our port
operations to a company from the UAE, but this is not a
partisan issue. The Clinton administration agreed to China's
accession to the WTO. A number of us opposed that. They agreed
to that accession. The Obama administration refused to take
action in the face of China's manipulation of its currency.
Some of our witnesses today will speak to the benefits of
trade liberalization, but it is hard to maintain a bilateral
trading partnership when one party is abiding by the rules and
the other is not.
When China joined the WTO in 18 years, 17 years ago, it
agreed to remove market barriers for foreign companies and to
comply with international trade standards that are intended to
create a worldwide level playing field. Unfortunately, as we
know and we feel all too often, China has not lived up to many
of these commitments. That country continues to use nontariff
barriers to block foreign producers from entering its market.
Chinese state-owned enterprises, such as those in the steel
sector, receive extensive subsidies that allow them to compete
with no consideration of market forces. It can be energy. It
can be land. It can be capital. It can be other kinds of
inputs. As a result, they flood the global market with steel
products and make it much harder for U.S. companies and workers
to compete.
I do not think CFIUS can or should bear the burden of
trying to bring about a fair trading relationship with China.
That is not its job. That is not its intent. It has its hands
full trying to police the national security threats we face
from that country and others.
But neither should we sit idle. The vast majority of
foreign investment in the United States falls, of course,
outside the scope of CFIUS. But we do not have a way to review
that investment to make sure it is in our economic interests.
I have introduced legislation with Senator Grassley--both
of us are members of the Finance Committee--called the Foreign
Investment Review Act that would require the Secretary of
Commerce to review certain foreign investments, particularly
those made by state-owned-enterprises, to make sure they are in
the long-term, strategic interests, economic and otherwise, of
the United States.
I agree we should update CFIUS to respond to the challenges
we face. It is equally important now, Mr. Chairman, that we
recognize that the same practices that undermine our national
security, can pose a threat to our economic security as a
Nation as well.
Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Senator Brown.
We will now move to our witnesses and their testimony. We
have with us four excellent witnesses today, and in the order
of your testimony, they will be the Honorable Christopher
Padilla, Vice President for Government and Regulatory Affairs
at IBM Corporation, and former Under Secretary for
International Trade at the U.S. Department of Commerce. Second
will be Mr. Scott Kupor, Managing Partner at Andreessen
Horowitz and Chairman of the Board of National Venture Capital
Association. Next would be Dr. Gary Clyde Hufbauer, the Reginal
Jones Senior Fellow at the Peterson Institute for International
Economics; and finally, Dr. James Mulvenon.
Did I get that pronounced right? Close?
Mr. Mulvenon. Mulvenon.
Chairman Crapo. Mulvenon? All right. Thank you for that.
Dr. James Mulvenon, the General Manager at the Special
Programs Division of SOS International.
Gentlemen, we appreciate you being with us today and your
bringing your expertise to assist us with this issue. We will
proceed in the order that I introduced you. I remind you that
we ask you to keep your oral remarks to 5 minutes, so we have
time for questions and answers. And I again remind our Senators
to do the same when their turn for questions comes.
Thank you. And Mr. Padilla.
STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER PADILLA, VICE PRESIDENT FOR GOVERNMENT
AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS, IBM CORPORATION; AND FORMER UNDER
SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Mr. Padilla. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
During the Administration of President George W. Bush, I
served as Assistant Secretary of Commerce responsible for
export controls in addition to my role as Under Secretary, and
in that and other Administration roles, I was a senior sub-
Cabinet official on CFIUS.
Interestingly, the last major expansion of export controls
focused on China, which looked at Chinese military end users,
bears my signature. It was signed in June of 2007 when I served
as Assistant Secretary for Export Administration.
In my role at IBM, I have been involved in two transactions
that were reviewed and approved by CFIUS, and I am responsible
for the company's compliance with export controls. And my
comments will draw on these experiences.
I would like to focus my remarks on the FIRRMA bill
discussed by Senator Cornyn this morning, and let me start by
saying that FIRRMA contains, I think, some important reforms
that IBM supports--to expand the ability of CFIUS, to examine
certain inbound investments, plugging gaps that do exist in its
jurisdiction. These include expanding the ability of the
committee to look at a wider range of inbound investment,
taking measures to prevent the evasion of CFIUS, and ensuring
senior-level review of cases. We also support increasing
resources for the committee.
But the problem with FIRRMA, Mr. Chairman--and it is a big
one--is that the bill does something else. It would drastically
expand the committee's mandate beyond examining inbound
investment. For the first time ever, CFIUS would also review
outbound international transactions, including thousands of
nonsensitive sales, IP technology transfer deals, even with
friendly nations, and this is a serious flaw in the bill. It
would duplicate and undermine the existing U.S. export control
system, would result in a flood of cases that would overwhelm
CFIUS, and could constitute the largest unilateral trade
controls imposed by the United States in many decades.
Controlling sensitive technology works best when it is done
internationally in cooperation with allies. A technology
control system that only unilaterally stops U.S. firms from
doing business abroad will not advance security interests if it
simply hands out markets to foreign competitors, many of whom
are equally adept in advanced technology, yet this is precisely
what FIRRMA would do.
As drafted, the bill would impose a very onerous and
entirely unilateral set of restrictions on overseas
transactions involving the contribution, vaguely defined, of
technology, IP, and associated support through any--I emphasize
``any''--type of arrangement.
This could capture under CFIUS things like the sale of a
computer server to a bank in Singapore, the licensing of a
database to a pharmaceutical company in Switzerland. Even
routine licensing of trademarks could require CFIUS review.
Saying, as the bill does, that ordinary customer relationships
are excluded does not narrow the bill because that term is also
left to regulators to define. With such a broad reach, the
CFIUS caseload would skyrocket from about 250 cases a year now,
which is already a record, to many thousands or even tens of
thousands.
Now, I know as Senator Cornyn said, one of the issues
driving FIRRMA is a concern that the export control system has
not kept up to date, but the answer to that is not to abandon
export controls and dump everything on to CFIUS, layering
another bureaucracy on top of foreign commerce. I think the
better answer is that there is existing regulatory authority to
impose new export controls quickly over time in partnership
with our allies. This can be done under current rules already
on the books.
So the authority is there, but the control lists do need a
refresh. A GAO report found in February 2015 that the Defense
Department was no longer updating or even using the Militarily
Critical Technologies List, which was established in statute by
Congress to keep export controls up to date.
FIRRMA would not correct this problem and could make it
worse. Under FIRRMA, the Government would define a vague new
list of technologies, even though it is not using the one it is
already supposed to keep, and then wait until something pops up
in a transaction review. We might then try to stop it in a
haphazard and scattershot way on a deal-by-deal basis, but that
would be totally unilateral.
Casting a huge regulatory net over business and applying a
test of, essentially, ``We will know it when we see it'' would
be very damaging to both competitiveness and security. I think
the answer, Mr. Chairman, is not to turn CFIUS into a super
export control agency. Instead, Congress and this Committee
should use its oversight authority to demand updates, to export
controls, ideally in cooperation with our allies to reflect
current technology. If you do that combined with a slimmed-down
FIRRMA bill that does plug some gaps in the ability of CFIUS to
look at inbound investment, I think that would be the best
approach for our economy and for our national security.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Mr. Padilla.
Mr. Kupor.
STATEMENT OF SCOTT KUPOR, MANAGING PARTNER, ANDREESSEN
HOROWITZ, AND CHAIR, NATIONAL VENTURE CAPITAL ASSOCIATION
Mr. Kupor. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, Members of
the Committee, thank you again for the time today and the
opportunity to testify regarding the Foreign Investment Risk
Review Modernization Act. My name is Scott Kupor and I am the
Managing Partner of Andreessen Horowitz. We are a venture
capital firm that has partnered with many innovative technology
companies. I am here today in my capacity, though, as the
Chairman of the National Venture Capital Association.
The venture capital industry shares the goals of this
Committee and FIRRMA's authors to protect U.S. innovation and
ensure that technology is not used to harm our competitiveness
or security. At the same time, we believe that Congress and the
Administration should be mindful of the bill's potential impact
on startups in the venture industry.
My testimony today will focus on the ways in which we think
FIRRMA can be improved while still accomplishing its
foundational goal.
First, I thought I would give you a quick background on
what venture capitalists do and what it means to the overall
economy and innovation. Venture capitalists like myself, we
often are called general partners, or GPs, raise investment
funds for a broad range of limited partners, or LPs. These are
endowments, foundations, and pension plans, many of which are
in your States.
We use this capital to invest in outstanding entrepreneurs
with breakthrough ideas. The basic structure of a venture fund
effectively protects the sensitive information of startups from
disclosure of investors into the fund. We generally limit
disclosure of limited partners to a very small amount, and most
of that disclosure is related to valuation and accounting-
related information to ensure that limited partners understand
that is the current economic position is of the fund.
Limited partners do not have access to sensitive
information, the concern of FIRRMA, and of course, they have no
say in the investment decisions of the venture fund.
We hope, of course, that all the companies we invest in
will succeed, but entrepreneurship is an inherently risky
endeavor. It is worth the risk, though, because it is
absolutely essential to our economy, with one study finding
that young startups, mostly venture-backed, were responsible
for almost all the 25 million net jobs created in the United
States since 1977.
Increased interests in startups by other countries, though,
has caused the share of global venture capital invested in the
United States to fall from 90 percent to 54 percent in only a
matter of 20 years. China is now the second largest destination
in the world for venture capital, and in 2016, 6 of the 10
largest venture deals in the world occurred in China.
Entrepreneurship is now a global competition, and I
strongly encourage policymakers to prioritize policies that
will solidify our leadership position, be they regulatory, tax,
or immigration related.
Against this backdrop, I would like to share our views on
FIRRMA. I do believe FIRRMA is well-meaning legislation
intended to deal with a very real challenge; however, as
drafted, the legislation produces many questions for the
venture industry that we believe should be clarified before the
bill moves forward.
My written testimony goes into greater detail, but this
morning, I thought I would highlight two key areas that we
would offer for improvement.
First, we would recommend that FIRRMA be amended to clearly
specify that U.S. venture funds with foreign limited partners
are not implicated by the covered transaction definition, nor
does a venture fund take on foreign personhood for purposes of
FIRRMA merely because it has foreign limited partners.
As drafted, FIRRMA is ambiguous in its application to a
venture capital fund with foreign limited partners. We are
concerned that this ambiguity, especially when combined with a
broad grant of rulemaking authority, will cause unnecessary
confusion, cost, and burden for the venture capital industry,
as venture firms will be left without a clear understanding of
whether they must file with CFIUS and under what circumstances.
As I mentioned earlier, as a practical matter, information
disclosure to limit partners is minimal and related largely to
valuation and accounting-related information, and also, as you
may know, most venture capitalists sit on the boards of
directors of the companies in which they invest, and as a
result, they owe duties of confidentiality directly to the
shareholders of those companies.
Thus, to the extent a venture capitalist were aware of
proprietary technology in use or being developed by the
company, she would not be in a position to share that with
limited partners. Hence, the risk of disclosure of proprietary
intellectual property to a foreign LP, understandably of
concern to Congress, is not a paramount risk in a typical
venture capital fund structure.
Second, we would ask that FIRRMA be modified so it does not
stifle foreign direct strategic investors that have become an
important part of the U.S. startup financing and are
increasingly investing alongside U.S. venture capital firms.
Specifically, FIRRMA should specify that CFIUS filing is
not needed if the foreign strategic investor takes a de minimis
stake in a startup, as in that case the foreign strategic
investor is a
de facto passive investor, but might fear it does not meet the
tightly drafted passive investment test.
In addition, we would ask that the passive investment test
be broadened to reflect true passivity. These changes, we
believe will maintain FIRRMA's intended effects, while avoiding
serious issues for startups in the venture capital industry.
The bottom line is that U.S. venture capital in
entrepreneurial companies are competing against a global set of
investors and companies who would love to have the next set of
breakthrough technologies developed in the countries of their
origin. If we make it harder for foreign investment to come
into U.S.-domiciled companies, that money will simply go to
other countries that are more welcoming, and we risk losing the
leading competitive position in innovation that the United
States has long held. It is far better for the United States to
continue to be the global financial center, where the benefits
of economic and job growth stemming from technological
innovation accrue to our citizens.
To conclude, our industry appreciates the interest the
Committee and FIRRMA's authors have paid this important issue
in national security. I hope my comments today have conveyed
the modern startup investing ecosystem is complex, and care
should be taken to ensure that it is not disrupted in a way
that harms the ability of startups to grow. I also hope that we
can all work together on policies that support the American
entrepreneurial system.
Thank you again for the opportunity.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Mr. Kupor.
Dr. Hufbauer.
STATEMENT OF GARY CLYDE HUFBAUER, Ph.D., REGINALD JONES FELLOW,
PETERSON INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS
Mr. Hufbauer. Thank you, Senator Crapo and Members of the
Committee, and apologies for my hoarse throat. Many of my
remarks overlap with what Chris Padilla said, so I will try to
abbreviate them. And I appreciate, Senator Crapo, the balance
you struck in your opening remarks between national security
and economic progress.
Inward and outward foreign direct investment almost always
benefit the U.S. economy, and the econometrics on this are just
overwhelmingly strong. Therefore, in my view, the burden should
be placed on those who would propose restrictions, and that is
the way CFIUS has operated in the past.
As Chris said, S. 2098 and its House counterpart would
significantly enlarge the CFIUS mandate to cover outward
investment and technology transactions. I mean, that is an
enormous expansion, and the bills would cast a skeptical eye,
perhaps properly, toward investment into a firm based in an
adversary nation. And that would seem to be China certainly,
but also Russia, Iran, and I am sure there are others.
The new mandate, as both the previous speakers have said,
could put U.S. multinationals at a disadvantage if they are
competing with, let us say, British or European or Japanese
multinationals who have the same technology because the United
States would be prevented from selling, and the others could go
ahead.
So with its enlarged mandate, CFIUS would need a much, much
larger staff. I really want to emphasize that. To give them the
mandate without the staff, everybody will be disappointed. As
Chris said, the number of cases will jump from 200 to at least
1,000 and probably more.
And the way the enlarged mandate is written in the bill--
maybe this is not how it would play out, but it seems to put
the burden on private firms to show that the transaction will
not reduce U.S. technological advantages in areas that are
currently or might soon become subjects of national security
concern.
So with those thoughts, I have just two recommendations.
First, I think the new mandate should focus on adversaries,
they should be named, and critical technology.
Now, we have just brilliant scientists in the National
Academy and National Engineering Association and elsewhere, and
they can identify these critical technologies. Let us name
them, and it is not a one-for-all name. It is a rolling name.
And second, the bill ought to more explicitly take into
account the availability of the technology in question from our
allies. That would be Japan and Korea and Europe and Canada,
and if we are going to block it to the adversaries, well, then
we ought to have a very heavy diplomatic demarche to the allies
that they should block it as well.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you, Dr. Hufbauer.
Dr. Mulvenon.
STATEMENT OF JAMES MULVENON, Ph.D., GENERAL MANAGER, SPECIAL
PROGRAMS DIVISION, SOS INTERNATIONAL
Mr. Mulvenon. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Brown, Members
of the Committee, thank you for inviting me this morning. My
name is James Mulvenon. I am the General Manager of SOS
International's Special Programs Division. I spent the last 20
years building teams of Chinese linguist analysts supporting
the intelligence community and Federal law enforcement and the
Department of Defense primarily trying to understand Chinese
technology trends.
Three years ago, with two of my U.S. Government colleagues,
I wrote a book called ``Chinese Industrial Espionage,'' which
documented in tedious detail the extent to which the Chinese
were stealing our technology which understandably made the
Chinese government quite upset.
I would like to make four key points today. The first, I
feel like my major role this morning is to present a more
comprehensive view of the problem, as I see it.
China has a comprehensive strategy, in many ways unlike the
U.S. Government, for national economic development and military
modernization, which has unfortunately for U.S. companies
created a very unfair asymmetric business environment in China
for them to operate.
I have sympathy for the plight of U.S. companies in China.
My father did business there for 25 years, but the nature of
the environment that the Chinese government has created through
regulation and other policies has in many ways forced U.S.
companies, which are in China and in the Chinese market for
legitimate reasons, to grow and prosper and make money, to make
suboptimal decisions, which may benefit that particular
quarters numbers but may not be in the long-term interest of
U.S. national security.
The second feature of the problem as I see it that U.S.
laws have not evolved to really accommodate the creativity and
innovation that the Chinese government and its entities are
using in order to exploit the gaps and weaknesses in our
system, moving as they found that they could not do straight
acquisition through the front door through CFIUS, as they kept
getting those rejected, but instead turned to more creative
joint venture and investment vehicles to be able to back-door
their way into intellectual property that they wanted to find.
And of this Chinese strategy, I think there are some key
features: heavy state industrial planning like the ``Made in
China 2025'' plan, military-civilian fusion, dispelling the
notion that there actually is such a thing as a private company
in China. The political and legal system in China really does
not allow any company in China to be able to refuse the
entreaties of the Chinese government if they wanted access to
the technology--very heavy state subsidies, as was mentioned
earlier. The integrated circuit fund of $250 billion was
designed specifically to evade WTO prohibitions against state
subsidies.
The promotion of national champion companies, we are all
familiar with Huawei and its various activities. A whole raft
of new laws and regulations that they have put out to codify
what had previously been informal measures on their part,
particularly the new cybersecurity law, which is putting
tremendous pressure on U.S. companies for data localization,
which is a threat to U.S. PII and other sensitive data.
Their creation of an entire domestic standards regime, they
use as a trade weapon against U.S. companies. I would highlight
5G wireless standard is the latest iteration of that. A buy
local strategy through their government procurement law, that
puts pressure on U.S. companies. State-backed joint ventures
and investment vehicles, which are quickly identified as state-
backed. I would highlight Canyon Bridge, which is sort of a
thinly disguised state council proxy of the Chinese government
that attempted to buy Lattice Semiconductor.
The mercantilism that we see in the One Belt, One Road
initiative, not to mention their planetary scale cyber
espionage program that took all of our OPM data back to
Beijing, large-scale technology espionage. Their nontraditional
collection program, the so-called ``1,000 Talents Programs,''
whereby they financially incentivize U.S. scientists and
researchers to come back to China to be able to share that
technology.
But in my view, export controls, which is often cited as
the reason why we do not need FIRRMA, are not enough. I have
many personal experiences with failing to convince Assistant
U.S. Attorneys to be able to prosecute clear export control
violation cases, but the anecdote that I would leave you with
that is most troubling to me is the U.S. engineer who in its
head possesses the kind of knowhow and information that would
otherwise be subject to
export control violations, sitting in a joint venture in China,
encouraged to help solve a particular technical problem. That
conduit of information transfer is not covered under the U.S.
export control regime, and it is why we need to more heavily
scrutinize these overseas joint ventures and investment
programs.
Thank you, sir.
Chairman Crapo. Well, thank you very much, Dr. Mulvenon,
and to all of our witnesses. Again, your testimony is
fascinating, and you bring a wealth of knowledge to us. And we
appreciate you doing that.
My first question is for Mr. Kupor and Mr. Mulvenon. The
national security concern with venture capital arises from an
assessment that China will soon surpass the United States as
the technological leader in fields such as artificial
intelligence and robotics in part derived from venture capital
deals and special purpose vehicles, the latter formed to
obscure the source of capital for a foreign acquisition.
My question is sort of a series of a couple of them. How do
you assess the risk of early or growth stage venture capital
contributing to the transfer of U.S. technology to the Chinese?
And along with that, how is a venture capital deal different
from a special purpose vehicle or a private equity deal?
Do you want to go first, Mr. Kupor?
Mr. Kupor. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, yes. First of all, with respect to China and artificial
intelligence, there is no question--I think the witness talked
about it--that China has very clear government policy around
artificial intelligence. It was mentioned, and it is true, that
they have offering things like cash stipends, for example, for
U.S.-trained engineers who are Chinese nationals to come back
to the country and obviously help them develop those
technologies. So I do not think there is any question that
there is a major technological race happening, particularly
with respect to things like artificial intelligence.
On the venture capital side, the reason why, as I said, I
do not think this is a major issue to worry about on the
venture capital side is--number one is, at the end of the day
from a U.S. venture capital perspective, the goal that we would
like to see is how do we actually get foreign investment here
into the United States so that the U.S. benefits from those
technologies.
And as I mentioned, kind of as the global share of U.S.
venture technology, venture capital has fallen, there are a lot
more dollars competing for those deals from other geographies.
So we think it is far better to actually encourage foreign
investment into those companies.
On the venture capital side, specific to your question,
what happens is venture capitalists are almost always minority
investors in companies, and this is, I think, a very important
distinction. You mentioned kind of private equity more broadly
in buyouts. In buyouts, those tend to be controlled
transactions, so those companies actually run the board. They
control from an ownership perspective of the companies.
Venture capitalists are almost always minority investors,
and so as a result, our ability to kind of dictate what the
company does and to kind of share information from an IP
perspective is much more limited than it might be in an M&A or
another control transaction.
So I think for that respect in particular, venture capital,
in fact, is quite a very different investment category than you
might be thinking about from some of the other investment
categories.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Dr. Mulvenon?
Mr. Mulvenon. Mr. Chairman, you mentioned earlier the DIUx
report, which I associate myself with as well, and we
collaborated with them in the creation of that report.
My organization also produced a study for the U.S. Economic
and Security Review Commission on China's research into
artificial intelligence and robotics and discovered--frankly
were surprised by the extent of Chinese investment in early
stage startups on both the West and East Coast of the United
States, in that area, and our concern about it was, of course,
derived from the Department of Defense's Third Offset Strategy,
which explicitly calls out artificial intelligence and robotics
and machine learning as the core technologies undergirding the
next wave of U.S. military modernization.
And to the extent to which the Chinese government has a
more robust investment strategy--and I think that has been
carefully documented as to how much larger it is than the U.S.
investment strategy--as well as the lack of scrutiny of these
investments--and I would just highlight particularly in the
DIUx category that there were certain investments, such as
companies like Neurala and other places where there had been
initial DoD funding, and because of the lack of nimbleness of
our system, the Chinese then came in and did the second and
third rounds of funding for those companies and then took over
the seating of that research.
And so I think this is an area of great concern only
because our own military leaders have identified these
technologies as really what are going to be the game changers
in the next round of military modernization globally, and given
the amount of friction we currently have with the Chinese
government in certain key security areas, if you have read
books like ``Ghost Fleet,'' which may be a hyperbolic view of
the future, but are often seen by futurists as the role that
things like artificial intelligence and machine learning will
play, I think we need to look at this issue very carefully.
Chairman Crapo. Well, thank you.
Mr. Padilla, the central point of your testimony is that
FIRRMA broadens of the scope of CFIUS to something akin to a
supra-export control agency with jurisdiction to capture
outbound transactions, joint ventures, and other transactions
outside the United States that are not investments and may even
be licensed transactions that have consequences for critical
technology companies and others.
What is the national security concern or gap in the export
control regime or other enforcement mechanism that would
necessitate this kind of expansion of CFIUS authority.
Mr. Padilla. I think the concern that is driving some of
what we are seeing in the debate about FIRRMA is that
technology control lists need to be updated.
I would say that a couple of the technologies that Dr.
Mulvenon mentioned--for example, artificial intelligence,
machine learning, which IBM is very heavily involved in, things
like quantum computing, Blockchain, these emerging technologies
do not appear on the Militarily Critical Technologies List
because DoD has not updated that list since 2011, nor have
there been proposals put forward by the United States in the
Wassenaar Arrangement, which is the international control
regime that has existed really since the end of the Second
World War through different names to try to control that
technology on a multilateral basis to countries of concern.
So I think those are legitimate concerns, but I do not
think the answer is to say, well, export controls are not
working the way they were designed by Congress, so let us dump
it all onto CFIUS. CFIUS is not equipped to do that kind of
work. They are not equipped to look at new emerging
technologies. They are not equipped to consult with allies.
They are not equipped to impose multilateral or even unilateral
controls.
So the export control system, which is under the
jurisdiction of this Committee, I think needs a refresh, and I
think the tools exist. They exist in regulation today, and they
ought to be used. But I think simply throwing up our hands and
saying, well, we would rather throw it all onto this other
bureaucracy is not the right approach.
Remember it is the Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States. It was intended and created to look at inbound
investment. If we do this, it would have to be renamed.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you. I appreciate it. I have got to
move on. My time has expired, and Senator Brown has----
Mr. Padilla. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo.----some really good questions, sir. But
thank you for that.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was intrigued, Mr. Mulvenon, by your comment that there
is no company in China that can resist entreaties to share--or
turn over--may be a better term, technologies to the
government, so thank you for that.
Dr. Hufbauer, good to see you again. Thank you for being
here. You suggested some of China's trade practices may spur
legitimate concerns, but that Congress should wait the outcome
of the USTR study of the matter initiated last August.
I have great respect for Ambassador Lighthizer, but I am
not sure we can or should wait for another study. I would like
to ask you and then each of the panelists. Is there any doubt
that China has and continues to violate its international trade
commitments and that engages in unlawful technology transfers?
Start with you, Dr. Hufbauer.
Mr. Hufbauer. No doubt whatsoever.
Senator Brown. Mr. Padilla?
Mr. Padilla. I would agree. I do not think there is much
doubt of violations, including by companies like ZTE most
recently.
Senator Brown. Mr. Kupor.
Mr. Kupor. I am definitely not an expert on the topic, but
certainly, from my understanding, that is true. Yes, sir.
Senator Brown. Mr. Mulvenon.
Mr. Mulvenon. I think it is not only true, but I think
every day, we uncover more and more of the scope and scale of
it and never cease to be amazed by the size of the transfer.
Senator Brown. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Padilla, I agree that we should be careful not to ask
too much from CFIUS, as your testimony pointed out, but when it
comes to national security, do we need to choose between export
controls, which you admit are outdated in CFIUS, and why not
adopt an appropriate that tries to fill the gaps between the
two?
Mr. Padilla. Well, CFIUS reviews do look at export
controls. When I was Assistant Secretary of Commerce, I sat on
the CFIUS committee, and one of the things we looked at when we
were looking at an acquirer, for example, is do they have a
history of violating export control laws. Could the acquirer be
trusted to follow our laws, or were there concerns there? So I
think there is close interlock between the systems, but they
were built very differently, and they have evolved very
differently over the course of 70 years in the case of the
export control system to do different things.
And I think the answer is to improve the export control
system, also to improve CFIUS because there are some gaps in
what it can look at, but not to layer them on both together, so
that the same transaction that might not need an export license
or that might have received one also then has to go through a
redundant CFIUS review. I do not think that is an appropriate
approach. I do not think it would enhance security, and it
certainly would hurt competitiveness.
Senator Brown. Thank you.
Mr. Mulvenon, there is broad agreement, I think, that the
identification of technology that should not be transferred to
our adversaries lags well behind where it should be. Will it
not be a problem that wherever you locate the responsibility,
DoD or CFIUS or Commerce? So why is CFIUS in your mind the best
place to place that responsibility?
Mr. Mulvenon. First of all, I agree with Mr. Padilla about
the laggard updating of the MCTL, which is really the most
powerful resource we have for tracking these kinds of
technology developments, and many, many times in my own
professional experience, I ran into situations in which we
could not convince key decisionmakers about an export control
violation because of the delay in adding new technologies to
that list.
I would highlight, however, that in terms of the gaps
between the systems, I could give you a good example of where
the two systems are not interacting well terribly.
The Commerce Department denied entity export list has not
been updated, for instance, to reflect certain recent CFIUS
actions. There is a Chinese company called San'an
Optoelectronics, which is a chip firm that has twice been
blocked by CFIUS from attempting to acquire military sensitive
technology, which is not on the denied entities list, and
American firms continue selling sensitive technology to them
and discussing investment in those companies. And so that is a
good example where the two systems need to interact better
because I certainly see them as complementary.
I do not see FIRRMA as a threat to become a supra-export
control agency. I see us needing to fill the gaps on both
sides, of both the export control system as the first line of
defense, and then CFIUS as a second line of defense,
particularly related to investment and joint ventures.
Senator Brown. So talk just for a moment in the last minute
or so about developing these lists. It seems that as we move
from 200 CFIUS filings a year to perhaps many, many more than
that, how do you organize these lists across so many agencies?
Clearly, there will be case-by-case determinations, but
they obviously need more structure than that. How do we do that
better?
Mr. Mulvenon. Well, I mean, the suggestion earlier about
the National Academy of Sciences and other entities that are
actually more directly interfacing with the cutting-edge
technology, that is always the dilemma when I deal with
elements of the U.S. Government is that they are not always on
the cutting edge of understanding which technologies are
emerging at any particular time. And so I think there are those
kinds of outside partnerships whereby you can maintain, then be
current about the technologies we should care about rather than
putting an undue burden on U.S. Government agencies that really
do not have the kind of day-to-day expertise to be able to
track that.
Senator Brown. [Presiding.] Senator Toomey.
Senator Toomey. Thanks very much. Gentlemen, I appreciate
the testimony today. I am very sympathetic with the goals of
this legislation, but I do have some concern about unintended
consequences.
My concern arises from a starting point that foreign direct
investment is a huge and hugely important engine for growth in
the United States.
The tax reform we just completed, I think is going to
encourage significant increases in foreign direct investment
because we are going to lower the burden, the tax burn on the
returns on those investments. I think this is a huge driver of
growth, and yet there are legitimate concerns about whether
there is some security that--security issues.
So I just want to figure out how we strike the right
balance here. One of the concerns--and maybe Mr. Hufbauer could
address this--is so much of the kind of technology that we
would be worried about transferring is inherently mobile. It
can be developed and refined and improved almost anywhere in
the world. If we do not strike the right balance here, what is
the risk? And maybe under this legislation, would you be
concerned about really constructive innovators being driven
overseas because they are concerned that if they are domiciled
in the United States, potential future investment is too
limited? Is that a concern?
Mr. Hufbauer. Thank you, Senator. Yes, that is very much a
concern, and the way I would put it is this--U.S.--well, during
my lifetime, which dates to before the Second World War, the
U.S. Government has been a leading proponent of technology,
DARPA and ARPA and so forth, and of course, companies. It is
that investment at home that has given us this leadership, and
our big weakness is not the espionage by the Chinese or their
forced technology transfer. Our big weakness is that we may not
be keeping up the pace of investment in innovation that we had.
At one time, we were clearly the leader. You cannot really
say that so strongly today, and the leadership has a couple of
components. One of the components is making the United States a
very attractive place for foreign scientists and engineers and
so forth to not only get their degrees here but to stay here.
Senator Toomey. So in its current form, are you concerned
that this legislation could tend to have that effect of driving
some innovation overseas?
Mr. Hufbauer. Well, I think it is flexible enough that it
would not necessarily have that, but I do not want to see the
U.S. Government put all its emphasis on trying to build a wall
on the outward flow of technology.
Senator Toomey. Well, that is another concern. That is
another----
Mr. Hufbauer. That will never work. I mean, we have to do
more at home, and that is by far, the bigger part of the story.
Senator Toomey. I have only got 2 minutes left. Let me put
another issue out on the table and invite anyone to comment on
either my first question or this next one.
The next one is--let us be honest. Incumbent businesses are
never enthusiastic about a dynamic innovative competitor
emerging, and I worry that large powerful incumbent businesses
might attempt to use CFIUS as a way to protect their status and
diminish the opportunity of potential competitors to raise the
capital that would allow them to compete.
Do you believe that there are sufficient safeguards in this
legislation to minimize the risk of that unintended adverse
consequence?
Mr. Padilla. Senator, I will maybe take the first stab.
When I served in Government, I saw cases like what you just
described, where it was clear that an incumbent competitor was
trying to prevent a foreign investor who would then infuse
capital into a relatively weaker domestic competitor and
strengthen themselves in the process, and we tried very hard in
the Bush administration at least not to allow that dynamic to
take hold because it is improper.
On your first question, I would just comment. IBM has 12
research laboratories around the world. Most of our cutting
edge research on things like AI and quantum computing are done
in New York or Texas or California, but we also have labs in
places like Zurich, Switzerland, and Sao Paulo, Brazil.
And I can tell you that if FIRRMA goes in the way that it
is written now, there would be large incentives to move core
research outside the United States, so that it would not be
captured by some of this added bureaucracy, and that is not a
good thing. It is not what IBM wants to do.
Mr. Kupor. Senator, if I could just add to your first
comment as well, your first question, there is no question that
kind of engineering talent will follow capital, and we have got
case studies of that already today in the form of Government
incentives that are driving capital. So whether that is R&D tax
credits, for example, that Canada and France and others are
offering to engineers--it was mentioned that China obviously is
trying to attract a lot of its expat community back through
financial incentives.
So I think it is a microcosm of a broader problem that
could be here, which is if you stifled capital flows, you could
have talent flow out as well.
Senator Toomey. Thank you very much.
Ms. Downey. Senator Schatz.
Senator Schatz. Thank you, Ranking Member Brown.
Mr. Padilla, I have a question, just a practical question
about the capacity at CFIUS. How many employees does it have?
How many analysts? What is the funding level? Because as we
consider expanding its scope, it is going to matter whether or
not they can accomplish anything additional.
Mr. Padilla. I do not know the exact current number,
Senator. It has been a little time, about a decade, since I was
involved, but when I was there, there were less than 20 full-
time staff at the Treasury who were focused on this, and then
you had in each agency--I was at the Commerce Department. We
had three people under me at the Bureau of Industry and
Security who worked on this.
So I would guess the entire universe among all the
agencies, maybe about less than 100.
Senator Schatz. OK. So if you are talking about fewer than
100 people, one of the questions is--it is an appropriations
question. It is a resource question. It is a throughput and
capacity question. Setting aside whatever statute CFIUS hangs
its hat on, we could give them more things to do, and if it is
the same number of people, they are not going to be able to
accomplish it.
I have a question about early stage investment and
potential dual use, and it seems to me this is an appropriate
thing for CFIUS to look at, but it is a little dicey in the
sense that you have a startup company, and they are not sure at
the outset--I mean, technology has evolved, and their
application has evolved. So a company may not know that it is
going to be dual use until the research finds a defense
application.
So at what point does CFIUS--I mean, how do you strike that
balance between sort of not snuffing out anything that could
potentially be dual use in the future, which would pretty much
snuff out 90 percent of tech startups, but recognizing that
once something has a serious defense implication and
application, that then it is under CFIUS jurisdiction. But how
do you sort of--I am looking at the two of you here--strike
that right balance between CFIUS and the VC and startup
community?
And I will start with Mr. Padilla and then go to Mr. Kupor.
Mr. Padilla. It is a very hard balance to strike, Senator.
I do think--and I support the idea--that CFIUS does need the
authority to at least look at nonpassive, noncontrolling
investments. In other words, it is not just passive, but it may
not constitute control.
You could look at things where someone gets a board seat on
a company. It is not a controlling interest, but because they
are on the board, they have access to information that they
might not otherwise get. And I think it is appropriate that
CFIUS be able to at least inquire about that.
In terms of what technologies, here again, I think it is
incumbent on the Government to define what it is worried about.
That is why Congress created the Militarily Critical
Technologies List, and it cannot just be we are worried about
AI. It has to be more specific than that, and that is hard to
do. I used to do it. It is not easy to say this parameter or
this algorithm.
But if the Government is concerned about security, it is
incumbent on the regulator to define what it is regulating. I
do not think the right approach is to say bring us everything
in a very broad universe, and we will sort it out one by one
and tell you later what we are worried about. That is not a
good regulatory approach.
Senator Schatz. Mr. Kupor.
Mr. Kupor. Yeah, I agree with that, Senator.
I think also you are right, which is as startup companies
develop, of course, the products go through many iterations. So
I think it would be very hard for CFIUS to have any ability to
review kind of the criticality of that technology until there
is a true commercial application developed that actually has
dual use, and that is going to often come probably 3, 5 years
into a company's history. So at that point in time, many of its
investment dollars will have actually already been received by
the company. So you may be talking about retrospectively trying
to undo financing agreements and other stuff that has happened.
I think it is a really hard problem to handle. I wish I had a
more definitive answer for you, but I think for that reason, it
is very difficult to kind of think about cutting off that early
supply of capital before you actually understand what the
commercial use of that technology is.
Senator Schatz. So I have maybe a tougher question for the
whole panel, and it has to do with CFIUS was constructed to be
limited in scope because of how serious the matter is because
to have the Government intervene against a transaction is no
joke, to expand that, and yet it still has to have
confidentiality because a lot of the discussion is a national
security discussion. There is a logic to that on the other
hand. Then you have a black box with, say, 100 human beings,
and maybe even few are making determinations on which companies
get investments and which do not, and maybe only in the SCIF
can Congress exercise its oversight. And that seems scary from
the standpoint of the potential for crony capitalism, of the
potential for corruption. And I am wondering whether you can
just speak to that very briefly as my time expires.
Mr. Padilla, and then quickly all the way down the line.
Mr. Padilla. CFIUS is one of the least transparent
Government processes that deals with foreign commerce. The
export control system for whatever faults it may have is
relatively transparent. The business community knows how to do
it, knows how to work with it. CFIUS by contrast is very
opaque.
Mr. Kupor. Yeah, I would agree. I think if this institution
decides to go forward with legislation, I think--deferring too
much of the rulemaking authority of CFIUS is a real problem,
just given kind of the confidential nature of it. So I think
having very clear bright-line rules about what is covered and
what is not, it would be incumbent upon this organization to do
so.
Mr. Hufbauer. That is a very legitimate concern, and my
suggestion is that the Congress ought to on a secret basis take
a
report from the CFIUS maybe every year, every 6 months, and
review the cases which were blocked or the cases which were
maybe not formally blocked but turned back and get your own
judgment, because it is obvious that CNI and the CIA and the
Pentagon and so forth who have all the secret information,
which we do not want to disclose widely to the public, but
Congress should take a look.
Mr. Mulvenon. Senator, I think one of the tradeoffs that is
important, particularly when I talk to companies about their
frustration with the process is that there could be--and there
is some language in the bill right now that suggests this.
There could be a greater opportunity for the companies earlier
in the process to provide their own technical assessments of
the technology issues at play as well as a commitment to
resolve the CFIUS evaluation at the first level much sooner as
a tradeoff to incentivize companies for the fact that they are
expanding the scope of what is being reviewed. And I know that
was tremendously frustrating to Western Digital and others that
were involved in the process, how long it took.
Senator Schatz. Thank you.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Menendez.
Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So let me first take a point of personal privilege and say,
Mr. Kupor, you have a great guy working for you in Justin
Field. He was my finance guy. He is in the audience, and my mom
said if you can say something nice, say it; if not, keep quiet.
I can say something nice. He is a great guy.
Mr. Kupor. Thank you, Mr. Senator. I agree with you.
Senator Menendez. And I also see that another alumni of my
staff, who was my communications director, Matt Miller, is back
there, sitting back there. I do not know who you are
representing here today, but, Matt, it is good to see you.
I thank all of you for your testimony. Dr. Mulvenon, a
draft report prepared for DoD last year raised concerns about
certain activities by Chinese firms in the United States that
appear to be motivated by transferring innovative technologies
to China with the ultimate goal of giving China a competitive
advantage and specifically to report highlights to Chinese
venture capital investment in early stage startup firms in the
United States in the artificial intelligence robotics financial
technology sectors.
It raises concerns that these investment activities are
both part of a larger Chinese strategy to displace U.S.
businesses and certain industries and are specifically
structured to fly under the radar of the CFIUS review process.
In your testimony, you discuss how China has structured
certain technology investments in the United States to
essentially get around the CFIUS reviews. What are the vehicles
or investment structures that they are using to do this? And in
your opinion, what steps should the Committee consider to
ensure that those types of efforts are actively monitored,
tracked, reviewed, and then appropriately done so by CFIUS?
Mr. Mulvenon. Thank you, Senator.
Well, in fact, if you look at artificial intelligence, you
can go all the way down my structure of China's comprehensive
strategy and pick off the pieces of each one.
China has a national industrial planning strategy for
artificial intelligence development, including the
corresponding military artificial intelligence development.
They have a massive subsidy
system set up, just structured in a way that evades the current
WTO restrictions on state subsidies. They have identified
national champion companies within China that they want to be
leaders on artificial intelligence. They have designed laws and
regulations that insist on data localization, such that those
artificial intelligence efforts, that that critical
intellectual property data has to be stored in China if that
work is going to be done there.
They have a domestics standards regime that they are using
as a trade weapon in order to leverage using market access in
China to leverage technology transfer for multinationals, and
then they have state-backed investment vehicles focused on
artificial intelligence investments.
Senator Menendez. So how do we respond to that?
Mr. Mulvenon. Well, first of all, recognizing that it is a
comprehensive strategy rather than the individual actions of
self-interested financial actors, which was our first cut at
the problem, and recognizing, as Dr. Hufbauer would say, there
is unfortunately on our side a realization that we are not
investing enough. So let me always say that we need to do more
investment on our side in artificial intelligence rather than
simply block Chinese efforts to invest in artificial
intelligence in the United States, and we are woefully
inadequate on that front.
But also just clearly recognizing in many cases the thinly
disguised state and military origins of many of these
investment vehicles from the Chinese side and scrutinizing
those and not permitting those to harvest the best of the
emerging technologies in the United States.
Senator Menendez. Thank you.
Let me ask you this. The legislation being discussed today
includes a provision that would make mandatory CFIUS filings
for transactions that involve certain investments by state-
owned enterprises. This has been an issue of mine going back to
the Dubai Ports World deal in which CFIUS approved a
transaction that would have handled over control the port
operations in New Jersey, New York, Baltimore, and Miami to a
state-owned company in the United Arab Emirates.
In September, the Committee heard testimony from the former
Treasury Assistant Secretary, Clay Lowery, who oversaw CFIUS.
He told the Committee that it was a worthwhile exercise to
explore the idea of mandatory filings for state-owned companies
as opposed to the current regime of high scrutiny for those
transactions.
What are your views of a mandatory filing requirement for
transactions involving investments in the United States by
state-owned or controlled enterprises?
Mr. Mulvenon. Well, with the caveat, as I said earlier,
that under the current Chinese political and legal system,
principally given Chairman Xi Jinping's assertion that there
needs to be greater Communist Party penetration even into
private enterprises in China, there is an element of it that is
a false distinction, given the Chinese government's ability to
reach into private companies and get access to technologies,
but I do believe that state-owned enterprises should be
mandatorily reviewed, if only because when we have peeled back
various investment efforts in the last couple of years and
found them to be actually state-backed and state-owned
enterprise-backed investments, that those were--that was the
primary basis of the security concern.
And given the nature of the Chinese system of state
capitalism, I think those state-owned enterprises deserve
particular scrutiny.
Senator Menendez. Any other views on that? And then I will
close on that.
Mr. Hufbauer. I agree, totally.
Mr. Padilla. I would agree also, Senator. I worked with
Clay Lowery when he was at Treasury and I was at Commerce, and
the FINSA bill, the last bill Congress passed on this, did
increase the scrutiny, and perhaps another increase of scrutiny
would be appropriate.
Senator Menendez. Thank you.
Senator Brown. Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses for being here today.
The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States,
CFIUS, that we have been talking about reviews acquisitions by
foreign companies to ensure that they do not threaten our
national security, and at our last hearing, we discussed how
technology transfers from our companies to foreign competitors
can undermine our security and how CFIUS does not cover certain
transactions where our adversaries are intentionally investing
in American startups in order to get access to critical
testimonies.
But I want to ask a different question around this. When
CFIUS does review a transaction, it can approve it with a
mitigation agreement that requires companies to complete
certain steps in order to reduce the national security risk.
Now, CFIUS is supposed to ensure that parties implement the
mitigation agreement, but a draft Pentagon report issued in
February of 2017--I think Senator Menendez just referred to
it--advised that CFIUS should try to minimize reliance on these
agreements because they are difficult to enforce, and there are
not enough resources decided to monitoring them.
So, Dr. Hufbauer, are more investigations into the national
security risks of transactions become necessary, how can CFIUS
ensure that a mitigation agreement is maintained over time if
overseeing that agreement may be too costly or addressing
security risks if the transaction may be too complicated?
Mr. Hufbauer. Thank you, Senator.
It is a problem because as Chris Padilla said, there is
only about 100 people on the staff of CFIUS, and it is hard
with that size staff to do all the follow-up that is necessary.
So if this bill becomes law, there has to be a substantial
expansion, but in addition, I would suggest that where there is
a mitigation agreement, which obviously the company wants, the
acquiring company and probably the acquired company, they
should put money into some kind of escrow in the Treasury to
ensure the enforcement over a period of years, 5 years, 10
years, to take care of the financial burden that this will
entail.
Senator Warren. Interesting idea. Thank you.
I should note that the defense authorization bill that
passed Congress last year requires a multiagency report that
includes an
assessment of whether current CFIUS process provides adequate
monitoring and compliance, and I think we need to work through
this and need more good ideas on how to do this.
The discussion of CFIUS focuses on protecting our national
security while preserving foreign investment, but I want to
touch on a policy that I think protects both priorities, and
that is investment in basic research.
Jim Lewis, a former official with the Departments of State
and Commerce, testified in this Committee last year that CFIUS
reform should be paired with policies that drive innovation
right here at home, and that means investing in research that
helps our economy and our military.
He said that our underinvestment in scientific research,
quote, creates a self-imposed disadvantage in military and
economic competition with China, and that maintaining our
economic and military superiority requires investment, both by
encouraging private sector investment and by Government
spending in those areas like basic research where private
sector spending is likely to be insufficient.
So let me start with you, Dr. Hufbauer, again. Would more
Government investment in scientific research support the core
objectives of CFIUS by protecting strategic industries from
foreign competition and maintaining our technological
advantage?
Mr. Hufbauer. Yes. When you were out of the room, Senator,
I gave a big plug for more investment, both by the Government
and by private firms.
Senator Warren. I want to give you as many chances as
possible.
Mr. Hufbauer. Well, in any event, yes, this is the big
picture. What we do to stir innovation in this country is
substantially more important than what we do to block outward
technology going to China or Russia or these countries, and we
should do more. We are not very good right now.
Senator Warren. That is very well stated.
Anyone else like to weigh in on that?
Mr. Kupor. I would just like to underscore that doubly.
Yeah, I think that is exactly right. There is no question that
what we are up against, our foreign governments, who have very
kind of centralized groups that they put together from a
funding perspective, to attract talent, to build technologies--
and there is a lot more we can do in the United States, no
question.
Senator Warren. Anyone else want to add or just say yes,
yes, so I can get a good record here?
Mr. Padilla. I would strongly echo the comments of my
colleagues, Senator Warren.
Senator Warren. Good.
Mr. Mulvenon. I strongly agree with you, Senator,
particularly given the, frankly, staggering scale of the
investment that the Chinese government is putting into advanced
technologies right now.
Senator Warren. Well, I really appreciate it, and thank you
all on this.
I think it is important to stand up to unfair commercial
practices that harm our economy and threaten our national
security, but I also think we need to make the necessary
investments here at home in our own research. That is what
keeps us strong, and that is what gives us a true advantage.
So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. [Presiding.] Thank you.
Senator Scott. Thank you, Chairman, and I want to say thank
you to Senator Cornyn for being here this morning and his
testimony and his continued efforts on this very important
issue.
South Carolina is the home of a number of incredible
companies. We are one of the largest beneficiaries of foreign
direct investment. There are 1,200 foreign-owned entities that
have created or are currently employing 130,000 South
Carolinians. Two-thousand fifteen alone saw $2.4 billion of
foreign investment in South Carolina. 2011, a few years
earlier, was the height, the peak at $3.7 billion of FDI.
Whether it is Bridgestone in Aiken, Honda in Florence,
Mercedes in North Charleston, foreign companies are flocking to
South Carolina, and this is not an ad for South Carolina, but
who can blame them? We have world-class universities, a world-
class skilled workforce, and an incredibly high quality of
life. From the beaches of the low country to the mountains in
upstate, South Carolina has something to offer for everybody.
Our state would not be where it is, however, without
foreign investment. That said, it is clear to me that some are
taking advantage of our system of trade to the detriment of our
Nation's security.
Last year, I joined with Senator Cornyn in introducing the
Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act. The bill
expands the committee's jurisdiction to include real estate
purchases around military basis in light of the documented
attempts by the Chinese to spy on our armed forces.
We also updated the committee's definition of critical
technologies, just as a development of AI and advanced genetic
engineering is taking on.
So, Mr. Mulvenon, why is it so important for CFIUS to
review these kinds of transactions and specifically those
transactions around military bases that seem to be--land
transactions around military bases that seems to be a sore spot
as it relates to the Chinese trying to take advantage of
opportunities to spy on our armed forces?
Mr. Mulvenon. Well, Senator, it is an excellent question.
If you look at this raft of new laws that the Chinese have put
out, one of the most striking parts of it is their view of
extraterritoriality with respect to Chinese companies.
And the extent to which the Chinese military and their
security services can directly intervene in the operations of
these companies to benefit Chinese national security, as an
example, if a Chinese telecommunications company is operating a
network operations center in the United States, according to
their new national security law, state security personnel can
enter that facility in Plano, Texas, for instance, and do
lawful intercept of communications in that facility because
they are treating that Chinese company as a domestic Chinese
company rather than one operating on foreign soil.
That is why the decision to reject the purchase of that
wind farm in the Pacific Northwest is particularly relevant
because those facilities in that wind farm would have been able
to collect emissions from a Navy electronic warfare facility
that was just there on shore. And those emanations would have
been able to reach those wind farm turbines.
And so I think that that is the particular concern, that
the ability of the Chinese government to impose upon these
companies involved in the Chinese side of the transaction and
to use those corporate facilities as intelligence collection
platforms.
Senator Scott. Thank you.
Would you say that we have done our best to strike a proper
balance between our economic concerns and our national security
concerns within the bill? Do you think we have hit that sweet
spot?
Mr. Mulvenon. I do think there is a good balance in the
bill. I favor the bill because I believe it responds to very
creative Chinese attempts to exploit gaps and weaknesses in our
current system.
I do not believe that the bill is a death knell for
innovation or investment in the United States, but I believe
that given the scale of Chinese technology espionage of the
last 15 to 20 years, most of which has gone unchecked, that
frankly we need to swing the pendulum a bit more in the other
direction.
Senator Scott. Thank you.
With my remaining time, Mr. Padilla, I am appreciative of
IBM's growing presence in South Carolina as well. I read your
letter expressing concerns regarding our efforts to reform
CFIUS. Your claim that FIRRMA would subject hundreds of
transactions unrelated to national security to a committee
review, I want to hear you out and get your perspective as we
share the goal of protecting our country. What specific changes
do you envision for us to improve FIRRMA and to meet the
mutually important goals?
Mr. Padilla. Thank you, Senator, and South Carolina is a
great place to do business.
Senator Scott. Yes, sir.
Mr. Padilla. So thank you for your support.
My concern with the bill boils down basically to one
section, and it is Section--it is in the definitions, Section
B, Roman Numeral V, and it is the provision that would do what
I have described as problematic. It would expand CFIUS from
looking at inbound investment to looking at outbound
transactions. And it has the language that I referred to in my
testimony about the contribution of any technology or IP
through any form whatsoever.
I think if you change that provision and a couple of other
definitions, much of what the rest of the bill does, IBM would
support, including, by the way, expanding the jurisdiction of
CFIUS to look at real estate transactions. That is one of the
gaps that I identified that does need to be filled and needs to
be filled by legislation.
Senator Scott. Yes, sir. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Van Hollen.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to the witnesses.
Before I ask the witnesses a question, I just wanted to
address a question to you and the Ranking Member regarding
another issue of national security, which is the North Korea
situation. Under your bipartisan leadership, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member, this Committee unanimously passed legislation,
I think important legislation, to strengthen and better enforce
sanctions against North Korea.
We passed that unanimously out of Committee on November
7th. Since that time, on November 29th, North Korea tested
another ICBM missile, and just 2 days ago, despite the
environment with respect to the Olympics and some of the talks
that are taking place, Secretary Tillerson said that ``the
threat is growing'' because even as those talks take place, the
North Koreans continue with their program.
So my question, Mr. Chairman, could you give us an update
on the status of this legislation which passed unanimously out
of this Committee? I just want some assurances that we are
going to get a vote on this as soon as possible in the full
Senate.
Chairman Crapo. Yes, Senator Van Hollen. I will be glad to
give you my update and then also turn to Senator Brown for his
response as well.
I remain solidly committed to moving this legislation not
only on the Senate floor as quickly as we possibly can but also
encouraging prompt house action, so that we can get the bill to
the President's desk. We do need to stand firmly and strongly
with regard to the developments in North Korea, and I believe
the legislation that you have helped to draft and bring forward
is a very critical and important part of that.
As you know, we have been running into some difficulty
getting the necessary consents from the other Senators to move
on the floor at this point in time. I am continuing to work
with all of the Senators to get those roadblocks removed.
As is often the case, the roadblocks do not necessarily
relate to this legislation, but the politic of the body result
in us having to resolve some other issues as well, which we are
working on as recently as yesterday. We have had meetings on
trying to move it.
Although I cannot tell you yet that we have got everything
ironed out in terms of the process to move forward, I can
reassure you that I am committed firmly to doing it.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you, and I appreciate that, Mr.
Chairman.
Senator Brown. Thank you, Senator Hollen. I concur with the
Chair and strongly support this bill and this vehicle and
moving on the floor as quickly as we can, understanding the
roadblocks that have been thrown in front of us.
I spoke briefly at the White House last week with Secretary
Tillerson. This is important for a whole lot of reasons, as you
know, and we will work together to remove those roadblocks and
work with you. And thanks for the work. You have really kept
this going and kept this in front of us and in front of the
public, so thank you.
Senator Van Hollen. Well, thank both of you, and Senator
Toomey was here earlier. He said he would join me in full
support of the effort, and thank you both of your effort.
Chairman Crapo. Thank you.
Senator Van Hollen. I just think we need to move it as
quickly as possible because I do not know of any real
substantive on the merits objection, so thank you.
Chairman Crapo. You are right. Thank you.
Senator Van Hollen. And I do not have a lot of time left,
but I do want to ask Mr. Padilla. You mentioned in your
testimony when I was here earlier your concerns about
essentially using CFIUS for U.S. exports as opposed to
investments here in the United States, but you said with
respect to investments here in the United States, you thought
we could strengthen the current regime.
What are some specific ideas? I am trying to look for some
common ground here. We can figure out what we disagree on and
what we agree on.
Mr. Padilla. Sure.
Senator Van Hollen. What is it that specifically we can
change with respect to CFIUS?
Mr. Padilla. Well, one is the one that Senator Scott
mentioned, the ability of CFIUS to look at real estate
transactions that are in close proximity to Government or
military installations.
The second would be what I would call nonpassive but
noncontrolling investments. Right now, CFIUS looks at--if you
control an acquisition, it is not worried about passive
investment, but what about that gray area in between, where,
say, you get a board seat on a company, and you get access to
certain controlled information, but you may not ``control'' the
company. That, I think is an area for expansion.
The other would be more process-related, and that is, I
think there should be a senior Senate-confirmed official in
every CFIUS agency who signs off on the transactions. I did
that when I was at Commerce. I know some agencies do it. Others
do not. And you need that senior-level review. Dubai Ports
World showed that when you do not have that, you can have
problems.
Senator Van Hollen. Got it. Appreciate that.
The one area that we would not be able to address, the
issue that Dr. Mulvenon raised earlier with respect to the kind
of joint venture in China, where it amounted to a directed
Chinese effort to gather more important information in some of
these very innovative areas.
So we are going to have to bridge your proposals where
there was agreement on the U.S.-based investments with some
kind of----
Mr. Padilla. I think you can do that, Senator, through
enhanced export controls, and there is already authority to do
that. It is not being used to its full potential.
Senator Van Hollen. Dr. Mulvenon, would enhanced export
controls be enough? Because I heard your earlier testimony. I
think that was important that we have not--since 2011, I think
you said--updated that.
Mr. Mulvenon. My concern--I can give you a scenario, a very
simple one that is my main concern. A lot of export control
cases and the technology control and mitigation plans that I
have seen developed dealing with that, where you de-architect,
where you do-feature a technology to take out the 30 percent of
that technology that is covered under the export control
regime, the technology is then transferred.
But then in the context of the joint venture, the engineers
potentially who have that additional--that remaining 30 percent
of the knowhow in their heads and then they are working on
common problems within the joint venture and everyone is
committed to making the joint venture a success, my concern is
the export control system does not cover the bleed of that
potential last 30 percent to re-architect it back into the
technology after the export control system successfully had to
de-architect it. And that is the dilemma about joint ventures
and investment vehicles particularly located in China.
Senator Van Hollen. Let me just correct a factual point.
The export control system actually does control that transfer
of knowledge. There are deemed export laws on the books that
say if you have something in your head and you are subject to
U.S. jurisdiction, you cannot tell anybody about it without a
license.
Now, there may be issues about whether it is being followed
or not, but that is an enforcement problem, not a legal
jurisdiction problem.
Mr. Mulvenon. My only point, Senator, is that, of course,
it falls under deemed exports, and we have a whole variety of
deemed export problems, not the least of which is PRC nationals
at U.S. universities operating equipment in laboratories that
would have required a deemed export license if they were using
them at a facility in China, but they are allowed to use them
at a university in the United States in a hard science program.
So there is a whole range of problems we have on the deemed
export side, but the problem is the enforcement regime, a
commercial enterprise in China of that last 30 percent, that
there is no good mechanism for the enforcement other than the
good will of the people involved in the enterprise.
Senator Van Hollen. Thank you. Thank you both.
Chairman Crapo. Senator Jones.
Senator Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
being late. Thanks to all the witnesses for being here. I have
got just a basic--not in the weeds, but just kind of simple
questions.
I know, Mr. Kupor, you expressed some concern about a bill
that might chill foreign investment, and it is my understanding
that to date, there have been four transactions blocked by
presidents as a result of the CFIUS review. Do you have any
information of other potential deals or investments that might
have been either withdrawn or otherwise scuttled because of the
possibility of CFIUS review?
Mr. Kupor. No, not specific to the venture capital world.
What my specific concern was, if we sweep up foreign
investment in two areas--one is as limited partners in U.S.
venture funds, then that would obviously chill the ability for
non-U.S. investors to be able to participate and help us grow
those technologies.
And then the second specific question was if you have
foreign direct investment into a venture capital company, a
little bit to the point that was made to Mr. Padilla about kind
of nonpassive investments, making sure that we are very clear
about what the rules of the road there are, so that we
understand at the outset, if we are going to take money from a
foreign investor, what are the things that we need to ensure so
that information disclosure is appropriate and consistent with
U.S. law.
Senator Jones. OK. And does this bill address concerns
about foreign investment, or can we make it better?
Mr. Kupor. The broader objectives of the bill, we are very
comfortable with. Again, it is these specific areas where our
concern is there is enough vagueness in the way it is written
that it could chill this investment, and so our request would
be for this institution to make sure that we define those more
appropriately as part of the legislation process.
Senator Jones. OK. Very good.
What about green field deals, the ones that U.S.
businesses--you know, that did not exist prior to the
investment by foreign person or entity that seemed to be beyond
the reach of CFIUS? Is that covered by any other rule,
regulation, or something that is out there, or should we
covered green field, the new deals that come in that are beyond
CFIUS control right now?
Mr. Kupor. Just so I am clear, Senator, do you mean new
deals as in kind of startup companies?
Senator Jones. Yeah. That did not exist prior to the
foreign investment coming in, that is part of a new deal.
Mr. Kupor. I think it is very reasonable that to the extent
a U.S. company, a new startup is going to take money from a
foreign investor, I think it is very reasonable for us to have
a defined process to understand does CFIUS apply, and if so,
are there things that the U.S. company can do to make sure that
they are compliant with it, whether that be board seats,
whether that be information disclosure, those types of things.
Right now, at least our concerns, it is not well defined
there, and so what a passive investor actually is, is a largely
undefined term of the bill.
Senator Jones. All right.
Mr. Chairman, that is all I think I have. I am going to
resist the urge to go toe-to-toe with Senator Scott about
Alabama versus South Carolina, especially in light of the most
recent football games.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Crapo. Well, thank you very much, Senator Jones.
Those are the kind of fun little battles that you can have on
the sidelines, anyway.
That concludes our questioning, and again, I want to thank
our witnesses. You all have a wealth of knowledge. It is very
obvious, and we have some very tricky and complicated issues to
resolve here and roads to travel on this. But we must get it
right, and we must do it well.
And so I am sure that we will be in continued contact with
you. As a matter of fact, it is a practice for Senators who did
not get all the time they wanted or who did not have an
opportunity to send some questions to you after the hearing. I
would let those Senators know that those questions will be due
by Thursday, January 25th, and then ask each of you, if you get
additional questions following the hearing, if you would
respond to them as quickly as you can.
Again, we appreciate your being here with us today and your
attention to not only this legislation and the issues we are
grappling with right now, but the overall set of issues of
protecting our U.S. national security on these critical
technologies.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:18 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Prepared statements, responses to written questions, and
additional material supplied for the record follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MIKE CRAPO
January 18, 2018
Today the Committee will begin to evaluate the essential national
security elements underlying a comprehensive proposal to reform the
review process used by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the
United States, or `CFIUS.'
Thank you to Senators Feinstein and Cornyn for their testimony on
their bipartisan Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of
2017.
This bill was first introduced by Senators Cornyn and Feinstein on
November 8th to `modernize and strengthen CFIUS to more effectively
guard against the risk to the national security of the United States
posed by certain types of foreign investment.'
The Senators and their staff have worked over a year with concerned
national security officials, the Treasury Department and various
affected industry representatives.
This comprehensive bill could be the first update to the body of
CFIUS law in more than a decade. It would expand the reach of current
law in a number of respects, while codifying some current
administrative practices, and result in significant changes to
jurisdiction, process and enforcement.
A study produced for the Pentagon's DIUx unit, which enlists
startups to find solutions for the military's most advanced technology-
related requirements, is credited as being the catalyst for much of the
impetus behind this CFIUS reform.
The DIUx study highlights the problems arising from the fact that
the U.S. Government does not currently monitor or restrict venture
investing, nor stop potential transfers of what's known variously as
early stage, foundational or critical technology know-how, particularly
with regard to certain types of Chinese investment in the United
States.
Today's hearing also draws witnesses from one perspective of the
private sector that is concerned not only with inbound investment, but
also outbound transactions and from the venture capitalists that
support American innovation.
We are also joined by two long-time CFIUS analysts, with particular
expertise in regard to China's economy, trade practices and national
security objectives.
The Committee will benefit from learning more about the types and
numbers of transactions that may be circumventing CFIUS and if any are
believed to have already transferred critical technology.
Many of us are interested in learning more about the ways China
acquires U.S. technology and which improvements to the current system
are warranted, particularly with regard to those investments that fall
short of a foreign person's actual ownership or control.
We are also interested in the issue of emergent `critical
technology,' and the witnesses' input on how it would be defined and
applied by CFIUS.
Additionally, we hope to hear more on the impact on U.S.-based
multinational corporations as a result of CFIUS unilaterally
restricting U.S. outward investment and associated technology, and
whether U.S. companies would lose the ability to compete to allied
companies or others in third-country markets.
It is also important to study the question of necessary resources
for any proposed reform to CFIUS. While CFIUS certified about 260
applications last year, the Committee looks forward to testimony on the
changes contemplated by S. 2098 and their impact on the number of
reviews, staff needs and resources going forward, and the impact that,
in turn, would have on U.S. national security if the resources fell
short.
CFIUS is but one leg of a triad that secures national security
related technology and the defense industrial base. The other two are
the U.S. export control regime and Federal investment itself in
research and development that keeps the industrial base resilient and
innovative.
The Committee must be mindful that in pursuing its mandate to
assure the national security interests of the United States under
CFIUS, that it not create a situation where it chills a wide range of
commercial activities that have traditionally been controlled through
export control laws.
The United States is both the world's largest foreign direct
investor and beneficiary of foreign direct investment (FDI), and it
ranks among the most favorable destinations for FDI which plays an
important role in not only the U.S. economy, but specifically in the
innovation of its industrial base, and therefore, its national
security.
It is clear that the current CFIUS system is itself under stress.
Moving forward, the Committee must prepare itself to thoughtfully
consider all of the recommendations made by S. 2098 and other CFIUS
legislation, with the full awareness of the national security and
economic stakes at the heart of it.
It is a new world. The laws, regulations and policies currently
exercised by CFIUS may no longer protect U.S. technology from illicit
transfers as they did in the past.
We must work together, as a Congress, first to assure the national
security of the United States by granting the Administration all the
authority it needs to confront this growing threat, but then not exceed
that grant to the detriment of maintaining a free, fair and open U.S.
investment policy.''
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOHN CORNYN
January 18, 2018
Introduction
Thank you, Chairman Crapo and Ranking Member Brown, for convening
this hearing to consider the proposal that Sen. Feinstein and I have
put forward, the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA). I have been honored to collaborate on this legislation with
my esteemed colleague, Senator Feinstein, who I serve alongside on both
the Judiciary and Intelligence Committees.
We spent many months working on FIRRMA, and we wrestled with some
tough issues in the process. Based in part on the information we are
exposed to on the Intelligence Committee, we believe these issues are
urgent and complicated ones. The bill we have put together takes a
targeted approach to addressing the problem, while also aiming to not
unnecessarily chill foreign direct investment. Before we get into
addressing the merits of the bill, however, I'd like to take a moment
to highlight the list of people who have endorsed this legislation.
That includes current U.S. national security leaders such as Secretary
of Defense James Mattis; Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin;
Attorney General Jeff Sessions; and Admiral Harry Harris, Commander of
U.S. Pacific Command.
It includes former U.S. national security leaders such as former
Secretaries of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and Bill Perry; former Secretary
of Homeland Secretary Michael Chertoff; former Director of National
Intelligence and Commander of U.S. Pacific Command, Admiral Dennis
Blair; General Mike Hagee, former U.S. Marine Corps Commandant; General
Edward Rice, former Vice Commander of Pacific Air Forces and Commander
of U.S. Forces in Japan; and General J.D. Thurman, former Commander of
U.S. Forces Korea and U.S. Army Forces Command.
The list includes private industry players such as
telecommunications giant, Ericsson, Inc.; Oracle Corporation; Trinity
Industries; Amsted Rail Company, Inc.; the Greenbrier Companies, the 20
member companies of the American Iron and Steel Institute; and the 260-
member Railway Supply Institute. It includes China experts such as Dr.
Larry M. Wortzel, a member of the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission.
Mr. Chairman, with your indulgence, I encourage the Committee
Members to review the comments of these supporters, and I ask consent
to submit their letters and quotes for the record. I would also ask
consent to submit for the record several summary and background
documents on FIRRMA.
Context: China
The context for this legislation is important and relatively
straight forward, and it's China. I have always been an ardent
supporter of free trade, and I strongly support foreign direct
investment in our country, consistent with the protection of our
national security. However, the not-always-peaceful rise of China has
significantly altered the threat landscape in recent years.
General Joe Dunford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has
said that by 2025, China will pose the greatest threat to U.S. national
security of any nation. And, last summer, CIA Director Mike Pompeo
echoed that view, saying that, over the long-term, China represents a
graver security risk than even Russia or Iran.
It's not just that China poses a threat, though, it's that the kind
of threat is unlike anything the United States has ever before faced--a
powerful economy with coercive, state-driven industrial policies that
distort and undermine the free market, married up with an aggressive
military modernization and the intent to dominate its own region and
potentially beyond.
To close the technology gap with the United States and leap-frog
ahead of us, China uses both legal and illegal means. One of these
tools is investment, which China has weaponized in order to vacuum up
U.S. industrial capabilities from American companies that focus on
dual-use technologies. China seeks to turn our own technology and know-
how against us in an effort to erase our national security advantage.
In the modern era, the U.S. Military has always had a decisive
technological advantage over our adversaries. This advantage is eroding
before our very eyes, in part because some U.S. companies have
willingly helped China build industrial
capabilities with clear national security applications. It is time to
tackle the underlying problems head-on, while there is still time.
If the trend continues for the foreseeable future, what might this
mean for our national security? We would potentially have an adversary
that can dominate the cyber realm, defeat our space weapons, and
control the skies as well or better than the U.S. Military. Just
imagine if China's military was stronger, faster, and more lethal--such
that China could unilaterally dictate which ships can transit through
critical sea lanes in the Indo-Pacific region. Or, imagine if China
could invade its democratic island neighbor Taiwan with impunity. The
implications for the United States would be profound, both security-
wise and economically. That is what the future likely holds, unless we
act.
I encourage each Member of this Committee to get a classified
intelligence briefing on these issues. I and my staff would be happy to
set those up for you, if helpful.
Rationale and Key Objectives of FIRRMA
As it currently stands, the jurisdiction of the Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) is quite limited; it
was designed for the last century, not the present one. China has found
gaps in both the existing CFIUS process and the export control system
and is exploiting them to the detriment of our national security,
aiding its own military modernization and simultaneously weakening our
U.S. defense industrial base. FIRRMA takes a measured and targeted
approach to close these gaps, with changes that are laser-focused on
national security concerns. Its provisions also reflect the need to
preserve as much certainty and predictability for investors as
possible.
The rationale behind FIRRMA is simple: CFIUS should be able to
review transactions that have, in effect, the same national security
consequences as a traditional acquisition of a U.S. company or a piece
of it. Foreign investors should not be able to circumvent CFIUS and get
via the ``back door'' something they cannot get through the ``front
door.''
To take advantage of these gaps and circumvent CFIUS review, China
pressures U.S. companies into business arrangements such as joint
ventures, coercing them into sharing their technology and know-how,
enabling Chinese companies to acquire high-tech U.S. industrial
capabilities and then replicate them on Chinese soil.
China has also been able to exploit minority-position investments
in early stage technology companies in places like Silicon Valley,
California, or the ``Silicon Hills'' in Central Texas to gain access to
intellectual property (IP), trade secrets, and key personnel. The
Chinese have figured out which dual-use emerging technologies are still
in the cradle, so to speak, and not yet subject to export controls.
FIRRMA would expand the jurisdiction of CFIUS to cover some of
these technology joint ventures and related arrangements and minority-
position investments, as well as certain real estate transactions near
military bases.
China's Civil-Military Integration Policies
The problems are compounded by some of China's carefully
constructed policies on civil-military integration, under which China's
military suppliers and their activities are woven right into China's
commercial environment, unlike in our free market economy. To help
modernize its military, China purposely blurs the lines between
military and ostensibly commercial activities, combining its defense
and civilian industrial bases. As such, U.S. technology and know-how
transferred to ``private'' Chinese companies are likely to contribute
directly and materially to China's military modernization.
Here, our export control system does not address the problem
because the diversion of U.S. dual-use technologies is no longer just a
risk, but a foregone conclusion. It is safe to assume that China will
divert the fruits of any U.S. company's cooperation with China to a
military end-use. It would be foolhardy to think these capabilities are
not making their way into the hands of the Chinese military.
Further, U.S. companies doing business in China are entirely
subject to the whims and dictates of the Chinese Communist Party. And,
there is no real difference between a Chinese state-owned enterprise
and a ``private'' Chinese firm, in terms of the national security risks
that exist when a U.S. company partners with one. Rule of law in China
is often illusory, and the Chinese Communist Party can easily exercise
control over both types of companies, as American Enterprise Institute
economist, Derek Scissors, has pointed out.
There are also major concerns regarding U.S. data, especially the
personally identifiable information (PII) of U.S. citizens, and export
controls do not cover this. The Chinese Communist Party considers data
to be a national strategic resource, so China is basically
nationalizing all data. Therefore, when U.S. companies are forced to
on-shore data into China, it can have major U.S. national security
implications.
So, China is clearly not normal business environment for U.S.
companies, and CFIUS modernization is the only way to effectively
address the national security risks.
Debunking Arguments by Opponents of FIRRMA
I want to take a moment to debunk a few flawed arguments that some
opponents of FIRRMA are making.
First, they say this bill represents regulatory overreach, which
really misses the point. I am typically one of the loudest Senate
voices of opposition to unnecessary regulation, as my track record
demonstrates. But, this is very different--CFIUS is not akin to
something like the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; instead, it is
part of our national security apparatus. And, the Federal Government
has no higher duty than to maintain our national security.
Second, opponents claim that the export control system can already
address these national security risks, and that this update to the
CFIUS statute is unnecessary. Without question, export controls are
vital in preventing transfers of technology that would be damaging to
national security, and I am committed to maintaining a strong export
control system. That is why under FIRRMA the export control system
would remain the first line of defense when it comes to technology
transfers.
Export controls work reasonably well in many cases, but they have
inherent limitations and are not enough by themselves. We need a second
line of defense. The CFIUS process and the export control system are
designed to be interactive and complementary, not mutually exclusive.
To effectively address the full range of mounting national security
risks regarding China's activities, these systems must be robust,
interoperable, and seamless.
Our bill certainly does not duplicate the export control system.
With transactions that represent pure technology transfers--basically,
just the IP--FIRRMA leaves those to the export control system. It would
only cover certain outbound U.S. transactions where they also include
the transfer of know-how, which is the so-called ``secret sauce.''
These are the types of transactions that could help China acquire an
industrial capability that is embodied in the U.S. business and
accelerate China's learning curve in areas of technology that are key
to national security.
What's more, FIRRMA includes safeguards to ensure that, with its
expanded authorities, CFIUS would review transactions only when
necessary. CFIUS would define circumstances in which transactions could
be excluded because other provisions of law, such as export controls,
are adequate to address any national security risks. This same
provision also leaves ample room for future export control reform by
giving CFIUS the flexibility to exempt transactions in the future that
are adequately addressed through the export control regime.
CFIUS would also be authorized to create a ``safe list'' of certain
allied countries, for which these new types of transactions would be
exempt from review. This provision would drastically reduce the pool of
transactions that would need CFIUS review, allowing CFIUS to focus its
efforts on higher-risk deals.
Third, opponents argue that FIRRMA will flood and distract CFIUS
with transactions that were previously routine. This argument questions
whether addressing real national security threats is worth the
financial cost; I assure you it is. For the price of a single B-21
bomber, we can fund an updated CFIUS process and protect our key
capabilities for several years. That is a down payment on long-term
national security. I am fully committed to securing the necessary
funding for implementation to ensure the process continues to run
smoothly, because this has to be a national security priority right up
there with training and equipping our troops and intelligence
professionals.
FIRRMA would also help provide additional resources, allowing CFIUS
to charge modest filing fees and also submit a unified annual budget
request covering all member agencies. And, the bill's own provisions
guard against an unfunded mandate, with the expansion only taking
effect after CFIUS determines on its own that the necessary personnel
and other resources are in place. FIRRMA also exempts outbound
transactions that are done through ``ordinary customer relationships,''
ensuring harmless day-to-day activities do not have to be reviewed.
Closing
In closing, I also ask you to withhold judgment on FIRRMA until you
have heard testimony from the Treasury Department and other key member
agencies of CFIUS, who are on the front lines of this issue.
While it is certainly appropriate to consider what the potential
impacts of this bill could be on foreign investment, that should not be
done in a vacuum. We must also ask what the impacts on our national
security will be if we do not take action on this.
As you hear from opponents of FIRRMA, I urge you to assess their
credibility on this issue by asking some basic questions about their
activities in China:
What types of arrangements do you currently have in China
with Chinese companies, what do you have planned for the near
future, and is CFIUS able to review any of it?
What dual-use technology and know-how has your company
transferred to China over the last decade, and what impact has
that had on our country's relative national security advantage?
Increasingly, U.S. companies operating in China are being unfairly
pressured into turning over valuable technology and know-how to Chinese
companies, often as a condition of getting market access. Regardless,
when U.S. companies engage in activities on Chinese soil that could
negatively impact our national security, the Federal Government has a
legitimate interest in being notified and afforded a chance to assess
the national security risks. If CFIUS is not modernized to allow for
this, we will continue to be in the dark here, and our national
security will suffer.
I urge you to advance this bill for the sake of our long-term
national security, which is being damaged before our very eyes. The
time to modernize CFIUS is now, and we must not allow ourselves to be
the frog in the boiling pot of water, so to speak.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN
January 18, 2018
Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, thank you for inviting
Senator Cornyn and me to your hearing to discuss the need for CFIUS
reform. While I regretfully am unable to attend in person, I appreciate
the opportunity to offer these written remarks.
I would like to open my remarks by commending this Committee for
taking up this issue and its interest in identifying ways we can
strengthen the United States' foreign investment process. We have heard
for some time in the Intelligence Committee about the need for reform
and the concerns regarding investment strategies other nations are
employing to undermine our security.
When I was Mayor of San Francisco, we had a sister city
relationship with Shanghai. Through this relationship I grew close with
Jiang Zemin, then the Mayor of Shanghai. Eventually, Jiang Zemin became
the President of China.
In this position, President Zemin prioritized efforts to privatize
China's economy and, ever since then, there has been significant
economic growth and development, including in foreign investment. In
fact, in 2016, Chinese entities invested a record $46 billion in the
U.S. economy, triple what they invested the prior year and 10 times
what they invested 5 years ago.
While this growth has done much to improve and grow China's
economy, it poses unique threats to United States national security.
For example, Chinese companies, often backed by the Chinese
government, have increasingly used investment in U.S. businesses to
acquire sensitive new
technologies and related know-how. Many of these technologies, such as
artificial intelligence and robotics, have military applications, and
gaining access to such cutting-edge technologies has been a key part of
the Chinese government's strategy to
modernize its military.
Other investments threaten our national security because they allow
China to acquire land or buildings in strategically sensitive
locations--like near U.S. military bases or other Federal facilities.
It's the job of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States--or CFIUS--to police foreign investment for national security
concerns.
However, the current law governing CFIUS, including the scope of
its authority, has not been updated for over a decade. In that time,
China and other countries have begun structuring their investments in
U.S. businesses so that they can evade CFIUS jurisdiction.
For example, many of these transactions take the form of joint
ventures or minority-position investments, which CFIUS currently does
not have the authority to reach. As a result, many transactions that
pose potential national security concerns are going completely
unreviewed.
In short, CFIUS just doesn't have the tools it needs to effectively
screen foreign investments for these emerging national security
threats.
The Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act, which I am
cosponsoring with Senator Cornyn, addresses these concerns.
First, it provides CFIUS with a new arsenal of tools to prevent
foreign companies from evading its jurisdiction. Under current law,
CFIUS may review only foreign investments structured as mergers,
acquisitions, or takeovers. But our bill expands this authority,
allowing CFIUS to reach joint ventures, minority-position investments,
certain leasehold arrangements, and other investments where a foreign
company effectively gains control of a U.S. business, regardless of how
the transaction is structured.
Second, it streamlines the CFIUS filing process in an effort to
encourage parties to notify CFIUS of potentially problematic
transactions in the first place.
Third, our bill mandates that CFIUS place a greater focus on the
threat posed by the transfer of cutting-edge technologies to foreign
countries such as China. By redefining the term ``critical
technologies'' to include these emerging technologies, the bill allows
CFIUS to take into account the full range of national security concerns
potentially posed by transactions that result in technology transfers
to foreign companies.
Finally, our bill gives CFIUS additional flexibility to address
national security concerns it identifies, granting CFIUS new authority
to suspend transactions during its review and attach mitigation
conditions to abandoned transactions when necessary. It also enhances
CFIUS's ability to monitor and enforce mitigation measures and to take
action when parties fail to comply with such measures.
In closing, I want to be clear, not all foreign investment causes
national security concerns. Rather, the vast majority of such
investment greatly benefits this country. Foreign investment has long
been an important source of capital that supports U.S. innovation,
economic growth, employment, and global competitiveness.
However, we must do all we can to ensure we can differentiate
between the two.
That is why, for the past 10 months, Senator Cornyn and I have been
working to craft a bill that strikes the right balance by giving CFIUS
greater authority to address very real national security issues without
unduly chilling foreign investment in the United States. By expanding
CFIUS's authority in a targeted manner and granting CFIUS the
flexibility to further define that authority through regulations, this
bill does just that.
In fact, our bill has received support from several Federal
stakeholders and members of the Intelligence Community.
In short, I think this is a strong bill that fills crucial gaps in
the current CFIUS process. I hope you will join Senator Cornyn and me
in supporting the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act.
______
PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER PADILLA
Vice President for Government and Regulatory Affairs, IBM Corporation;
and former Under Secretary for International Trade, Department of
Commerce
January 18, 2018
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brown and Members of the Committee, thank you
for inviting me to testify on this very important topic.
My name is Christopher Padilla, and I am Vice President for
Government and Regulatory Affairs at IBM. During the Administration of
President George W. Bush, I served as Under Secretary of Commerce for
International Trade, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export
Administration, and in other senior roles in the Department of State
and the Office of the United States Trade Representative.
In my Government roles, I was a senior sub-Cabinet representative
of the Commerce Department to the Committee on Foreign Investment in
the United States (CFIUS), and I participated closely in inter-agency
work to implement new Committee procedures after passage of the Foreign
Investment and National Security Act of 2007 (FINSA).
In my role at IBM, I have been involved in two large transactions
that were reviewed by CFIUS, and am responsible for the company's
worldwide compliance with export controls. My comments today draw upon
all these experiences.
IBM shares Congress' goal of strengthening America's national
security and appreciates the attempt to do so through the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2017 (FIRRMA). CFIUS plays
an important role in screening inbound foreign investments for
potential national security risks, and it is necessary to periodically
consider how this process can be improved.
In recent years, IBM has been through three reviews by CFIUS
resulting in the successful conclusion of each transaction. From this
experience, and from working on mitigation agreements when I served in
Government, I can assure you that CFIUS has--and makes good use of--its
authority to address potential security concerns about inbound foreign
investment.
Nevertheless, these experiences also revealed the need for
improvements to the CFIUS process, including an expansion of the
Committee's jurisdiction to review certain types of inbound foreign
investment transactions. FIRRMA contains some important reforms that
IBM supports, such as:
Expanding the ability of CFIUS to review a limited number
of nonpassive, but noncontrolling, investments;
CFIUS review of transactions when there are material
changes in shareholder rights that expand control or access to
information;
Expanding the ability of CFIUS to review certain real
estate transactions when they are in close proximity to
military or Government installations;
Taking steps to prevent the deliberate evasion of CFIUS
review through complicated financial structures;
Expanding consultation with allies to coordinate and share
information on the types of inbound investment to be
scrutinized;
Ensuring there is a single Senate-confirmed appointee in
each CFIUS agency with responsibility and accountability for
investment reviews; and
Providing badly needed resources to the Committee. The
CFIUS case load has increased significantly in recent years,
and staff resources are already stretched thin. Even if
Congress does not elect to give CFIUS an expanded mandate along
the lines noted above, it should provide additional resources
for CFIUS to do its job effectively.
But the problem with FIRRMA, Mr. Chairman, and a principal reason
the bill is controversial in the business community, is that it does
something else: it would drastically expand the Committee's mandate
beyond examining inbound investment. For the first time, CFIUS would
review outbound international commercial activity, including many
thousands of nonsensitive IP and technology licensing transactions,
even with friendly nations.
This is a serious flaw in the bill that would duplicate and
seriously undermine the existing U.S. export control regime, result in
a flood of cases that would quickly overwhelm the Committee, and could
constitute the most economically harmful imposition of unilateral trade
restrictions by the United States in many decades.
Effectively Protecting National Security
As a company with long experience in foreign markets, IBM knows
that controlling sensitive technology works best when accomplished
internationally, in cooperation with America's allies.
Since the late 1940s, the United States has worked with other
countries to stop sensitive technologies from falling into the wrong
hands. Whether for dual-use goods like computers and electronics, or
for chemicals, aeronautical products, missile technology or nuclear
materials, Congress and the executive branch have recognized that to be
effective, controls on technology should be multilateral.
A multilateral approach is important for a simple reason: the
United States does not have a monopoly on smart people, advanced
technologies or investment in leading-edge R&D. Many emerging, dual-use
critical technologies are available from other countries, and companies
and governments around the world continue to drive the frontiers of
technology through their own R&D investments. In fact, in 2017, three-
fourths of total global investment in R&D was conducted outside of the
United States.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2017 Global R&D Funding Forecast, R&D Magazine, Winter 2017
(available at: http://digital.rdmag.com/researchanddevelopment/
2017_global_r_d_funding_forecast?pg=1#pg1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A system of technology controls that unilaterally stops American
firms from doing business abroad will not advance national security
interests if it simply hands markets to foreign competitors--many of
whom are equally capable in advanced technologies.
Yet this is precisely what FIRRMA would do. As drafted, the bill
would impose a very onerous--and entirely unilateral--set of
restrictions on outbound transactions of U.S. companies involving the
``contribution'' of technology, intellectual property, and associated
support ``through any type of arrangement.''
This is an exceptionally broad universe that would capture
countless licensing, joint development, sales, research, and other
transactions involving foreign persons, most of which involve
technology that the U.S. Government previously determined did not
warrant export control restrictions. For example:
Computer Hardware Sales & Service: U.S. firms sell
computers, servers and systems worldwide, often paired with
installation, maintenance and technical support services. This
hardware and related support typically involves hundreds of
patented or licensed technologies that would count as a
``contribution'' of intellectual property under FIRRMA. For
example, the sale of a computer server with tech support to a
bank in Singapore could come under CFIUS review.
Software Licensing: American technology companies license
many types of software applications to both businesses and
consumers. These applications often come with technical support
that may include help desk, software updates, bug fixes and
customization, all of which could involve patented or licensed
technologies. For example, the licensing of a database
application to a pharmaceutical company in Switzerland could be
captured by FIRRMA.
Trademarks: U.S. companies routinely license this most
basic form of intellectual property to partners around the
world for marketing and business development purposes. This
bill could potentially trigger a staggering volume of
regulatory filings for basic trademark deals that could not be
less threatening to
national security.
Saying that ``ordinary customer relationships'' are excluded would
not solve this overreach, as that term, too, is undefined in FIRRMA and
left entirely to the discretion of regulators. Neither is it comforting
to be told that regulators will narrow the scope of covered outbound
reviews after legislation is passed. Congress, not unelected officials,
should decide how broad the CFIUS regulatory remit should be.
More practically, by covering such an extraordinarily broad range
of transactions, CFIUS would quickly be overwhelmed with new reviews,
making it difficult for the Committee to focus adequately on real
threats to national security. Under FIRRMA, the CFIUS workload would
skyrocket from about 250 cases per year--already a record number--to
many thousands or even tens of thousands, including review of many
routine outbound investments and technology transactions hitherto seen
as nonthreatening by the United States and its allies.
Duplicative Regulation Would Harm U.S. Economic Competitiveness
As drafted, FIRRMA would turn CFIUS into a supra-export control
agency, duplicating long-standing U.S. export control regimes and
unilaterally limiting the ability of American firms to do business
around the world. Foreign competitors that do not face similar
regulatory restrictions will seize global market opportunities while
American companies are left watching from the sidelines.
FIRRMA would give CFIUS extremely broad discretion to define the
scope and reach of its regulatory authority, creating uncertainty and
delays in investment decisions, contract negotiations and sales to
foreign customers.
This approach stands in stark contrast to the approach recently
taken by Congress and the Administration to curtail duplicative
bureaucracy and regulation, and could capture under Government control
a very wide range of commercial activity. As a result, foreign
customers and investors will look elsewhere, and over the long term
this could drive innovation and the development of new critical
technologies outside the United States.
Protecting National Security Using Existing Authorities
One of the issues driving FIRRMA is a concern that the current
CFIUS and export control regimes do not address the issue of emerging
critical technologies. There is some justification for this concern.
However, there is existing regulatory authority to impose new
technology controls quickly, while also ensuring that effective, long-
term controls are established in partnership with U.S. allies.
In 2012, a final rule was published (15 CFR 742.6(a)(7)) which
established the ``0Y521'' series of controls in the Export
Administration Regulations (EAR). Under this little-used regulation,
the Government can impose immediate controls on emerging or other
technologies if deemed in the national security or foreign policy
interests of the United States. Crucially, however, this regulation
also envisions that the United States will simultaneously pursue
effective multilateral controls for these technologies with U.S.
allies. And such controls would be administered through the specific,
parameter-based, and relatively transparent process of export licensing
that the business community knows and can work with.
So, mechanisms exist to quickly control sensitive technologies if
necessary. But which technologies should be so controlled? This is
where the picture gets murkier.
Technology control lists are badly in need of a refresh, and
Congress should consider using its oversight authority to make this
happen. Under the Export Administration Act, Congress directed that
regular list review should be a priority, and it established the
Militarily Critical Technologies List (MCTL) in statute for just that
purpose. Yet a GAO report in February 2015 found that ``the MCTL was
out-of-date and was no longer being published online, but that
widespread requirements to know what is militarily critical
remained.''\2\ The same report found:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Critical Technologies:
Agency Initiatives Address Some Weaknesses, But Additional Interagency
Collaboration is Needed,'' February 2015, GAO 15-288.
According to DoD officials responsible for the MCTL, they are
no longer updating the list, and are in the process of
determining whether it is appropriate to seek relief from the
requirement to maintain the list. They stated that alternatives
to the MCTL are being employed based on the specific needs of
each agency, and DoD offices are using the U.S. Munitions List,
the Commerce Control List 600 Series, and the Industrial Base
Technology List as alternatives to the MCTL.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\
Ibid., and reference is also made to a prior report: U.S.
Government Accountability Office, ``Protecting Defense Technologies:
DoD Assessment Needed to Determine Requirement for Critical
Technologies List,'' January 2013, GAO-13-157.
This is not how Congress thought the process should work. Using the
control list to say what is militarily critical puts the cart before
the horse. The intent was that the Defense Department, working with
other agencies and with industry, would broadly identify general
categories of militarily critical technologies (including emerging
technologies of concern) in the MCTL, and then draw from that list to
propose specific, parameter-based, and usually multilateral export
controls. The controls would be implemented via the Commerce Control
List, the U.S. Munitions List, and international control regimes such
as COCOM (succeeded by the Wassenaar Arrangement), the Missile
Technology Control Regime, the Australia Group, the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, or others. Export controls have worked well to protect national
security for decades, but the list review process has recently fallen
into disuse.
FIRRMA would not correct this problem, and in fact could make it
worse. Under FIRRMA the Government would define some new, very vague
and broad list of technologies of concern (even though it has failed to
update technology lists already required under current law) and then
wait until something pops up in a transaction review. The Government
might then try to stop it--but only unilaterally, on a deal-by-deal
basis, and without regard to foreign availability, technology trends,
or consultation with allies or industry. Casting an extraordinarily
wide net over routine commercial transactions and applying, in effect,
a regulatory test of ``we'll know it when we see it'' would be deeply
damaging to U.S. competitiveness, and, more important, could lead to a
false sense of security.
Instead, there should be a return to a more disciplined list review
and multilateral export control process already mandated by law.
Congress could act to ensure effective monitoring and control of
emerging technologies through existing export regulations by requiring:
1)
regular, ongoing reviews of emerging technologies for potential
national security risks as envisioned by the MCTL;
2)
full and robust application of existing EAR regulatory
authorities to control these emerging technologies as necessary
to protect national security; and
3)
annual reports to Congress with additional oversight to ensure
that this export control process effectively addresses any
risks.
Conclusion
In summary, IBM fully supports efforts to strengthen national
security. We encourage Congress to find ways to do so without
undermining U.S. economic competitiveness, or driving innovation and
investment outside the United States.
We believe that a refreshed technology control list, and the more
robust use of existing export control authority ultimately leading to
international controls, would be the most effective way to protect
national security interests.
While FIRRMA contains several important reforms to CFIUS, the
Committee should continue to focus on inbound foreign investment in the
United States, rather than reviewing outbound transactions that are
low-risk or already covered under existing export control regulations.
Thank you for this opportunity to appear before the Committee. I
would be pleased to answer any questions that you might have.
______
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF GARY CLYDE HUFBAUER, Ph.D. *
Reginald Jones Senior Fellow, Peterson Institute for International
Economics
January 18, 2018
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* This testimony is based on a blog posted on the Peterson
Institute website: https://piie.com/blogs/trade-investment-policy-
watch/revamping-cfius-and-going-too-far.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you, Senator Crapo, and Members of the Committee for inviting
me to testify concerning S. 2098, the Foreign Investment Risk Review
Modernization Act of 2017. My remarks will also touch on the House
counterpart legislation, H.R. 4311, the Foreign Investment Risk Review
Modernization Act of 2017.
Two empirical facts provide the starting point for my remarks:
Inward foreign direct investment is almost always good for
the United States. Foreign firms that invest in the United
States--usually by acquiring U.S. firms--are typically top of
their class abroad. They pay higher wages than average U.S.
firms in the same industry, do more R&D and investment, and
export a larger share of production.\1\ These facts are just as
characteristic of Chinese firms as foreign firms based in
Canada, Europe, or Japan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Theodore H. Moran and Lindsay Oldenski. 2013. Foreign Direct
Investment in the United States: Benefits, Suspicions, and Risks with
Special Attention to FDI from China. Policy Analyses in International
Economics 100. Washington: Peterson Institute for International
Economics. Also see Moran's remarks at https://piie.com/system/files/
documents/moran201702draft-c.pdf.
Outward foreign direct investment also benefits the United
States. Contrary to popular mythology, investment abroad does
not, as a rule, take place at the expense of investment in the
United States. Instead, U.S. firms that invest heavily abroad
typically grow U.S. R&D faster, employ more workers, and
produce and export more than comparable U.S. firms that invest
little or nothing abroad.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Gary Hufbauer, Theodore Moran, and Lindsay Oldenski. 2013.
Outward Foreign Direct Investment and U.S. Exports, Jobs, and R&D:
Implications for U.S. Policy. Policy Analyses in International
Economics. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Given these facts, the burden of proof should rest on any
Government action that seeks to restrict either inward or outward
foreign direct investment (FDI). Historically, this is how the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) has
operated.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ For a detailed background, see James K. Jackson, ``The
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS),''
Congressional Research Service, October 11, 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CFIUS was created in 1975 to screen foreign takeovers of U.S. firms
for threats to U.S. national security. The focus was on inward
investment and technology acquisition. Treasury chairs the CFIUS,
ensuring that the economic benefits of inward foreign investment are
given due consideration, a perspective buttressed by membership of
Commerce and USTR, and observer status of OMB, CEA and the NEC.
The CIA, NSC, and Defense fully inform other Committee members of
the national security dimensions of any takeover. However, an
influential draft report by Brown and Singh (February 2017) calls upon
Congress to vest the power to block a transaction in just three Cabinet
members, if they are all in accord: Defense, Justice and Homeland
Security.\4\ In the past, less than five takeovers have been blocked by
CFIUS, but somewhat more applications have been withdrawn prior to an
adverse decision. The Brown and Singh draft report advocates more
stringent screening, especially with respect to Chinese transactions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Michael Brown and Pavneet Singh, ``China's Technology Transfer
Strategy: How Chinese Investments in Emerging Technology Enable a
Strategic Competitor to Access the Crown Jewels of U.S. Innovation,''
pre-Decisional draft, Defense Innovation Unit Experimental, February
2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If enacted, the blend of S. 2098 and H.R. 4311 would significantly
enlarge the CFIUS mandate to cover outward investment and technology
transactions by U.S. firms. It would also cast a skeptical eye toward
investment (inward or outward) from or to China, Russia, and a handful
of other adversarial nations.
The new and broader CFIUS mandate raises three inter-related
concerns:
It could replace multilateral cooperation with unilateral
restrictions on outward flows of ``critical technology'' to
neutral or adversarial nations;
Thereby putting U.S.-based multinational corporations
(MNCs) at a disadvantage, relative to MNCs based in Europe or
Japan, when firms compete in third-country markets;
And duplicate controls on the export of merchandise and
technology established under the Export Administration Act with
multilateral consultation.
Using existing statutory authorities, President Trump could achieve
the objectives sought by S. 2098 and H.R. 4311. If he wants to restrict
U.S. investment and technology flows to China, Russia, Iran or any
other country, Trump can do so without new legislation.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The president can restrict foreign investment and exports of
goods and technology under the International Emergency Economic Powers
Act (IEEPA) and other statutes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The lasting impact of these bills will come when a different
president resides in the White House. If the CFIUS mandate is expanded
as the co-sponsors contemplate, the CFIUS caseload will burst from 200
annually to thousands. Necessarily, the bureaucracy will blossom with
new administrative and technical capabilities. Once the bureaucracy is
created, and reviews become a thrice-daily event, it will be almost
impossible to turn the clock back to today's open regime for investment
and technology flows.
Under S. 2098 and H.R. 4311, future decisions to block inward or
outward foreign direct investment might not require the Government to
carry the same burden of proof as historically has been the case.
Hypothetical arguments that allowing an acquisition or transferring
certain technology abroad might in the future endanger national
security will have greater weight. Proof may not be needed that the
acquisition or transfer currently endangers national security. The
cited Brown and Singh draft report, if followed, makes the change in
emphasis very clear.
In fact, S. 2098 states, among other factors to be considered,
``the potential effects of the covered transaction on United States
international technological and industrial leadership in areas
affecting national security, including whether the transaction is
likely to reduce the technological and industrial advantage of the
United States relative to any country of special concern.''
Likewise, H.R. 4311, states, among factors to be considered,
``whether the covered transaction is likely to contribute to the loss
of or other adverse effects on technologies that provide a strategic
national security advantage to the United States.''
In plain language, both bills stipulate that any transaction that
might enable a foreign country (especially an adversary) to narrow its
gap with U.S. technological leadership should be viewed skeptically.
This warning covers a great deal of ground, not only with respect to
transactions with adversaries, but also with respect to transactions
with neutrals or allies who might in turn convey the technology to
adversaries.
Chinese technology practices have generated the core motivation for
S. 2098 and H.R. 3411. China has targeted several high-tech industries
for massive upgrading in the next 10 years. Multiple Chinese means of
accessing frontier U.S. technology in an effort to achieve this goal
are spelled out in the Brown and Singh draft report. Among other means,
China acquires venture capital stakes in nascent technologies and
compels foreign firms to transfer technology to Chinese business
partners as the ``price of admission'' to the vast Chinese market.
President Trump has directed the U.S. Trade Representative to launch an
investigation of China's technology transfer practices, under Section
301 of the Trade Act of 1974. Once the investigation is concluded,
measures to block U.S. firms from acquiescing to Chinese demands could
be Trump's response, whether or not a blend of S. 2098 and H.R. 4311
passes Congress.
Both S. 2098 and H.R. 4311 refer to China, Russia and other U.S.
adversaries as ``countries of special concern'' without naming them.
CFIUS is directed to scrutinize inbound and outbound investment and
technology transactions with these countries. At the same time, both S.
2098 and H.R. 4311 would allow CFIUS to exempt from review ``covered
transactions'' with foreign firms based in countries that are U.S.
military allies or have close security relations.
Recommendations
Legislation enacted by Congress should be narrowed to cover the
immediate problem--transfer of critical technology to adversarial
countries--without a massive expansion of the CFIUS mandate to review
the bulk of outward foreign direct investment by U.S. firms.
Narrowing could be accomplished with two provisions. First, require
the Committee to identify ``critical technologies'', drawing on the
resources of the intelligence community, the National Academy of
Sciences, and the National Academy of Engineering. Second, require the
Committee to name ``countries of special concern''. With these two
provisions, the workload would be narrowed while U.S. firms that
develop critical technologies would be put on notice to seek CFIUS
review prior to transferring the know-how to worrisome countries.
CFIUS review of questionable transactions should take into
consideration the availability of equivalent critical technology from
firms not based in the United States. Obviously, if an end run through
Europe or Japan has already occurred, there's less reason to block the
U.S. firm. If an end run is only a future possibility, then a decision
to block the transaction should be accompanied by a forceful diplomatic
demarche to U.S. friends and allies to establish a multilateral basis
for the denial.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
______
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN CRAPO FROM
CHRISTOPHER PADILLA
Q.1. Your written testimony expresses support for specific
provisions of the bill and concerns about specific provisions.
Please discuss the one critical provision of the bill that
is essential to CFIUS' protection of national security, and the
one provision that you feel most needs further amendment to
improve the bill.
A.1. There are several gaps in the current authority of CFIUS
that FIRRMA would effectively address. One such gap in the
authority of the Committee to assess foreign investments in the
United States for national security risks is real estate
transactions near military bases or other sensitive Government
facilities. FIRRMA appropriately fills this gap. In addition,
the bill would give CFIUS expanded authority over certain
inbound transactions that are less than controlling, but more
than passive. Depending on the circumstances of such a
noncontrolling, nonpassive investment, there may be national
security issues posed that CFIUS should have the authority to
address, and FIRRMA provides that.
Conversely, Sec. 3(B)(v) of FIRRMA significantly expands
the definition of ``covered transaction,'' giving CFIUS
jurisdiction over outbound and overseas transactions. CFIUS
should not govern, nor was it established to review, outbound
transactions. This provision should be removed and amended with
new language to appropriately reflect the need to enforce and
update existing export control regulations to address relevant
national security concerns in outbound and overseas
transactions. The appropriate U.S. Government agencies that
administer export controls should work closely with industry to
identify and target critical technology controls, including
updating lists of militarily critical technologies that should
be considered for control.
Q.2. Much of the concern surrounding this reform effort is
about China acquiring cutting edge technology by stealing,
reverse engineering, or investing in companies that develop the
technology.
Is there a way for emergent ``critical'' technologies to be
appropriately defined and applied by CFIUS?
A.2. Export control agencies have the technical expertise and
established industry advisory groups to identify emergent
critical technologies. Indeed, in the Export Administration
Act, Congress
mandated that the Department of Defense, in consultation with
other agencies, should maintain a list of military critical
technologies and update it to reflect technological advances.
From that list, specific export controls and technology
transfer limits would be drawn. But the MCTL has fallen into
disuse.
Rather than re-create the process in CFIUS, which lacks the
expertise to perform this mission, technical experts in the
export control agencies (including the Defense Department) are
best situated to make such an assessment. If improvements are
needed in this process, then Congress should ensure that the
export control agencies have the necessary resources, direction
and focus to accomplish this task. Since new technologies are
created continually, it is important that the effort to
identify emergent critical technologies be ongoing and
conducted with input from industry as well as academic experts.
Ideally, technologies identified as requiring control would
also be discussed with U.S. allies, to develop effective
technology controls that are effective and internationally
consistent.
Q.2.a. Given the claim that China is acquiring the technology
through various means, is reforming solely CFIUS statute and
regulations the best way to solve the problem?
A.2.a. No. As cited in my written testimony to the Committee,
there are several ways in which CFIUS could be reformed through
FIRRMA to address increased national security threats from
certain inbound investment transactions.
However, reform of and application of CFIUS alone is not
the answer. There is existing authority in export control
regulations to govern the transfer of technology to a foreign
person, regardless of the type of transaction. Where
appropriate, we should use existing export control regimes to
identify, define, and control emerging technologies to prevent
transfers of technology that could create a national security
threat to the United States. Moreover, restricting access to
U.S. technologies on a strictly unilateral basis, whether via
export controls or CFIUS, will not ensure that the United
States maintains its technological lead. Other countries are
investing heavily in the development of new technologies, and
the United States must seek an internationally effective export
control regime, as well as increasing its own investments in
research and development across a broad range of technologies
to ensure that it will not be overtaken in the race for
technological supremacy.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR COTTON FROM
CHRISTOPHER PADILLA
Q.1. What other collaborative arrangements, including joint
ventures, does IBM currently have in China with Chinese
companies, and was CFIUS able to review those for risks to U.S.
national security?
A.1. All IBM technology partnerships in China are reviewed
against the U.S. Government's lists of restricted end-users and
activities, including military end-users and proliferation
screening. Additionally, our agreements mandate that all
partner companies also comply with U.S. export control
regulations, including restrictions on military end use. IBM's
activities in China comply with U.S. law and export control
regulations, and, where necessary, have received approval from
the necessary export licensing agencies. In addition, IBM has
been through two CFIUS reviews for business transactions with
Chinese companies, both of which were subject to a rigorous
review and to risk mitigation agreements with appropriate U.S.
Government agencies.
Q.2. What such arrangements do you have planned for the near
future, and is CFIUS able to review any of those for risks to
U.S. national security?
A.2. While we cannot speculate on future business decisions,
IBM believes that under existing CFIUS regulations and export
control regulations, there is ample authority to govern and vet
transactions for risks to national security. As mentioned in my
testimony, IBM supports both the expansion of CFIUS
jurisdiction over certain inbound investment transactions, as
well as an updated and comprehensive review of militarily
critical technologies that should be controlled for export from
the United States.
Q.2.a. What dual-use technology and know-how has IBM
transferred to China over the last decade, and what impact do
you think that has had on the United States' relative
technological advantage in areas of national security?
A.2.a. Most IBM business transactions in China do not require
an individual export license for either goods or technology,
but in every transaction there is an obligation to comply with
U.S. Export Administration Regulations as well as other
relevant provisions of U.S. law. IBM business in China is fully
compliant with U.S. law and export regulations. It should be
noted that as a general matter of policy, U.S. export controls
have long limited the transfer of technology to China to levels
that are several generations behind current, cutting-edge
technologies sold in other markets.
Q.3. Over the past 10 years or so, has IBM been pressured by
Chinese entities to turn over valuable technology and know-how
to Chinese companies? If so, what types?
A.3. No. Our business decisions in China are driven by
commercial considerations and by the limits established in U.S.
export control laws and regulations.
Q.4. Has IBM been pressured by Chinese entities to oppose,
criticize, or help defeat the Foreign Investment Risk Review
Modernization Act?
A.4. No. Even if we had been asked to do so, IBM would have
refused. Our position on this legislation is not driven by
pressure from foreign governments, but rather from our long
experience in international markets and direct experience with
both CFIUS reviews and U.S. export control laws.
Q.5. When U.S. companies engage in activities on Chinese soil
that could negatively impact the United States' national
security, do you believe the Federal Government has a
legitimate interest in being notified and afforded a chance to
assess the risks for U.S. national security?
A.5. Yes. This is why the United States has a robust and
multilateral export control system to review, assess, and
mitigate legitimate risks to U.S. national security in
commercial transactions overseas.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM
CHRISTOPHER PADILLA
Q.1. The legislation introduced by Senators Cornyn and
Feinstein would add five new types of covered transactions to
CFIUS' purview and it would expand the definition of ``critical
technologies.''
Q.1.a. Can you comment on whether CFIUS and its member agencies
currently have sufficient resources to monitor foreign
investment and acquisitions, review filed transactions, and
conduct thorough reviews and investigations in the required
time periods?
A.1.a. There is a time lag in CFIUS' issuance of public data
about its work, but the available data indicate that there has
been a material rise in the number of investigations conducted
by CFIUS, which places stress on CFIUS resources. Substantially
increasing the CFIUS workload, as we believe FIRRMA would do,
would exacerbate this stress.
Q.1.b. In your opinion, should any expansion of authority also
include new resources, funding, and staffing for the panel?
A.1.b. Yes. We agree with providing badly needed resources to
the Committee. The CFIUS case load has increased significantly
in recent years, and staff resources are already stretched
thin. Even if Congress does not elect to give CFIUS an expanded
mandate, it should provide additional resources for CFIUS to do
its job and manage the existing case load effectively.
Q.2. Last year, Ness Technologies, a New Jersey-based software
engineering company, had agreed to be purchased by HNA, a
Chinese conglomerate, on the condition that the transaction
received approval from CFIUS. According to a lawsuit filed by
Ness Technologies last month, that deal fell apart because HNA
provided ``knowingly false, inconsistent, and misleading
information'' about its ownership and ties to the Chinese
government during CFIUS' review of the acquisition. HNA's
interests in the United States are certainly not limited to
Ness Technologies--they've received CFIUS approval to purchase
a California technology distributor and they are actively
working to purchase a controlling stake in SkyBridge Capital,
the investment firm owned by Anthony Scaramucci. This case
raises important questions about the consequences of failing to
provide accurate information or knowingly providing false
information to CFIUS.
Q.2.a. What steps should CFIUS take, if any, with regard to
other transactions, either previously approved or pending
approval, involving a party if CFIUS determines that party has
misled the panel. For example, should the panel reopen
previously cleared HNA transactions or modify their approach to
reviewing pending transactions in light of this information?
A.2.a. IBM cannot comment on the HNA transaction or other
specific transactions in which IBM is not a party. However,
generally speaking, IBM believes that it would be fully
appropriate for CFIUS to reopen a review or investigation of a
transaction if new evidence comes to light indicating that one
or more of the parties provided false or misleading information
during the CFIUS process. IBM believes that CFIUS currently has
the authority to do so and supports efforts to further clarify
this authority in FIRRMA.
Q.2.b. What should be the consequences of a party misleading or
failing to provide accurate information to CFIUS?
A.2.b. Transaction denial and unwinding of previously approved
transactions are the current remedies. These remedies are
severe but appropriate in a situation involving the provision
of false or misleading information.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER FROM
CHRISTOPHER PADILLA
Q.1. As we search for the most appropriate remedy to the very
real problem of foreign countries gaining access to critical
U.S. technologies, I've heard some suggest that we should be
pursuing other changes instead of or in addition to the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS)
reform.
Q.1.a. What role should export controls play in addressing this
problem?
Could the export control system be modified to address the
concern that know how--not just intellectual property (IP)--is
being transferred through joint ventures (JVs) and other
partnerships?
A.1.a. Existing U.S. export controls already address the issue
of the transfer of ``know how,'' and they have done so for
several decades. No modification to the export control system
is necessary to address this concern. IBM believes that the
real issue here is that the lists of controlled technology
(which includes know how) have not kept pace with technological
advances. The solution is for Congress to exercise its
oversight authority to ensure that the U.S. export control
agencies update their control lists so that they cover know how
of concern from a national security perspective. The U.S.
export control agencies already have the authority to make such
updates immediately--they do not have to wait for the
multilateral system to agree in order to do so.
Q.1.b. Are there other fixes outside of CFIUS that should be
considered to address this security challenge?
A.1.b. The U.S. Export Administration Regulations (EAR)
currently provide a mechanism to address concerns about access
to emerging U.S. technologies. These regulations can already
control for export emerging technologies that are dual-use
(i.e., have both commercial and military applications) and that
have potential national security implications. Specifically, 15
C.F.R.  742.6(a)(7)
establishes a mechanism for the Commerce Department, with
concurrence from the Defense and State Departments, to
designate for control items that are not currently covered by
the multilateral export control regime (Wassenaar Arrangement)
but nonetheless ``should be controlled for export because the
items provide at least a significant military or intelligence
advantage to the United States or for foreign policy reasons .
. . ''. Items designated under this unilateral export control
mechanism (denoted by classification in the ECCN 0Y521 series)
are controlled for export--and thus require an export license
issued by the Commerce Department--to all countries except
Canada (subject to limited exception). These items are
temporarily controlled for export for one calendar year
(subject to limited extension), providing time for the Commerce
Department to transition the items to a more permanent control
status. Such a transition may occur upon an item's
incorporation into the multilateral export control regime, or
it may occur upon a determination by the Commerce Department
that a more permanent unilateral control is appropriate. The
Commerce Department also has the option to de-control an item,
if warranted. Four categories of items (including related
technology) have been controlled for export in this manner
since creation of the unilateral export control mechanism in
2012. Publicly available data indicate that eight licenses were
issued with respect to such items in 2015.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
CHRISTOPHER PADILLA
Gaming and Tourism
Q.1. Foreign companies are beginning to expand into new
industries, including gaming and tourism in the State of
Nevada. As an example, foreign companies have been investing in
and developing properties on the Las Vegas Strip. In the
context of CFIUS reviews, hotel deals previously examined by
the committee include the acquisition of New York's Waldorf-
Astoria Hotel by Anbang Insurance Group in 2014.
Q.1.a. Given the importance of the tourism industry to Nevada,
could you elaborate on the concerns associated with foreign
acquisition of hotels or tourism companies in the United
States?
A.1.a. To the extent that the acquisition of hotels or tourism
companies present a national security risk, CFIUS already has
authority to review such transactions. As an information
technology solutions company, I regret that IBM has no basis on
which to comment further on any concerns that might exist
within the hotel and tourism industry.
Q.1.b. How does CFIUS review such transactions, and what is the
Committee's track record on approving or denying these types of
deals?
A.1.b. To the extent that the acquisition of hotels or tourism
companies present a national security risk, CFIUS already has
authority to review such transactions. However, IBM has no
particular knowledge of the Committee's track record in
reviewing such cases.
CFIUS, Mining and Proximity to Military Installations
Q.2. In the last decade, CFIUS blocked three proposed
investments in Nevada mining companies, citing national
security concerns regarding the properties' proximity to Fallon
Naval Air Station.
How does CFIUS traditionally review such acquisitions as it
relates to their location relative to military installations?
Is that process working effectively, or are there any areas
needed for improvement?
A.2. CFIUS currently has authority to review transactions that
include real estate near military or other sensitive facilities
when the transaction involves the acquisition of a U.S.
business. However, current CFIUS authority does not extend to
real estate transactions that include only undeveloped land and
are not part of an acquisition of a U.S. business. As I stated
in my testimony, IBM supports the expansion of CFIUS to include
such real estate transactions.
Greenfield Acquisition
Q.3. In Nevada, we are home to a number of technology startups,
including drone technology.
Can you discuss the potential positive and negative
consequences of expanding CFIUS review to ``greenfield''
projects--or those involving startups?
A.3. Foreign investment in ``greenfield projects,'' in which a
foreign entity creates a totally new business in the United
States from the ground up, generally represents a positive
contribution to the U.S. economy, creating new jobs and
boosting economic growth. To the extent that such new
businesses are located in proximity to military installations
or other sensitive facilities, expansion of CFIUS to cover pure
real estate transactions would enable the Committee to address
this concern.
In the case of acquisitions or investments that result in
foreign control of existing U.S. startup companies, CFIUS
already has authority to review such transactions for national
security risks, just as it has existing authority to review
transactions that result in foreign control of any other U.S.
business.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN CRAPO FROM SCOTT
KUPOR
Q.1. Your written testimony expresses support for specific
provisions of the bill and concerns about specific provisions.
Please discuss the one critical provision of the bill that
is essential to CFIUS' protection of national security, and the
one provision that you feel most needs further amendment to
improve the bill.
A.1. I support modernizing CFIUS to ensure it is reviewing
appropriate transactions that safeguard our national security.
However, the area of the Foreign Investment Risk Review
Modernization Act (FIRRMA) most in need of improvement is
clarity that a U.S. venture capital fund with foreign limited
partners (i.e., those that invest into a fund, or ``LPs'') is
not implicated. As my testimony details, FIRRMA is currently
ambiguous as to whether a U.S. fund or its LPs must file with
CFIUS if the fund might invest in critical technologies. FIRRMA
should be changed to reflect that neither a U.S. fund nor its
foreign LPs need to file with CFIUS when those LPs are passive
investors. This means either clarifying that venture funds are
outside the scope of the bill entirely, or affirmatively
stating that foreign LPs must meet the passive investment test
in FIRRMA. If the latter, the passive investment test must be
broadened to reflect true passivity. For example, FIRRMA
considers an investment to be nonpassive if the investor has
access to ``any nonpublic technical information in the
possession of the United States business'' or ``any
nontechnical information in the possession of the United States
business that is not available to all investors.'' These
requirements are too narrow and do not reflect the reality of
the marketplace where all shareholders are not subject to the
same
information at all times. Very early investors--such as angel
investors--may receive less detailed information about a
company than other investors, but that is harmless in the vast
majority of cases.
Q.2.a. Much of the concern surrounding this reform effort is
about China acquiring cutting edge technology by stealing,
reverse engineering, or investing in companies that develop the
technology.
Is there a way for emergent ``critical'' technologies to be
appropriately defined and applied by CFIUS?
A.2.a. It is imperative that ``critical'' technologies be
specifically defined so the scope of FIRRMA is well understood
in the marketplace. Small, high-growth startups are among the
most innovative companies in the world. Yet the ability of
startups to navigate the regulatory landscape is limited as
these companies are resource-constrained. I strongly encourage
Congress and CFIUS to keep these small companies in mind as
they define critical technology.
I believe Congress should set careful parameters on what
critical technology means; otherwise, there will be a
temptation by CFIUS to broaden the term out so far as to pull
in vast areas of our economy. This will have the effect of
potentially slowing down the innovation economy but also taking
CFIUS's eye off the areas of technology that could truly impact
our national security. To highlight an example, artificial
intelligence and machine learning technologies will likely find
their way into nearly all companies over the next 5-10 years.
We suspect they may be as ubiquitous as core infrastructure
elements--such as a database--are today. Thus to legislate at
that level of definition will not only curb the development of
these critical technologies in the United States, but will also
overwhelm the review cycle for CFIUS. Therefore, to the extent
Congress seeks to define ``critical'' technologies, it should
do so not only by limiting broad references to foundational
technologies, but also by defining the key use cases for which
the application of that technology could raise national defense
or other core security issues.
Q.2.b. Given the claim that China is acquiring the technology
through various means, is reforming solely CFIUS statute and
regulations the best way to solve the problem?
A.2.b. Reforming CFIUS is not the sole way to combat technology
theft and transfer. The Federal Government can combat
technology theft by working closely with the startup,
technology, and investor community to identify best practices
and communication channels so industries and Government can
work together on problem areas. More should be done by law
enforcement to train the venture industry and startups on how
to combat technology theft and how to garner the attention of
law enforcement agencies. Ultimately, if foreign sovereign
governments want to steal technology, they are much more likely
to do so through formal espionage and theft efforts versus
through investing in startup companies. In addition, law
enforcement should educate startups on ways to deal with
investors that may seek to transfer technology overseas.
Finally, the Federal Government should make available more
nondilutive capital for startups, whether through the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), Advanced Research
Projects Agency--Energy (ARPA-E), the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) program, or other initiatives. Our industry
would be glad to partner with all appropriate Federal agencies
on these ideas.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM SCOTT
KUPOR
Q.1. The legislation introduced by Senators Cornyn and
Feinstein would add five new types of covered transactions to
CFIUS' purview and it would expand the definition of ``critical
technologies.''
Q.1.a. Can you comment on whether CFIUS and its member agencies
currently have sufficient resources to monitor foreign
investment and acquisitions, review filed transactions, and
conduct thorough reviews and investigations in the required
time periods?
A.1.a. I am concerned about the workflow the Foreign Investment
Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) would place on CFIUS if
the covered transaction section is not changed to reflect the
concerns I raised in my testimony. Specifically, as drafted
FIRRMA is unclear on whether a U.S. venture fund with foreign
limited partners (i.e., those that invest into a fund, or
``LPs'') must file with CFIUS, or whether those foreign LPs
must file before investing in a fund. LPs do not have access to
sensitive information that is the concern of FIRRMA, nor do
they have any say in the investment decisions of venture funds.
Therefore, FIRRMA should specifically indicate that U.S.
venture funds and passive LPs are not covered by the
legislation. If this ambiguity is not cleared up venture funds
and foreign LPs will very likely file on a precautionary basis
with CFIUS because they fear the consequences of not filing
when the agency believes a filing was in order. An
overabundance of precautionary filings by venture funds and LPs
will not improve our national security, and in fact will
diminish the benefit of FIRRMA, as CFIUS will be consumed with
filings that were never a national security threat in the first
place.
Q.1.b. In your opinion, should any expansion of authority also
include new resources, funding, and staffing for the panel?
A.1.b. Yes, I believe if CFIUS's mandate is expanded
considerably the agency must receive additional resources to
ensure it has the ability to be appropriately responsive to the
business community. At the same time, I believe Congress should
require that CFIUS abide by statutory time lines so the
business community understands at the outset when it will
receive a decision.
Q.2. Last year, Ness Technologies, a New Jersey-based software
engineering company, had agreed to be purchased by HNA, a
Chinese conglomerate, on the condition that the transaction
received approval from CFIUS. According to a lawsuit filed by
Ness Technologies last month, that deal fell apart because HNA
provided ``knowingly false, inconsistent, and misleading
information'' about its ownership and ties to the Chinese
government during CFIUS' review of the acquisition. HNA's
interests in the United States are certainly not limited to
Ness Technologies--they've received CFIUS approval to purchase
a California technology distributor and they are actively
working to purchase a controlling stake in SkyBridge Capital,
the investment firm owned by Anthony Scaramucci. This case
raises important questions about the consequences of failing to
provide accurate information or knowingly providing false
information to CFIUS.
LWhat steps should CFIUS take, if any, with regard
to other transactions, either previously approved or
pending approval, involving a party if CFIUS determines
that party has misled the panel. For example, should
the panel reopen previously cleared HNA transactions or
modify their approach to reviewing pending transactions
in light of this information?
LWhat should be the consequences of a party
misleading or failing to provide accurate information
to CFIUS?
A.2. I appreciate the question, but I am not an expert on
CFIUS's current practices or any of its cases. However, I do
believe that candor before Government agencies is of the utmost
importance.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER FROM SCOTT
KUPOR
Q.1. One of the strengths of the United States is our ability
to foster innovation and develop new technologies.
Would the filing times and additional fees associated with
CFIUS jurisdiction significantly inhibit venture capital
investments and hurt entrepreneurship by creating excessive
barriers, such as prolonged wait times, to foreign investment?
A.1. My testimony raised serious concerns about the impact of
the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA)
on U.S. startups and venture capital funds. Presently, FIRRMA
is ambiguous as to whether a U.S. venture fund with foreign
limited partners (i.e., those that invest into a fund, or
``LPs'') must file with CFIUS if it might invest in critical
technology, or whether the foreign LPs themselves must file
with CFIUS. This is despite the fact that LPs are truly passive
investors that have no access to sensitive information and no
say in investment decisions. If FIRRMA is not clarified to
remove U.S. venture funds and their LPs from the scope of the
bill, I fear that it will have a lasting impact on foreign
investment into venture funds. If foreign LPs must file with
CFIUS when they invest in a venture fund--incurring wait times
and additional cost in the process--that would be a substantial
disincentive to investing in U.S. venture funds. As CFIUS
reform proceeds, we must keep in mind that global investors
have many choices these days. U.S. startups have seen their
share of global venture investment drop from 90 percent 20
years ago, to 81 percent 10 years ago, to 53 percent last year.
This means if we make it more burdensome to invest in U.S.
startups via U.S. venture funds then we will continue to see a
steady decline in our global share, which will further harm our
competitiveness.
Q.2. Would significantly expanding CFIUS's jurisdiction
negatively affect our investment relationship with Europe and
other traditional economic and military allies, who could get
caught up in an expansion of CFIUS's scope of review?
A.2. FIRRMA provides that CFIUS may exempt certain counties if
the United States has in place a mutual defense treaty with
that country and meets other factors. In my testimony, I
expressed support for broadening that authority out to a wider
group of U.S. strategic partners. I am concerned that if
exemptions are too narrow that FIRRMA will both burden key U.S.
allies and inundate CFIUS with filings from countries that are
not engaged in the type of activity with which FIRRMA is
concerned. I encourage Congress to look at ways to ease burdens
imposed on important U.S. allies during the CFIUS process.
Q.3. Do you have a sense of how many increased CFIUS filings a
bill like the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
could result in? Would CFIUS be able to handle the surge in
reviews likely to result from a bill like FIRRMA? How much
would it need to expand to handle such a caseload?
A.3. A major factor impacting the increase of filings will be
whether FIRRMA is improved to clarify that U.S. venture funds
nor their LPs must file with CFIUS when those LPs are passive
investors in the fund. As my previous answer indicates, unless
FIRRMA is modified CFIUS will see many precautionary filings
from U.S. venture funds and their foreign LPs that should not
be within the scope of the bill. I strongly encourage Congress
to narrow the scope of FIRRMA in line with my testimony to
ensure CFIUS stays focused on the transactions that truly
impact national security. But even if FIRRMA is modified, I
believe CFIUS will need additional resources to be responsive
to the considerable uptick in filings due to the bill.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
SCOTT KUPOR
Gaming and Tourism
Q.1. Foreign companies are beginning to expand into new
industries, including gaming and tourism in the State of
Nevada. As an example, foreign companies have been investing in
and developing properties on the Las Vegas Strip. In the
context of CFIUS reviews, hotel deals previously examined by
the committee include the acquisition of New York's Waldorf-
Astoria Hotel by Anbang Insurance Group in 2014.
Q.1.a. Given the importance of the tourism industry to Nevada,
could you elaborate on the concerns associated with foreign
acquisition of hotels or tourism companies in the United
States?
Q.1.b. How does CFIUS review such transactions, and what is the
Committee's track record on approving or denying these types of
deals?
A.1.a.-b. I appreciate the question, but unfortunately I am not
able to answer specifically as the U.S. venture capital
industry has had little experience in dealing with gaming-
related applications of CFIUS. The reason for this is our
industry invests in and partners with startups as they scale
and grow, whereas CFIUS's jurisdiction is over transactions
where a foreign person is acquiring an existing U.S. entity. My
testimony before the Banking Committee pertained to changes the
Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA)
proposes for CFIUS that might affect the venture capital
industry and startups for the first time. In particular, I am
concerned that FIRRMA is unclear on whether a U.S. venture fund
with foreign limited partners (i.e., those that invest into a
fund, or ``LPs'') must file with CFIUS, or whether those
foreign LPs must file before investing in a fund. Neither of
these options are prudent from a public policy perspective and
both would be incredibly disruptive to venture firms. LPs in
venture funds have no access to the sensitive information that
is the concern of FIRRMA and have no role in the investment
decisions of venture funds. Therefore, foreign LPs pose no
national security risk to our Nation. But if FIRRMA is not
clarified then CFIUS will be confronted with an abundance of
precautionary filings from venture firms and their foreign LPs
that distract the agency from investments that may pose a
national security concern. These precautionary filings will be
costly for venture funds and distract investors from partnering
with startups to build and scale the company.
CFIUS, Mining and Proximity to Military Installations
Q.2. In the last decade, CFIUS blocked three proposed
investments in Nevada mining companies, citing national
security concerns regarding the properties' proximity to Fallon
Naval Air Station.
How does CFIUS traditionally review such acquisitions as it
relates to their location relative to military installations?
Is that process working effectively, or are there any areas
needed for improvement?
A.2. As previously indicated, I am not an expert on CFIUS as it
currently operates and unfortunately unable to answer this
question. I would add, however, that focusing CFIUS review on
investments in close proximity to military or other sensitive
Government installations seems to be a much more appropriate
use of CFIUS time than aiming to review passive investments in
venture capital funds or venture-backed startups.
Greenfield Acquisition
Q.3. In Nevada, we are home to a number of technology startups,
including drone technology.
Can you discuss the potential positive and negative
consequences of expanding CFIUS review to ``greenfield''
projects--or those involving startups?
A.3. Nevada is home to a burgeoning startup ecosystem. From
2013-2017, 190 Nevada startups raised $640 million in venture
funding. FIRRMA has the potential to significantly impact
startups in Nevada and across the United States. One way
startups can be affected is if FIRRMA enables CFIUS to
unnecessarily scrutinize U.S. venture capital funds, which
partners with many high-growth startups in Nevada. As my
written testimony detailed, FIRRMA is ambiguous as to whether a
U.S. venture fund with foreign LPs must file with CFIUS. U.S.
venture funds have increasingly
attracted foreign LPs, which benefits our country because that
capital is then invested in U.S. startups. Scrutinizing the LPs
of a venture fund is not a good use of CFIUS's time, as these
LPs do not have access to sensitive information that is the
concern of FIRRMA and have no say in investment decisions of
the fund. Our national security would be far better served by
focusing on direct investments into U.S. companies where there
might be an opportunity for a foreign person to extract
sensitive information from a company.
Unless FIRRMA is clarified to remove venture funds from the
ambit of the bill, foreign LPs will have a significant
disincentive to invest capital in the United States via venture
funds. This will in turn harm U.S. startups that need that
capital to grow and prosper. Furthermore, the risk capital will
simply flow to other non-U.S. startups, compromising not only
job growth in the United States, but also making it more likely
that long-term hubs of innovation will prosper in markets
outside of the United States.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN CRAPO FROM GARY
CLYDE HUFBAUER
Q.1. Your written testimony expresses support for specific
provisions of the bill and concerns about specific provisions.
Please discuss the one critical provision of the bill that
is essential to CFIUS' protection of national security, and the
one provision that you feel most needs further amendment to
improve the bill.
A.1. The core is the protection of ``critical technologies''.
The legislation should draw on America's best brains--
identified by the National Academy of Sciences and the National
Academy of Engineering, with assistance from the National
Security Agency and the Central Intelligence Agency--to define
``critical technologies'' for national security purposes. The
definitions should be updated at least annually.
Q.2. Much of the concern surrounding this reform effort is
about China acquiring cutting edge technology by stealing,
reverse engineering, or investing in companies that develop the
technology.
Q.2.a. Is there a way for emergent ``critical'' technologies to
be appropriately defined and applied by CFIUS?
A.2.a. The best that can be done for appropriate definition is
to rely on the agencies named in my first answer. This should
be a central mission of a standing committee of these agencies,
with rotating members to obtain expertise on different
technologies.
Q.2.b. Given the claim that China is acquiring the technology
through various means, is reforming solely CFIUS statute and
regulations the best way to solve the problem?
A.2.b. If the CFIUS mandate is enlarged by the pending
legislation, it should be closely coordinated with the Export
Administration authority. Ideally, the two committees/agencies
would be merged, but that may be a step too far. In addition,
the CIA's resources and budgets should be expanded to keep
abreast with Chinese technology through covert means. It would
be worthwhile to ask the GAO for a report on ways to improve
civil and criminal prosecution of espionage cases. Over the
long term, the only way the United States will maintain
technological superiority is through stepped up public and
private investment in R&D.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM GARY
CLYDE HUFBAUER
Q.1. The legislation introduced by Senators Cornyn and
Feinstein would add five new types of covered transactions to
CFIUS' purview and it would expand the definition of ``critical
technologies.''
LCan you comment on whether CFIUS and its member
agencies currently have sufficient resources to monitor
foreign investment and acquisitions, review filed
transactions, and conduct thorough reviews and
investigations in the required time periods?
LIn your opinion, should any expansion of authority
also include new resources, funding, and staffing for
the panel?
A.1. In my view, CFIUS resources are hopelessly inadequate for
the mandate envisaged by this legislation. Moreover, adequate
funds must be provided for the NAS, the NAE, and the
intelligence agencies. Unless the Congress is prepared to
provide an annual budget in the range of $100 million, the new
CFIUS cannot possibly discharge the broader mandate.
Q.2. Last year, Ness Technologies, a New Jersey-based software
engineering company, had agreed to be purchased by HNA, a
Chinese conglomerate, on the condition that the transaction
received approval from CFIUS. According to a lawsuit filed by
Ness Technologies last month, that deal fell apart because HNA
provided ``knowingly false, inconsistent, and misleading
information'' about its ownership and ties to the Chinese
government during CFIUS' review of the acquisition. HNA's
interests in the United States are certainly not limited to
Ness Technologies--they've received CFIUS approval to purchase
a California technology distributor and they are actively
working to purchase a controlling stake in SkyBridge Capital,
the investment firm owned by Anthony Scaramucci. This case
raises important questions about the consequences of failing to
provide accurate information or knowingly providing false
information to CFIUS.
LWhat steps should CFIUS take, if any, with regard
to other transactions, either previously approved or
pending approval, involving a party if CFIUS determines
that party has misled the panel? For example, should
the panel reopen previously cleared HNA transactions or
modify their approach to reviewing pending transactions
in light of this information?
LWhat should be the consequences of a party
misleading or failing to provide accurate information
to CFIUS?
A.2. When an acquiring company provides ``knowingly false''
information, it should be disqualified from any new U.S.
acquisition for an extended period, say 5 years, and it should
be fined quite heavily. But I would not require the company to
divest past acquisitions not involving critical technology.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER FROM GARY
CLYDE HUFBAUER
Q.1. Do you think that significantly expanding CFIUS's
jurisdiction and identifying ``countries of particular
concern'' for purposes of CFIUS review could be considered a
discriminatory measure by trade partners?
What would be the potential consequences of doing so from a
trade perspective? Should we expect retaliation? What forms
could that retaliation take?
A.1. Yes, this would be regarded as a discriminatory measure,
but GATT Article XXI permits discrimination for national
security reasons. The target country would not have an
actionable complaint in the WTO. But retaliation can certainly
be expected, mainly in the form of denied acquisitions by U.S.
firms. China and Russia already ``wall off'' vast sectors of
their economies (mainly high-tech) from foreign acquisition, so
I suspect that the retaliation would involve other sectors,
such as finance, food, education, or health.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
GARY CLYDE HUFBAUER
Gaming and Tourism
Q.1. Foreign companies are beginning to expand into new
industries, including gaming and tourism in the State of
Nevada. As an example, foreign companies have been investing in
and developing properties on the Las Vegas Strip. In the
context of CFIUS reviews, hotel deals previously examined by
the committee include the acquisition of New York's Waldorf-
Astoria Hotel by Anbang Insurance Group in 2014.
LGiven the importance of the tourism industry to
Nevada, could you elaborate on the concerns associated
with foreign acquisition of hotels or tourism companies
in the United States?
LHow does CFIUS review such transactions, and what
is the Committee's track record on approving or denying
these types of deals?
A.1. In my opinion, the acquisition of U.S. hotel and tourism
companies by foreign firms, including firms based in adversary
nations exemplified by China and Russia, is not a national
security concern. While I am not privy to the CFIUS track
record on such M&A transactions, I am unaware of any
transaction that was blocked.
CFIUS, Mining and Proximity to Military Installations
Q.2. In the last decade, CFIUS blocked three proposed
investments in Nevada mining companies, citing national
security concerns regarding the properties' proximity to Fallon
Naval Air Station.
How does CFIUS traditionally review such acquisitions as it
relates to their location relative to military installations?
Is that process working effectively, or are there any areas
needed for improvement?
A.2. As a rock-hunter in the Fallon area, I know it well. So
far as I know, the Pentagon alerts the CFIUS committee when an
acquisition is proposed near a military installation. If the
Pentagon objects to the acquisition, because of surveillance
concerns, I believe the acquisition is routinely denied.
Greenfield Acquisition
Q.3. In Nevada, we are home to a number of technology startups,
including drone technology.
Can you discuss the potential positive and negative
consequences of expanding CFIUS review to ``greenfield''
projects--or those involving startups?
A.3. In my view, greenfield projects create much less concern
than M&A projects involving the same technology. However, there
can be a legitimate worry that the greenfield will hire
American personnel with technology expertise. In cases
involving critical technology (as identified in my answer to
Senator Crapo) it would be appropriate for CFIUS to monitor the
personnel employed for a reasonable period (say 5 years). In
appropriate cases, surveillance can be authorized by a FISA
warrant. In exceptional cases, the foreign firm may be required
to divest.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF CHAIRMAN CRAPO FROM JAMES
MULVENON
Q.1. Your written testimony expresses support for specific
provisions of the bill and concerns about specific provisions.
Please discuss the one critical provision of the bill that
is essential to CFIUS' protection of national security, and the
one provision that you feel most needs further amendment to
improve the bill.
A.1. Did not respond by publication deadline.
Q.2. Much of the concern surrounding this reform effort is
about China acquiring cutting edge technology by stealing,
reverse engineering, or investing in companies that develop the
technology.
LIs there a way for emergent ``critical''
technologies to be appropriately defined and applied by
CFIUS?
LGiven the claim that China is acquiring the
technology through various means, is reforming solely
CFIUS statute and regulations the best way to solve the
problem?
A.2. Did not respond by publication deadline.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR MENENDEZ FROM JAMES
MULVENON
Q.1. The legislation introduced by Senators Cornyn and
Feinstein would add five new types of covered transactions to
CFIUS' purview and it would expand the definition of ``critical
technologies.''
LCan you comment on whether CFIUS and its member
agencies currently have sufficient resources to monitor
foreign investment and acquisitions, review filed
transactions, and conduct thorough reviews and
investigations in the required time periods?
LIn your opinion, should any expansion of authority
also include new resources, funding, and staffing for
the panel?
A.1. Did not respond by publication deadline.
Q.2. Last year, Ness Technologies, a New Jersey-based software
engineering company, had agreed to be purchased by HNA, a
Chinese conglomerate, on the condition that the transaction
received approval from CFIUS. According to a lawsuit filed by
Ness Technologies last month, that deal fell apart because HNA
provided ``knowingly false, inconsistent, and misleading
information'' about its ownership and ties to the Chinese
government during CFIUS' review of the acquisition. HNA's
interests in the United States are certainly not limited to
Ness Technologies--they've received CFIUS approval to purchase
a California technology distributor and they are actively
working to purchase a controlling stake in SkyBridge Capital,
the investment firm owned by Anthony Scaramucci. This case
raises important questions about the consequences of failing to
provide accurate information or knowingly providing false
information to CFIUS.
LWhat steps should CFIUS take, if any, with regard
to other transactions, either previously approved or
pending approval, involving a party if CFIUS determines
that party has misled the panel. For example, should
the panel reopen previously cleared HNA transactions or
modify their approach to reviewing pending transactions
in light of this information?
LWhat should be the consequences of a party
misleading or failing to provide accurate information
to CFIUS?
A.2. Did not respond by publication deadline.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR WARNER FROM JAMES
MULVENON
Q.1. Can you describe how China legally obtains sensitive U.S.
technologies through private companies and through joint
ventures?
A.1. Did not respond by publication deadline.
Q.2. Many of the technologies that China, Russia, and others
are seeking to obtain are at a very early stage, frequently
before we know whether there is a military use for them. Many,
such as artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics also have far
ranging applications that extend well beyond military usage.
How can we encourage investment in these early stage
technologies--which is so critical to our U.S. economic
dynamism--without giving access to competitor nations and
weakening our economic advantage?
A.2. Did not respond by publication deadline.
------
RESPONSES TO WRITTEN QUESTIONS OF SENATOR CORTEZ MASTO FROM
JAMES MULVENON
Gaming and Tourism
Q.1. Foreign companies are beginning to expand into new
industries, including gaming and tourism in the State of
Nevada. As an example, foreign companies have been investing in
and developing properties on the Las Vegas Strip. In the
context of CFIUS reviews, hotel deals previously examined by
the committee include the acquisition of New York's Waldorf-
Astoria Hotel by Anbang Insurance Group in 2014.
LGiven the importance of the tourism industry to
Nevada, could you elaborate on the concerns associated
with foreign acquisition of hotels or tourism companies
in the United States?
LHow does CFIUS review such transactions, and what
is the Committee's track record on approving or denying
these types of deals?
A.1. Did not respond by publication deadline.
CFIUS, Mining and Proximity to Military Installations
Q.2. In the last decade, CFIUS blocked three proposed
investments in Nevada mining companies, citing national
security concerns regarding the properties' proximity to Fallon
Naval Air Station.
How does CFIUS traditionally review such acquisitions as it
relates to their location relative to military installations?
Is that process working effectively, or are there any areas
needed for improvement?
A.2. Did not respond by publication deadline.
Greenfield Acquisition
Q.3. In Nevada, we are home to a number of technology startups,
including drone technology.
Can you discuss the potential positive and negative
consequences of expanding CFIUS review to ``greenfield''
projects--or those involving startups?
A.3. Did not respond by publication deadline.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]