- U.S. POLICY TOWARD A TURBULENT MIDDLE EAST
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
U.S. POLICY TOWARD A
TURBULENT MIDDLE EAST
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
APRIL 18, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-124
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://docs.house.gov,
or http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
___________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-814 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail, [email protected]
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas
KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California
WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama
AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida
BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York
BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,
THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
Amy Porter, Chief of Staff
Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director
Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
WITNESSES
The Honorable David M. Satterfield, Acting Assistant Secretary,
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of State.......
5
The Honorable A. Wess Mitchell, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State........
14
LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING
The Honorable David M. Satterfield: Prepared statement...........
7
The Honorable A. Wess Mitchell: Prepared statement...............
16
APPENDIX
Hearing notice...................................................
58
Hearing minutes..................................................
59
The Honorable Daniel Donovan, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York: Prepared statement......................
61
Written responses from the Honorable David M. Satterfield to
questions submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York........................................
62
The Honorable Brad Sherman, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California......................................
68
The Honorable Ted Lieu, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California..........................................
71
U.S. POLICY TOWARD A
TURBULENT MIDDLE EAST
----------
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2018
House of Representatives,
Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 o'clock a.m.,
in room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order.
In announcing military strikes against Syria last week, the
President made clear the people of the Middle East must shape
their own destiny.
He's right. But that doesn't mean that we don't have vital
national interests in the region or a reason to promote
stability, tolerance, and respect for human rights.
The U.S. and our allies were justified in taking limited
military action against Bashar al-Assad. We took that action in
response to his barbaric use of chemical weapons.
Hopefully, the Syrian dictator gets the message. If not, I
have no doubt there will be more military strikes. The world
has enough security challenges without the breakdown of the
100-year norm against the use of chemical weapons.
That said, military force cannot be the only means of
responding to these atrocities. We need a strategy to get a
political solution, one that moves beyond Assad to secure a
lasting peace.
The previous administration did not have one. That's part
of the reason why we're confronting this crisis today. The
stakes in Syria are high. This chaos goes far beyond its
borders, threatening allies and partners.
And I again commend Ranking Member Engel for his steadfast,
years-long commitment to addressing this conflict.
There is no excuse for the Senate's failure to act on the
Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act. This bill, passed twice
unanimously by the House, would make those supporting Assad's
killing machine, and its barrel bombs and gas attacks, pay a
real cost.
The committee also recently passed the No Assistance for
Assad Act, which prohibits the regime and prohibits its allies
from profiting from any reconstruction.
Both these bills would give our diplomats real leverage. If
the U.S. isn't engaged in the Middle East, Iran will certainly
take advantage.
Tehran is already aggressive and capable, as this committee
has highlighted. The regime is using its bolstered position
from a windfall of cash from the nuclear deal to help Hezbollah
amass missiles along Israel's borders.
They are seeking, obviously, to establish a land bridge
across Syria to Israel's doorstep and they are moving fighters
and weapons across that land bridge to new bases on Israel's
borders.
This is shoring up Assad, yes, and it is also threatening
our troops that are fighting ISIS. And remember, Iran is also
fueling the humanitarian disaster in Yemen with its support for
the Houthis. Our closest partner in the region, Israel, is
increasingly threatened by Iranian expansion but so are our
other U.S. friends and allies in the region.
The Iran nuclear deal has serious flaws so let me speak to
this for a moment. This committee has closely examined them.
The administration is rightly working to address Iran's
ballistic missiles, to strengthen inspections, and to fix the
deal's sunset problem.
The British, the French, and the Germans need to stand with
us. Meanwhile, the list of the region's other challenges is
long. Our relationship with NATO ally Turkey is strained as
never before. Its military offensive against the Kurds in
Syria, frankly, has benefitted ISIS.
The Kurdish Syrian Democratic Forces we back now have to
divert their operations from the offensives they were taking
against ISIS to defensive actions, defending themselves from
Turkish military attacks.
Turkey's increasing engagement with Russia and Iran is very
concerning.
In Libya, radical jihadists remain strong. Neighboring
Egypt is a critical partner in the fight against ISIS and
should be supported, but its repression of civil society risks
backfiring, and Hamas terrorists are inciting violence in Gaza.
As tempting as it is to say enough and retreat to our
shores, smart, focused, and a determined engagement in the
Middle East must be our approach. We need to talk strategy with
the administration today about the Middle East and we
appreciate them being here with the committee.
And I will now turn to the ranking member for his comments.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
hearing. To our witnesses, welcome to the Foreign Affairs
Committee and thank you for your service.
Thank you, Mr. Mitchell, for being here today and it's good
to see you again. I appreciate the excellent work you're doing.
Ambassador Satterfield, our first work on Syria reaches
back about 15 years or so, so I appreciate your service as
well.
Still, I wish we had a permanent Assistant Secretary in
place. Nearly 15 months into this administration the White
House only sent a nomination to the Senate last week.
Syria has been a larger focus of mine. Many years ago--I
think it was more than 15--Ileana Ros-Lehtinen and I introduced
the Syria Accountability Act, which was passed into law with
bipartisan support.
So we have a huge number of concerns about the Middle East.
But today I am going to focus on Syria.
It's a shame that it takes a chemical weapons attack to
grab the world's attention when it comes to Syria. After all,
the vast majority of Assad's \1/2\ million victims didn't meet
their ends in a chemical attack. It often wasn't sarin or
chlorine that drove millions more from their homes.
For those who have lost love ones in these 7 years of
brutal slaughter, the pain and the grief are no different
whether they died in a chemical attack or in a hospital that
was leveled to the ground or in a crowded street when a barrel
bomb detonated.
Assad's a murderer, a butcher. His brutality is sickening
and it goes on every day. Yet, I want to be clear. Assad's most
recent use of chemical weapons is an abhorrent crime that
demanded immediate consequences.
Late last week, the United States, the United Kingdom, and
France acted together to dole out these consequences. The use
of the weapons cannot stand and whoever would use them and
whoever would support those who do cannot go unpunished.
But I want to be equally clear. If the administration plans
ongoing military action, Congress must first authorize it or
prevent it. Even under the most generous interpretation of the
War Powers Resolution, the 60-day clock started ticking when
the President notified Congress of the attack.
Now, if anyone hear feels a sense of deja vu, you're not
alone. A year ago, we were debating the same issue. Assad uses
chemical weapons, the United States fires off some missiles,
but the killing still continues.
Why is history repeating itself? Mainly because the
administration seems to have no strategy for dealing with the
crisis in Syria. That's why regardless of what happens next we
need to hear from the administration.
Even if the President intends for last week's air strike to
be another one-off response, the White House is still past due
in laying out its strategy for Syria to Congress and the
American people.
As part of last year's defense authorization bill, we
require the White House to come to us with a strategy by
February 1st. That deadline has come and gone. I hope you'll
tell us today if the strategy will be sent to Capitol Hill
without any more delay.
The incoherence is plain to see. Over the last year, the
President has publicly disagreed with his top advisors about
our path forward in Syria and is off-the-cuff remarks about
leaving Syria and reckless rhetoric have at times emboldened
Assad.
Just prior to last year's chemical weapons attack, the
President said we would have to accept Assad as a fact of life,
and shortly before the most recent attack the President
suggested a precipitous withdrawal from Syria.
Rather than forming the policy that would help to resolve
this crisis, I feel that the President has only made it worse.
I am not holding my breath, but I continue to hope that the
administration will bring us a plan that will push for an end
to violence that will ease a political transition and that will
help lay the groundwork for a future for Syria in which Bashar-
al Assad has no role whatsoever.
This is certainly no easy task and I'd be the first one to
acknowledge that the previous administration should have done
more.
But there are still plenty of good ideas to help craft a
policy like this. In fact, as the chairman mentioned, I've
introduced two bills that I think would move us toward those
goals.
The Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act passed the House
unanimously last year. It started with bipartisan good work, as
usual, from this committee.
This bill would crack down on Assad's enablers, namely
Moscow and Tehran, who serve as lifelines to the barbaric
regime.
I have to say after the President personally overrode his
own administration's plan to sanction Russia for its support of
Assad, I think this bill is needed now more than ever.
I hope the Senate will act on it soon. The other bill, as
the chairman mentioned, is my No Assistance for Assad Act,
which I introduced with Mr. Kinzinger and which this committee
voted to advance a few weeks ago.
This bill would restrict reconstruction funding for any
area still controlled by Assad. One bill would help end the
violence now. The other would make sure that when this crisis
has ended no American tax dollars are going to help Assad cling
to power.
We cannot overstate the scope of the tragedy in Syria.
Assad has the blood of hundreds of thousands of innocent Syrian
men, women, and children on his hands.
That this catastrophe has been allowed to go on for so long
is a global failure that will leave a black mark on this era of
human history. But we cannot throw up our hands in resignation.
If America is to remain a leader on the global stage, we
must continue working to end the bloodshed.
I again thank our witnesses. I thank the chairman. I look
forward to hearing how the administration intends to tackle
this problem and the range of other challenges with which we
are challenging in the Middle East.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
So this morning we are pleased to welcome David
Satterfield. He's Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near
Eastern Affairs, and Wess Mitchell is Assistant Secretary of
State for European and Eurasian Affairs.
Mr. Satterfield served in many senior positions within the
department including as U.S. Ambassador to Lebanon, as Chief of
Mission in Cairo, and Deputy Chief of Mission in Iraq.
Dr. Mitchell, prior to his current position at the State
Department, was the co-founder and president and CEO of the
Center for European Policy Analysis and we appreciate them
being here with us today.
Without objection, gentlemen, your full prepared statements
will be made part of the record. Members here will have 5
calendar days to submit any statements or questions to you or
any extraneous material for the record.
So if you would, Mr. Satterfield, please summarize your
remarks and after the 5 minutes we will go to Mr. Mitchell and
then to the questions.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DAVID M. SATTERFIELD, ACTING
ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF NEAR EASTERN AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Mr. Satterfield. Thank you very much, Chairman Royce,
Ranking Member Engel, members of the committee. I appreciate
the opportunity for me, my colleague, Assistant Secretary
Mitchell, to testify.
From the Arab Spring in 2011 to the current civil wars in
Syria and Yemen, the rise and fall of ISIS' so-called
caliphate, no one would argue the many significant challenges
the United States and our allies face in the region.
However, I want to say at the beginning in many places the
U.S. has made positive strides. We are supporting the growth of
a nascent democracy in Tunisia.
Economically, the region continues to support and we
aggressively pursue American opportunities for business that
generate American jobs.
We have supported billions of dollars of sales to our
partners in the Gulf, power generation solutions in Libya,
Algeria, and Iraq, major sales of locomotives and other power
sources in Egypt, and we have made significant dramatic
progress against ISIS.
However, this said, we are not blind to the continuing
issues in the region and the U.S. is taking all possible steps
to find solutions to this region's enduring challenges.
On April 7th, after weeks of heavy Syrian and Russian
bombardment on the people of Douma and adjacent areas, the
regime deployed chemical weapons, killing dozens and injuring
hundreds of innocent men, women, and children.
On April 13th, the militaries of the United States, France,
and the United Kingdom executed strikes on three chemical
weapons facilities in Syria.
Russia has failed to live up to its guarantee in regards to
the 2013 framework agreement that Syria would cease all use of
chemical weapons and fully declare its entire stockpile for
verifiable destruction, and Iran acts malignly in Syria and
through Syria, pouring resources and forces to support Assad
and advance its regional ambitions including in Lebanon.
The targeted military action by the U.S., France, and the
U.K. was a measure to deter and prevent Syria's illegal and
unacceptable use of chemical weapons.
This sends, we hope, a positive and powerful message to the
Syrian regime, Russia, Iran, and the international community
that chemical weapons will not be tolerated and there will be
real consequences for their use.
While preventing the use of chemical weapons in Syria is
our immediate concern, the administration's priority remains
the defeat of ISIS. ISIS has lost nearly all of the territory
it once controlled in Iraq in Syria. But the fight in Syria
still has to be pursued to its conclusion.
More broadly, the United States supports a unified and
territorially whole Syria. This objective is served by U.S.
support for the U.N.-led Geneva political process established
by U.N. Security Council Resolution 2254 in which process the
U.S. believes strongly that representatives of all Syrians
including all its Kurdish components should fully participate.
Our strategic partnership with Iraq including the Kurdistan
region remains essential to ensuring the goal of a lasting
defeat of ISIS and encountering Iran's malign influence in the
region.
The Iraqi Government is stabilizing communities including
minority communities that suffered greatly from ISIS and now we
are beginning private sector-led investment-driven
reconstruction.
On May 12th, all Iraqis, including Iraqi Kurds, will
participate in parliamentary elections, the country's fourth
since 2005.
Iran's malign influence in the region continues to threaten
our allies such as Jordan and Israel, and feeds violent
conflicts in Syria and Yemen through Iran Revolutionary Guard
Corps facilitation and work.
The Houthis have repeatedly used in Yemen Iranian ballistic
missile and cruise missile technology to threaten Saudi Arabia,
including over 80,000 U.S. citizens in that country.
U.S. military support for the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen
serves a clear purpose--to reinforce Saudi and Emirati action
on behalf of the Yemeni Government in the face of intensified
Houthi threats and to expand the capability of our Gulf
partners to push back themselves against Iran's destabilizing
actions.
We all agree, as does the Congress, that the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen is unacceptable. Last month, the Governments of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates provided $1 billion
to Yemen's humanitarian response appeal, and this complements
the U.S. Government pledge of $87 million and more than $854
million contributed since beginning of fiscal year 2017.
The Iranian regime is taking advantage, as I said, of
regional conflict and instability to expand its influence and
threaten its neighbors. We remain focused on neutralizing
Iran's influence, particularly its support for terror and
militance, cyber warfare, ballistic missiles, and use of proxy
forces.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, members of the committee, the
Middle East is a complex landscape and the people in the Middle
East deserve an end to violence, hunger, and uncertainty.
We are working with our allies inside and outside the
region to find solutions.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I welcome the
opportunity to respond to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Satterfield follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ambassador Satterfield.
Dr. Mitchell.
STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE A. WESS MITCHELL, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF EUROPEAN AND EURASIAN AFFAIRS, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Mr. Mitchell. Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel,
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you. It's an honor to represent
the State Department's Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs
in this hearing.
In my comments today, I will focus on the strategic
dimension of the conflict in Syria as it relates to the work of
our bureau and, specifically, to the part played by the
Republic of Turkey and the Russian Federation.
America's goals in Syria have been to defeat ISIS, to see a
Syria that is unified and stable emerge from the rubble of this
conflict, and to prevent Iran, a power that aids and abets
Hezbollah and that seeks the destruction of the state of
Israel, from extending its malign influence in the region.
Let us assess Turkey and Russia as they relate to these
goals. Turkey is a 66-year member of the NATO Alliance and
member of the Defeat ISIS Coalition.
It has suffered more casualties from terrorism than any
other ally and hosts 3.5 million Syrian refugees. It supports
the coalition through the use of Incirlik Air Base, through its
commitment of Turkish military forces against ISIS on the
ground in Dabiq and Al-Bab, and through close intelligence
cooperation with the United States and other allies.
Turkey is publicly committed to a political resolution in
Syria that accords with U.N. Security Council Resolution 2254.
Turkey has a vested strategic interest in checking the
spread of Iranian influence and in having a safe and stable
border with Syria. Despite these shared interests, Turkey
lately has increased its engagement with Russia and Iran.
Ankara has sought to assure us that it sees this
cooperation as a necessary stepping stone toward progress in
the Geneva process.
But the ease with which Turkey brokered arrangements with
the Russian military to facilitate the launch of its Operation
Olive Branch in Afrin district, arrangements to which America
was not privy, is gravely concerning.
Ankara claims to have agreed to purchase a Russian S-400
missile system, which could potentially lead to sanctions under
Section 231 of CAATSA and adversely impact Turkey's
participation in the F-35 program.
It is in the American national interest to see Turkey
remain strategically and politically aligned with the West. Our
policy has been to combine close engagement with clear
messaging that the United States will actively defend our
interests.
In the context of Syria, we have engaged in high-level
interagency discussions both to address legitimate Turkish
security concerns and to avoid inadvertent collisions between
our forces.
These conversations are ongoing. Moving forward, our aim is
to enlist Turkey as a more active ally in supporting the Geneva
process, the defeat of ISIS, and stabilization in Syria, as
well as a long-term factor in thwarting expansion by Russia and
Iran, as outlined in the national security strategy and
national defense strategy.
Let us now turn to Russia. It is hard to see how Russia
shares any of America's strategic goals in Syria. Moscow
professes a wish to defeat ISIS but directs its bombs at
fighters and even civilians who oppose the regime, with little
regard to ISIS.
It professes to want a stable Syria but subverts the Geneva
process with separate tracks like the Astana process where it
dictates the agenda, and Moscow facilitates the spread of
Iranian influence in Syria and elsewhere in the region.
Moscow's primary aims in Syria are not really about the
Syrian people or the stability of the region. Moscow wants to
retain its presence in Syria as an entry point through which to
influence future events in the Levant and Eastern
Mediterranean.
It wants to inflict a globally visible defeat on the United
States to create a negative demonstration effect of thwarting
our aims here to dishearten our friends abroad and to drive
wedges between us and our allies.
Moscow is willing to impose catastrophic human costs to
achieve these goals. Russia has supported the Assad regime's
indiscriminate attacks and siege tactics on civilian
neighborhoods, which have killed, wounded, and starved
thousands of innocent civilians.
As we have seen in Aleppo and east Ghouta, the Russian
Government not only supports, but goes to great lengths to
protect, an Assad regime that uses weaponized chemicals, horrid
killers like sarin and chlorine, to slaughter men, women, and
children, even toddlers and infants. Let us remember that.
We are pushing Russia to be a constructive participant in
the U.N.-led Geneva process and to bring Assad to the
negotiating table.
So far, Russia has ignored these calls and has instead
chosen to be a spoiler to Geneva. Its reckless intervention in
Syria and support for the Assad regime has raised the risk of
confrontation with the West.
The failed attack on U.S. forces by Russian mercenaries
recently in Syria was one sobering example of this behavior.
America has done its part to avoid escalatory spirals.
We have brokered and maintained deconfliction channels to
prevent collisions in an increasingly congested and complex
battle space. Communication between the coalition and the
Russians helps minimize the risk of miscalculation,
misunderstanding, or accidental engagement.
We do not seek a confrontation, but our forces will not
hesitate to use necessary and proportionate force to defend
themselves as they are engaged in operations to defeat ISIS.
Moscow's support for the Syrian regime is intolerable for
America and all civilized nations. In the days and weeks ahead,
the United States and our allies will degrade and defeat ISIS,
support a stable Syria, and limit the spread of Iranian malign
influence.
We will work with NATO ally, Turkey, to more fully advance
these endeavors and push the Russian Government to desist in
supporting a hateful regime that kills civilians and bring a
speedy political resolution to this horrible conflict.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mitchell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
----------
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Dr. Mitchell.
You know, our delegations have met in many of the capitals
across the Middle East with government that raised this same
concern about the crescent that Iran is pushing now through
Syria, through Iraq, up to Lebanon.
And this question we get a lot--is this going to allow Iran
to threaten Jordan, to threaten Israel? Will it mean the end of
an independent Lebanon? What will it mean to the other
partners, allies in the region? What's the strategy?
What's the strategy, especially in Syria? And also in Iraq,
I guess, but what is to be done to prevent the consolidation of
that land bridge, as I said in my opening statement, from which
we see the transfer now of these heavy weapons, of these
missiles, of fighters coming right up to the Israeli border,
right up, Lebanon now is called into question in terms of their
ability to be an independent state.
So I want to ask you about that strategy, and given that
Hezbollah is Iran's primary terrorist proxy, why have we not
seen more designations of Hezbollah front companies,
particularly in the construction sector, which I think would
set them back?
Ambassador.
Mr. Satterfield. Mr. Chairman, we certainly agree that Iran
today is a real and imminent threat to our allies in the
region, including Israel and Jordan.
With respect to the strategy to deal with that threat, the
first priority for the administration was the elimination of
the challenge posed to all the states in the region and to any
effort to constrain Iranian expansion and aggression posed by
ISIS and its so-called caliphate.
Now, that goal in Iraq has been accomplished and the
campaign there is focused on what we might call
counterterrorism efforts rather than an outright military
campaign.
In Syria, as I noted in my opening remarks, the challenge
does remain. While ISIS' caliphate has been dramatically
reduced in terms of geographic scope and numbers, there is a
remnant element up against the Iraqi border in the eastern
Euphrates Valley that still has to be confronted and destroyed
as we are confident it can and will be.
But the challenge posed by Iran, the challenges posed by
the connection that you note, from Iran, Iraq, Syria, to
Lebanon has to be dealt with.
We have been working assiduously in strengthening Iraqi
forces in their ability to control the border with Syria. We
have been working as well in northeast Syria where our forces
are present in ensuring that trade of illicit nature across
that border is constrained.
But there needs to be continued approach by all of the
countries in the region with the United States to what is a
common threat not just to the U.S. and our interests, not just
to Jordan and Israel alone, but to the Gulf as well by Iran's
hegemonistic ambitions and proliferation and we are working on
mobilizing.
Chairman Royce. Well, it seems to me--if I could just
return to the dialogue that I think we all need to have on
this--there has to be a strategy with respect to Syria about
how we are going to deploy additional sanctions, diplomacy in
terms of an effort to get a political solution, how we are
going to perhaps put in safe zones and then expand those zones
to protect those on the ground who are allies right now
fighting ISIS that, obviously, will be targets of Assad.
There needs to be a comprehensive strategy here laid out by
the administration for Congress in terms of the options to
pursue because of the urgency and also because of the fact that
some of the initiatives we've taken here.
We need Engel's Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act, as I
said, which has unanimous support in the House. It would impose
real costs on Assad and his backers for these war crimes and
those backers--those backers are Iran and Russia.
The administration has said on multiple occasions that
Russia and Iran are complicit in Assad's chemical weapons
attacks. So I would just ask another question here: Does the
administration support imposing costs on the Russians and the
Iranians for their role in the Assad regime's war crimes
against its own people?
Mr. Satterfield. Mr. Chairman, the administration has taken
steps with respect to both Iran, Iranian-supported proxy
forces, notably, Hezbollah, and with respect to Russia for
engagement vicariously in the kind of proliferation, criminal
behaviors, and actions both in Syrian and outside Syria that
you reference, and we will continue to act aggressively to use
the authorities available to us to that end.
Chairman Royce. One area that I think is--if I could just
close here--I hope that the Senate, with a lot of pressure from
the administration and us, will move quickly on the Caesar
Syrian Civilian Protection Act in order to put this into law,
and I think that that will help protect Syrian civilians but
also help lay out a strategy.
Thank you, and I go to Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I concur with all your
remarks and your questions.
I want to just say that when Secretary Tillerson outlined
the administration's intentions in Syria in his speech at the
Hoover Institution, as the chairman mentioned, he laid out a
whole list of goals, and I just hope that those goals remain
goals that we are trying to move forward with.
The problem is while ISIS is, obviously, the worst of the
worst, the way I looked at Syria and still do is that our goal
should not have been only the defeat of ISIS. That should have
been one of our goals but should not have been the only goal.
I really think that the defeat of Assad was a parallel goal
and should have had the priority that it had and,
unfortunately, I think under both the two administrations it
really hasn't been.
Assad is just a butcher and a murderer and it just breaks
my heart that we didn't offer support to the Syrian people when
they needed it the most.
The Wall Street Journal reported this week that the
administration was looking to set up an Arab force to take the
place of U.S. troops in Syria.
So let me ask either of you some questions. Who would
contribute fighters to this force? How would the transition
take place? Who would train the fighters? Would the United
States continue to have some holding force? To what extent is
this feasible, considering how thin the region is?
Spread in Yemen, would Egypt send fighters to Syrian areas
not controlled by Assad? Would the United State continue to
provide air cover? How effective would these fighters be,
considering we haven't seen these forces be effective in Yemen
or the Sinai?
Those are just some questions about this. Can either one of
you tell me about this Arab force and how much have we thought
this out?
Mr. Satterfield. Ranking Member Engel, the President has
made clear he wishes to see the U.S. continue and complete the
campaign against ISIS in northeast Syria.
The President has also made clear he believes that regional
and local forces need to take on this struggle as they
themselves are directly exposed to the consequences of the
resurgence of ISIS.
Therefore, we are reaching out to partners across the
region to see what form of contribution, and not just
financial, they may make to sustaining this fight beyond the
destruction of ISIS.
Mr. Engel. You see, while I agree with everything you have
said, Ambassador, to me, ISIS is one prong of something--an
important prong, but one prong of what we should be doing, and
I really think to rid Syria of the butcher Assad ought to be as
important as the--as our ISIS concerns.
Mr. Satterfield. I strongly agree with you that a Syria in
which Assad remains as leader--this regime--is not a Syria
which we would predict to be meaningfully secure or stable or
not a source of generation threat and violent extremism under
whatever name in the future and it's why we have strongly
supported a political process led by the U.N.
Unfortunately, that political process has been blocked and
the parties responsible for blocking it are quite clear it's
the Syrian regime itself and the Russians who, through their
absence of pressure on the regime in Damascus, contributes to
enables this freezing of a Geneva process which virtually the
entire international community supports.
Mr. Engel. And through their veto in the United Nations.
Mr. Satterfield. Exactly, sir.
Mr. Engel. Is the State Department satisfied with the
current communication channels in place with Russia to
deconflict issues in Syria?
Since Russia became militarily engaged in Syria, they've
relied extensively on resupply by air. These flights, both
military and chartered civil flights, cross the airspace of
many of our partners including Georgia and Iraq.
What discussions has the U.S. had with our partners about
closing their respective air space to such Russian flights?
Mr. Satterfield. Ranking Member, our discussions in the
deconfliction channel, which is quite robust with Russia, have
focused on deconfliction of forces on the ground, in the air in
Syria, but not on the broader areas that you touch on.
Mr. Engel. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We got to Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Chairman Royce.
Welcome to our panelists.
I am hoping to get some clarification from the State
Department on the current status of the PLO office. As we know,
it is unlawful for the PLO to maintain an office in the United
States.
But for decades, the executive branch has had waiver
authority to allow the office in DC to remain open. This waiver
must be renewed every 6 months, and last November the
administration allowed the waiver to lapse.
The administration then had 90 days to issue a secondary
waiver to allow the PLO office to remain open. That deadline
passed in February and no waiver of any kind has been issued
since.
Interestingly, however, the administration issued its PLO
commitments compliance report just last week, stating, as it
always does, that the PLO has not lived up to its commitments.
We sanctioned it by downgrading the status of the PLO
office, then immediately waived that sanction in the interests
of so-called national security, which is used so often.
So my questions are under what authority is the PLO office
currently remaining open? Why has it not been closed in
accordance with the law? And I expect to hear that State
believes this 90-day period for the secondary waiver starts the
clock and is not the deadline.
In other words, this waiver exists in perpetuity. The
administration will never have to issue that secondary waiver
and the PLO office will never have to close despite the
underlying law--is that your interpretation?
Mr. Satterfield. I would be happy and I think it would be
quite useful to provide to you a detailed written response on
the different aspects of the question. But I can give you a
broad overall summary.
In consultation with the Department of Justice, which has
the direct authority in interpreting the consequences of the
failure to waive originally, we have allowed the office to
remain not open in a formal status as has been downgraded, but
to remain able to communicate in support of peace negotiations.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Are there such peace negotiations
underway?
Mr. Satterfield. We believe the continued purposes of the
office meet that requirement. But, again, I would like to
provide you with a detailed response to the different aspects
of the questions you asked.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Well, I look forward to conversing later
with you and receiving that correspondence.
Mr. Satterfield. Happy to.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Because I am really interested about the
authority under which it remains open. It seems to me that it's
very unlawful.
But moving to Lebanon, there are elections in just a few
weeks in which Iran and Hezbollah will manage to maintain their
position, probably strengthen it, and Secretary Tillerson has
said that we have to recognize the reality that Hezbollah is
part of the political process in Lebanon.
Could you unpack that for us, explain State's position and
interaction with Hezbollah? Do we have the same position in
regards to Hezbollah and the Lebanese Armed Forces?
Thank you. Thank you to both.
Mr. Satterfield. We regard Hezbollah as a terrorist
organization. We both designate members of Hezbollah and those
associated with Hezbollah's support as well as entities that
are involved with Hezbollah.
That hasn't changed. That remains and is vigorously
pursued. With respect to the Lebanese elections, we certainly
support a free and fair election in Lebanon.
With respect to the outcome you will understand I don't
want to prejudice by my comments those outcomes. But I would
say, broadly speaking, we do not see the likelihood of a
dramatic change in the political constellation--the balance
that marks Lebanese electoral politics or the National Assembly
today.
With regard to the Lebanese Armed Forces and Hezbollah, I
do want to be clear. The United States has provided exceptional
support for the Lebanese Armed Forces in recent years and not
just financial support.
It's not simply a dollars and sense issue. We have
personnel working closely with and in the Lebanese Armed
Forces. This gives us an insight and a view into how those
forces function that we've never had in the past and I can say
here on the record we do not believe that the Lebanese Armed
Forces are anything other than a legitimate institution of the
Lebanese state, and I would note that in strengthening that
legitimate institution you effectively counter the illegitimate
security structures, militias, principally Hezbollah, which
pose a challenge to the state and its authority.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much for a thorough
answer, Mr. Ambassador, and I echo the chairman's desire to see
more designation and sanctioning of Hezbollah affiliates.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. And we go now to Brad Sherman of
California.
Mr. Sherman. Take a breather. I've got about 3 minutes
where I will preview questions for the record. You can answer
those later, then I will have some questions for you to respond
to orally.
First, when are you going to fill all the important
positions at the State Department? As the ranking member
pointed out, that's critical.
As to Qatar, they have diplomatic contacts with Hamas and
the Taliban. So do we. They have media that some people accuse
of being pro-terrorist. So do we. So does Israel.
The real question here is does Qatar currently give money
to terrorist organizations or allow its citizens to do so.
Saudi Arabia wants a nuclear program, wants a nuclear
cooperation agreement with the United States. Just because
Saudi Arabia is anti-Iran does not mean they've embraced the
values of Jeffersonian democracy.
I don't think a nuclear weapon in Saudi Arabia brings us
closer to peace. I met the Crown Prince. Many are impressed by
the Crown Prince. But many were impressed by the Shah of Iran
in 1979 and by 1980 all the weapons he had acquired were in the
hands of the Islamic Republic.
So my question is, what are we doing to prevent Saudi
Arabia from engaging in enrichment or reprocessing of fissile
material?
Japan benefits from the U.S. defense umbrella. It seeks a
veto over the terms of any deal we make with North Korea. Is
Japan contributing sufficiently to the enormous financial costs
that we face in the Middle East?
Next, Turkey--should it continue to enjoy the faster review
period for arms exports that we give to other NATO countries,
given that it is, at best, the least pro-American NATO member?
Syria--we have three objectives there: Defeat ISIS and
enforce the chemical warfare convention--those are two
objectives that we seem to have a reasonable strategy for.
Our third objective is to help the Syrian people live in
safety, peace, and with good governance. Congress has proposed
a strategy here. We had bills passed through this committee.
But does the administration have a strategy or is this
something we simply can't achieve at a cost the American people
will accept?
Second as to Syria, assuming Assad is in power even 2 or 3
years from now, why shouldn't we allow the Kurds to have
sovereignty? Why should we insist that they continue to live in
a country driven by war, Assad, Russia, Iran, Hezbollah?
Iran--here I will actually have a quesiton--the argument is
that we should renounce the JCPOA because, well, Obama
negotiated and it was bad then so it should cease to exist now.
The question is really what is the legal effect of voiding
the JCPOA. Well, the legal effect on Iran is that they're now
entitled to start enriching.
The legal effect on Russia is they are the custodian of the
many bombs worth of fissile material that Iran turned over when
they got their money at the beginning of the JCPOA and Putin
could say, well, if the deal is void I am returning the fissile
material to Iran.
And third--and this is thought to be the good part--if the
JCPOA fails to exist, then the United States and its allies are
free to start new sanctions on Iran.
So the question is, is that good part of renunciation
illusory. John Kerry sat exactly where you're sitting now,
Ambassador, and told this committee that even after the JCPOA
we can adopt harsh sanctions on Iran, anything, as long as it's
proportionate to Iran's wrongdoing outside the nuclear arena.
Well, Iran helps Hezbollah, Hamas, and the Houthis, and
those are just the terrorist organizations that start with the
letter H.
So the question is does voiding the JCPOA or taking an
action that Putin and Tehran could claim is voiding the JCPOA
just play into their hands, giving them legal rights--and
should we instead just sanction them proportionate to their
nonnuclear evil?
Mr. Satterfield. Mr. Sherman, excellent questions for the
record and we'll respond to you in detail on all of those.
With respect to your last question, it is the intent of the
administration at this moment to fix the JCPOA. Those
diplomatic efforts are underway quite actively with our key
European partners. We hope they produce a successful result.
That's our focus at the moment, nothing else.
Chairman Royce. The gentleman's time is expired.
We go to Mr. Chris Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for convening
this very important hearing and welcome to Ambassador
Satterfield and Dr. Mitchell. Thank you for your extraordinary
service and leadership.
I would also like to just note that Nick Rahall, former
Member of Congress from West Virginia, a very distinguished
member, is here with us and it's great to see him again.
Let me just ask a few questions--at least five. I have many
more but I won't allow more than that.
On Monday, American Pastor Andrew Brunson endured a 12-
hour-long hearing on the groundless terrorism charges he faced
with our Ambassador-at-Large for religious freedom. Sam
Brownback in attendance as well as Senator Thom Tillis.
At the end of the hearing, he was remanded in custody until
his next court date in May. Is it the opinion of the department
that somehow diplomacy will effectuate his release or is it
time, when taken together with all the other religious
repression that Erdogan is practising and other Turkish leaders
have done previous, to look at Turkey as a CPC (country of
particular concern) pursuant to the IRFA legislation?
Second, in 2004, I authored a law to establish a special
envoy to combat anti-Semitism. Nita Lowey and I just wrote an
op-ed that has been carried by a number of publications
appealing to the administration and the incoming Secretary of
State. We could not get to first base, unfortunately, with
Secretary Tillerson.
I met with him. We just could not get him to say, let's do
it--let's pick. It is congressionally mandated so I do hope
that very critical position will be filled and filled quickly.
Third, and just like my good friend Eliot Engel and the
frustration of the Senate not taking up a bill, H.R. 390, the
Iraq and Syria Genocide Emergency Humanitarian Relief and
Accountability Act, which I worked on for 4 years, held 10
congressional hearings--the Christians were not getting help
from the previous administration, despite promises to look at
it.
I went over there and met with a number of the Christians.
I know that the Vice President has been--as well as the head of
USAID, Mark Green, looking at this. Those people need help.
If it wasn't for the Knights of Columbus and others
providing upwards of $60 million of private aid, we would have
had dead children and very sick adults and elderly in--who--you
know, the Christians who escaped ISIS.
So, please, that legislation needs to pass. It also has an
accountability piece so that we can bring charges with facts
against those who have committed these crimes.
Fourth, on UNRRA, I just looked at some recent very, very,
compelling testimony about the anti-Semitism and the anti-
Americanism that's contained in the textbooks.
We are going to do a hearing on my subcommittee on this
shortly joint with Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, who has been very, very
focused on that as well. It's not getting better. It's,
arguably, getting worse.
And finally, the cash payments that were made to Iran--the
Iranian deal, in my opinion, was egregiously flawed on a number
of fronts anytime, anywhere, all the other reasons.
But where is that money going? How has it been spent and
how much? Are we, through that sanctions relief, providing
assistance to the troops that are being deployed to Syria?
Hezbollah is getting money, we know, from Iran. Is that
part of the sanctions relief money? If you could answer those
questions I would be deeply appreciative.
Mr. Mitchell. Congressman, thank you for those questions,
and you have raised some very important issues. Let me quickly
deal with two of the issues that you have raised.
First of all, Pastor Brunson--this is a matter of
considerable focus and concern for the State Department and
from my bureau, from me personally.
I visited with Pastor Brunson's wife, Noreen, in Ankara not
long ago. We are in close and continuing touch with Pastor
Brunson, with his family members, and with the Turkish
Government.
There was a hearing on Monday. Senator Tillis was there and
so was Ambassador Brownback. I would just say this: The Turks
claim to have a very high standard of justice. The indictment
suggests otherwise. The claims in the indictment were
laughable. This is clearly an innocent man.
We are watching to see if the Turks adhere to their stated
standards of justice. If that does not happen, we are
considering options for consequences.
We are in close coordination, in touch with the Senate and
the House in talking through some of those possible measures.
But I want to underscore that we take it very seriously.
Secondly, on Holocaust issues, anti-Semitism is a growing
problem throughout many parts of Europe. The Office of
Holocaust Issues is housed in our bureau--European Affairs.
I established for our team, when I came into my job, that
this would be a very high priority for us. I don't have
anything--any comments to make at this time about the role that
you have mentioned.
I will simply say that that matter is under consideration.
Mr. Satterfield. With respect to assistance to the
Christian and other minority communities in the Nineveh Plains,
this is indeed, as you noted, an object of special focus for
the administration.
The Vice President has led on this effort and we continue
to engage. As you know, I believe, we have provided
extraordinary assistance beyond that previously or generally
allocated for the communities of Iraq specifically for the
purpose of assisting these communities and we see this as a
very positive direction.
On UNRRA, again, the President has made very clear that we
are examining quite closely every dollar of taxpayer money that
has been or may be expended for the purposes of support of
UNRRA, and at present, the administration does not have plans
for any additional funding.
We will review that issue based upon that careful
consideration of where the moneys are going, what other support
exists for UNRRA amongst regional parties, international
parties, and the purposes for which it goes.
Finally, on the JCPOA and the specific question you posed
on money, I would like to be able to respond to your question
in a different format, not here in an open session.
But we can get you responses to your question.
Mr. Smith. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. Greg Meeks of New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador, let me just follow up on that dealing with the
JCPOA, real quick, in your last response to Mr. Sherman.
I, as the ranking member, I've talked to a lot of the E3.
I've talked to folks about our allies in the military, in
Israel, et cetera.
They've all come back and said to me that the JCPOA, for
the limited purpose of which it was agreed upon, is working--
that--and so they have extreme concerns about us moving out.
They say for the limited purpose of preventing Iran from
having a nuclear weapon, given the terms of the agreement,
they're much better off. They know more about the Iranian
nuclear program than they've ever known before, et cetera.
So you said that--what needs to be fixed as far as what
that purpose is? Can you tell us that?
Mr. Satterfield. There are three critical deficiencies we
identify both in the JCPOA, more importantly, in the frame
around the JCPOA.
One is the absence of sanctions addressed to Iran's ICBM--
that is, long-range and their continental range ballistic
missile program.
The second is the matter of inspection authority for IAEA
in certain types of institutions in Iran, which are not, in our
view, adequately laid out, empowered within the JCPOA text.
And finally, the so-called sunset clauses--that is the
sunsetting of restrictions on critical elements of the
enrichment program and enrichment cycle where we wish to see
essentially through a frame or follow-on agreement to the JCPOA
and elimination of those sunsets.
Now, we are engaged in detailed discussions with the E3--
with our critical European partners. Those discussions are
ongoing, literally, today and we very much hope they come to a
positive resolution.
Mr. Meeks. And if they don't?
Mr. Satterfield. We will address that situation at the
level of the President. But we are focused now on achieving the
success.
Mr. Mitchell. And can I add a point on that, sir, if I may?
You mentioned our allies, and I can speak a little bit to
that. I think there is a recognition in Europe and among our
allies that the problem of Iran is growing in scale,
specifically the ballistic missile problem, the problem of
Iran's malign influence across the region. Even in the period
since JCPOA was brokered, the scale on which Iran is exerting
its influence across the region has increased considerably. I
think there's also a recognition that this is a set of problems
for which Europe should take increased responsibility.
That's a message that I hear on a regular basis in our
bureau's interaction with officials from major U.S. allies in
Europe.
Mr. Meeks. Are we ready to walk away from our allies and we
are also talking about part of that agreement is China and
Russia, and given what's going on with them right now so that
we are virtually dividing the signatories of the JCPOA.
And so you say we'll take it up at that time but this was a
multilateral agreement that, from what I am getting, everyone
says Iran has not violated and, at the same time, we are in
about the process of negotiating an agreement with North Korea
about our word and whether we stand by it or not.
Mr. Satterfield. Mr. Meeks, I can only reiterate, the
administration is focused on success here. We are focused on
obtaining support from our critical allies to cure what we
regard as significant failures both in the agreement and things
that were not negotiated at the time of the agreement but now
pose a real threat.
And as Assistant Secretary Mitchell said, the dialogue with
our European allies has been a positive one and we hope it is
one that leads to a comprehensive resolution.
Mr. Meeks. I don't know about the policies but the
President has said something else other than what you have said
that he's willing to pull out.
The message we've gotten from the President is that we are
willing to leave our allies and change what the agreement was
because I think that's what the concerns of our allies are that
we are fundamentally changing what the agreement was. And so
we'll see how it goes and where we'll end up. But I think it's
a very dangerous situation.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of
California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Secretary Mitchell, last month in Kosovo,
six Turkish nationals were kidnapped and sent back against
their will to Turkey, where they are imprisoned. They were
members of the Gulen movement, and it's somewhat of a scandal
in Kosovo.
We have in Turkey now is a government that's willing not
only to oppress its own people which, as we know, has been--
they've been arrested by the thousands but now is projecting
itself into Europe and conducting itself in instances like I
just described.
Quite frankly, the tone of your testimony today was
certainly not someone that seemed to be alarmed about the
misdirection of Turkey, and are we going to be giving them
those F-35s?
Do you believe that we should continue treating Turkey as
it evolves into this radical Islamic government and continue to
treat them as if they were our allies of 10, 15, 20 years ago?
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you for those questions, sir. Let me
start with the issue of Kosovo and just say that we followed
that development very closely.
It was a very concerning development and we have been in
touch closely with officials in Kosovo on this matter and
underscored the importance of the rule of law as it relates to
matters of extradition. So----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Have we been in touch with the Turkish on
this?
Mr. Mitchell. We are in ongoing conversations with the
Turkish authorities about a number of matters. With respect to
Gulen, that is primarily----
Mr. Rohrabacher. No, no, no, on a number of matters--on the
Gulen kidnapping of these people in Kosovo, are we now
confronting the Turks on this?
Mr. Mitchell. We have raised it in our diplomatic
conversations. It's primarily a matter for the Department of
Justice.
But let me take on the broader question that you raised
about Turkey because I think it's absolutely essential for
today's discussion and I do want to be clear.
We are concerned about the track that Turkey is on both
with regard to democracy and rule of law and the period since
the attempted coup, and in a broader geopolitical sense. The
coordination with Russia and Iran is very concerning. I would
also say that the track that Erdogan has repeatedly articulated
publicly, of closer engagement with the Russians on S-400, we
take this seriously and have prioritized that in our diplomatic
conversations with the Turks.
We have been very clear that if a transaction occurs there
will be consequences under CAATSA, that we will abide by the
law as articulated in Section 231.
We've also been very clear with regard to the consequences
for potential participation in the F-35 program and, more
broadly, our military industrial cooperation with Turkey.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, I would hope that we also are paying
attention to the fact that Turkey is involved with radical
Islamic organizations now. I don't know how deeply. We don't
know how extensive that is but we do know that it's turned that
corner and heading in that direction.
Secretary Satterfield, what is our purpose in Syria? Will
we accept anything less than--would we accept a compromise that
would keep Assad in power at least in part of Syria or is our
goal and our purpose only to totally eliminate the Assad
government?
Mr. Satterfield. Mr. Rohrabacher, our purpose of our forces
in Syria, as Secretary Mattis, Chairman Dunford have stated
repeatedly, is to defeat ISIS.
The purpose of our diplomacy of our international
engagement with respect to Syria is to support a political
process which, at its end, has a revised constitution,
elections conducted under the auspices of the United Nations,
and our belief is that those elections, if freely and fairly
conducted amongst all Syrians including the emigre Syrian
communities, would not produce the survival of the Assad
regime.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Well, let me just note, what you
described wasn't just Syria but probably three-quarters of the
countries of the Middle East, and if we made those demands, why
is it that Syria--we have to make those demands against Syria
and not against all these other countries in the Middle East?
Mr. Satterfield. Because, sir, of the extraordinary
depredations of this regime in this country against its
citizens, because of the extraordinary and historically
unprecedented in modern times outflow----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You don't think the rest of the countries
in the Middle East have similar track records? You're trying to
tell me that--well, we heard the same thing, of course, about
Saddam Hussein. We heard the same thing about Qaddafi and we
end up creating total chaos--total chaos in that part of the
world.
Mr. Satterfield. No regime in modern history in the Middle
East, including Saddam Hussein's----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes.
Mr. Satterfield [continuing]. Has killed as many of its own
citizens, has produced external and internal displacement of
its own citizens on the scale of the Assad regime. No. It's
unique, sadly.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, let me just say, Mr. Ambassador, you
read history differently than I do. That is an area that is
filled with dictators. It's filled with authoritarian regimes,
filled with our allies that if the people rose up against them
as they're rising up against Assad--he's a bad guy, he's a
dictator, he's everything you said--but he's not that different
from these other regimes. Once they are challenged--once they
were challenged don't tell me the Qatar Government wouldn't mow
down all of their guest workers if there was an uprising in
Qatar, and vice versa, with these other regimes.
I am very disturbed by the fact that we are sliding into a
war and not having an out that will not lead us to major
military commitments to that region. That would be a disaster
and I think it's based on the analysis that you just said, that
Assad is somewhat different than everybody else. I don't think
so.
Thank you very much, Mr. Assistant Secretary.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Albio Sires of New Jersey.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Chairman, for holding this hearing
and thank you for being here.
One of the concerns that I have is the buildup of the
Iranians as they're getting closer and closer to Israel. I
mean, they now have 7,000 fighters. Israel lost a plane
recently.
This encroachment--how are we going to respond to this? It
just seems to be getting bigger and bigger, and my concern is
one day they're just going to try to push even closer.
Mr. Satterfield. There is no question that the aggressive
Iranian projection of its influence, forces associated with
Iran, Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps directly, and aggressive
proliferation of advanced systems into Syria and through Syria
into Lebanon pose a real and, as I said, imminent threat to
Israel.
Israel, of course, is taking its own actions to address
this challenge but, more importantly or as importantly, the
U.S. and Israel are deeply lashed up, and I mean that in every
sense of the word, in terms of our own cooperation and
coordination in trying to better address, more effectively
address this challenge.
Mr. Sires. And it seems like Putin wants the Israelis not
to do any other strikes against this Syrian backed-group. To
me, Putin has just, again, injected himself in the middle of
this again.
Mr. Satterfield. I won't comment on that assertion. Israel
acts on its own based on its own calculus regarding risk and
benefit. But I will say this.
We've made very clear in our dialogue with Russia, and
we've had an extensive dialogue with Russia on the issue of
Syria and broader questions including that of Iran and Iran's
activities for some time.
We've made the basic question to Moscow, how do you see it
as in Moscow's interest to entwine yourself with this regime,
with this Iran, and these Iranian activities.
We see nothing good in the future for Russia out of this
and that's a question, unfortunately, which has not been
adequately responded to.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Going to Egypt, I note that the North Koreans have their
Embassy there and I think, through the Embassy, they do a lot
of arms sales in this part of the world.
I was wondering what kind of pressure are we asserting to
make the North Koreans stop there or have the Egyptians stop
this effort.
Mr. Satterfield. Former Secretary Tillerson exercised
authority granted him by the Congress to suspend or withhold,
rather, $195 million from FMF provided to Egypt and that
suspension continues.
There are several conditions, which we have discussed with
the Egyptian Government at the most senior levels for
consideration of release of those funds.
One of those conditions is a downgrading and, in some
cases, more than a downgrading of the Egyptian diplomatic
presence in Pyongyang, the North Korean diplomatic presence in
Cairo, and the general character of that relationship.
It is absolutely part of a very material discussion with
the Egyptians.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
And one concern that I have also in Egypt--my time is
running out--but I have written a number of letters regarding
the situation with Coptic Christians in Egypt, in terms of
making sure that they're able to express their religion, making
sure that they're safe.
I was wondering what kind of pressure are we putting in
Egypt now that el-Sisi supposedly got 97 percent of the vote to
help with this situation.
Mr. Satterfield. We have had a dialogue with all elements
of the Egyptian Government, including President el-Sisi
directly, who received significant support from the Coptic
community in his reelection with respect to the need for full
exercise of Coptic Christian rights in Egypt.
This is, I don't have to tell anyone on this committee, a
sensitive issue in Egypt but is one we continue to pursue.
Mr. Sires. I am more concerned about the security of the
Coptic Christians in this country.
Mr. Satterfield. That is an issue which President el-Sisi
himself has repeatedly and publicly expressed as his concern
and he has, indeed, taken steps to address that particular
issue--the threat by radical Islamist movements against the
Copts.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you very much.
We go to Joe Wilson of South Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Chairman Ed Royce and
Ranking Member Eliot Engel, for having this important hearing
on turbulence in the Middle East.
And first, Dr. Mitchell, I want to thank you for your
efforts for Pastor Brunson. We appreciate Congressman Chris
Smith for raising the issue and then I was very pleased to see
your personal interest as significant and all that can be done
to address that issue with our NATO ally, Turkey.
And as we address the topic of turbulence in the Middle
East--and thank both of you for being here--a concern I've
always had, how do we identify friendly or democratic allies in
Syria.
We have 2,000 troops in Syria. Who are we advising to
correctly support regime change of the barbaric dictator,
Assad?
Mr. Satterfield. The purpose of our military deployment of
those 2,000 troops in northeast Syria is to conclude the
campaign to defeat ISIS.
In that campaign, we have associated ourselves with the
Syrian democratic forces, a Kurdish and Arabic group in the
north and northeast who have fought alongside us in this
campaign.
We have made very clear the issue of regime change is not a
purpose of our military deployment. It is the defeat of ISIS.
The purpose of the international political process in Syria is
to see the Syrian people, all of them, able to make a choice in
a free and fair manner to choose the kind of regime, the kind
of governance they want, and we have said repeatedly we do not
believe that choice would, in the end, produce a continuation
of Assad or his regime.
Mr. Wilson. Well, I want to thank you. That's about the
best description we've had over the years of being here and
discussing Syria. So thank you very much.
And for both of you, the Revolutionary Guard is one of the
main elements in spreading Iran's malign influence in the
Middle East, such as in Lebanon and in Syria.
What specific steps does the administration take to
diminish the Iranian influence across the Middle East? What is
the strategy to prevent Iran from filling the vacuums created
by instability in the region, particularly as ISIS is being
defeated and withdrawing?
And how active are the Revolutionary Guards outside of the
Middle East, where are they active? And then another point
about Iranian-backed militias, why are they not being
identified as terrorist organizations?
Mr. Satterfield. The administration has aggressively
pursued the sources of IRGC support from a financial standpoint
and material standpoint, has designated members of the
Revolutionary Guard Corps for their involvement in terrorist
activities.
That step by this administration was quite unprecedented,
as the IRGC is an entity of a government, a state.
It is extremely unusual to sanction it. We have done for
their involvement in terrorist acts. They are a multifaceted
multipresent organization not just in Syria and Lebanon but in
Yemen as well.
They conduct subversive activities, directly or indirectly,
in the Persian Gulf. We are dealing with all of these
challenges.
Now, how do we do that? Of course, there are sanctions to
get at the heart, the arteries of support. But more broadly
speaking, by strengthening legitimate institutions of
legitimate states, you push back against a vacuum which Iran
takes advantage of.
By trying--and Yemen is a particular case here--to bring an
end to the conflict in Yemen you try to heal or close over the
cracks, the fissures that Iran quite adroitly exploits to its
advantage.
Iran will look like the thief going down a corridor in the
night for any opportunity to go through a partly opened door,
an unlocked door, a fully open door.
We want to close that as much as possible. So it's a broad
approach to a broad and multifaceted problem.
Mr. Wilson. And I appreciate too that you are recognizing
that the IRGC (Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps) is
separate from the Iranian military and so, indeed, acting
independently but achieving, sadly, such turmoil.
Additionally, the administration has not yet reinforced
sanctions on any entities where sanctions were lifted on the
Iranian nuclear deal.
What steps is the State Department taking to address Iran's
illicit activities including support for terrorism, arms
trafficking, human rights abuses, and ballistic missile
development?
Mr. Satterfield. I think the key area or the key sector
that your question strikes to is in the aviation industry and
the administration is actively considering what steps would be
appropriate.
This is not an easy issue because of the extensive
involvement of many corporate entities in broad support for
aviation entities in Iran. We are looking at this very
carefully. We have reached no decisions.
Mr. Wilson. Well, we appreciate your service, each of you.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Ted Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to you and
Ranking Member Engel for ensuring this committee has the
opportunity to engage with the administration in the timely
manner on recent events in the Middle East.
I would like to echo my colleagues in voicing our concern
with continued vacancies in key leadership positions at the
department. I hope that Director Pompeo moves quickly to fill
those roles.
Ambassador Satterfield, we know and we firmly believe that
you are more than capable of performing the job as Assistant
Secretary.
This is in no way a criticism of your abilities. But we are
15 months into this administration and there is still no
confirmed Assistant Secretary for the Middle East.
I would also like to associate myself with the ranking
member's comments on the international affairs budget. We are
deeply grateful to our civil and Foreign Service personnel to
commit themselves to doing work that is sometimes dangerous,
that keeps them away from their families, and that doesn't get
a whole lot of credit from the American people.
But diplomacy and foreign aid is immeasurably critical to
our national security. Military might is not something that can
be exercised in the absence of diplomacy. The two must work
hand in hand.
Before I ask my questions, I would also implore both of you
to make the return of Americans held in Iran, particularly my
constituent, Robert Levinson--the longest held American
hostage--a serious priority.
Even if the President potentially disengages from Iran, we
cannot allow whatever decision is made on the nuclear file to
impact our efforts to bring Bob home to his family.
I would ask for the commitment of both of you to make that
a priority and to engage as much as possible with the Levinson
family.
And finally, before turning to my questions, I would just
like to respond to my colleague who suggested that Assad is
doing what any leader in the region would do.
The answer to that is no. We must be horrified and furious
about the butcher who drops barrel bombs on schools and
hospitals, who uses chemical weapons against civilians.
The slaughter of over \1/2\ million people shocks our
conscience in Syria as it would and must shock our conscience
in any other country in the region or in any place on this
planet.
Now, I have many concerns about the administration's lack
of cohesive and coherent foreign policy in the region. I am
confused, to say the least, that the administration seems to be
actively pursuing Middle East peace, bolstering our relations
with Israel, acknowledging the reality that yes, Jerusalem is
indeed the capital of Israel while at the same time seemingly
leaving Israel the fend for itself by taking real kinetic
action when it comes to the Iranian presence in Syria.
The administration has been reluctant to confront Russia in
a range of areas but particularly for its enabling of Assad and
its turning a blind eye to Iran and Hezbollah's actions in
Syria.
And just when it seems like the administration might
actually take meaningful steps to sanction Russia for its
actions in Syria, the President pulls back only after
Ambassador Haley had made the announcement.
And to put the blame on her for being confused about the
policy decision only furthers the disjointed mixed message
foreign policy this administration has been sending to our
allies from day one.
I believe Ambassador Haley when she clearly stated, ``I
don't get confused.''
So I would ask you, Ambassador Satterfield, as the
President is talking tough on Iran with respect to the JCPOA,
he doesn't appear to be acting tough on Iran in Syria. What's
the strategy to actually counter Russian and Iran's very real
and dangerous enabling of Assad, Iran's establishment of bases
in Syria and support for Hezbollah that threaten to seriously
destabilize and threaten our allies and the region?
And specifically--I will try to make this as clear as
possible--is the United States relying on Russia to influence
Iran--let's start with that question.
Mr. Satterfield. First, let me affirm, our efforts in
support of all of the Americans who have been detained, held
hostage, missing in Iran, will continue.
We take these concerns very seriously. We are in touch with
all the families including the Levinsons, and we'll do all that
we can to deal with this very difficult and very painful issue.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much.
Mr. Satterfield. With respect to Iran in Syria, we
certainly identify the threat and the challenge, not just
Israel but to the region as a whole, and we have identified
those concerns not only in our exceptional dialogue with Israel
and the Israel security----
Mr. Deutch. Ambassador Satterfield, I apologize. I don't
wish to be rude. But I just had a few questions.
So the first one is does the United States rely on Russia
to influence Iran in the region?
Mr. Satterfield. We have certainly made clear to Moscow
that we see no reason, no logic in Moscow enabling either by
action or inaction what Iran is doing in Syria or elsewhere in
the region.
We see it as a threat to Russia over time, yes.
Mr. Deutch. And if Russia is unwilling or unable to provide
assurances that the Syrian regime or its associated forces like
Hezbollah or other Iranian-backed proxy forces will cease
violence in these areas, what's the next option for the United
States policy in Syria? What do we do then?
Mr. Satterfield. With respect to Russia, I will defer to my
colleague. But we have a variety of means at our disposal which
are under constant and active consideration to try to bring
about the kinds of mitigation of harm, mitigation of risk that
we are all seeking on Syria.
Those decisions lie, in many cases, with the President
himself.
Mr. Mitchell. I would only--thank you for the question,
sir.
I think that's a critical issue. I would only add to that
that in addition to the humanitarian dimension important to the
strikes, I think a secondary effect was to demonstrate for all
parties, including the Russian Federation, the seriousness of
the United States in this conflict.
I would add that there are measures under consideration
including measures that stem from CAATSA. Those are under
ongoing consideration and we will take additional steps against
the Russian Federation as needed.
Mr. Deutch. Well, with all due respect, why should we
believe that when there--it was announced that we were going to
impose sanctions only to have the President or those close to
the President essentially throw the U.N. Ambassador under the
bus, saying that she didn't know what she was doing?
Why should we believe you when you come here and say that
we are serious about the possibility of imposing sanctions?
Mr. Mitchell. Well, the reason you should believe me, sir,
is that since January of last year this administration has
implemented sanctions against 189 individuals and entities in
Russia including 136 under Ukraine authorities and 24 under
CAATSA authorities.
So for your--the main part of your question, I would say,
we have credibility with regard to toughness on Russia.
Mr. Deutch. Was our credibility threatened at all by the
interaction over the past few days----
[Simultaneous speaking.]
Chairman Royce. If I could make the point--we are over by a
couple of minutes and--yes. So let's go to Mr. Scott Perry of
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen.
I just want to respond a little bit to my friend and
colleague, who I respect, regarding the administration's
dealing with Russia.
The last administration obliterated decades of foreign
policy that was bipartisan that generally in large part kept
Russia out of the Middle East and out of meddling there, and
this administration has been left to pick up the pieces.
And with regard to leaving Israel, left alone to be the
only one providing kinetic activity in Syria, I remind the
gentleman that the last administration provided none except for
harsh rhetoric while this administration has had rounds
impacting on the ground in Syria.
And with that said, I think I want to turn to Dr. Mitchell
here. Iran provides Hezbollah with approximately $800,000
annually, trains thousands of their fighters in camps in Iran.
Hezbollah possess approximately 150,000 missiles. Hezbollah
provides construction facilities near Israel to produce more of
these munitions.
In that context, Hezbollah is--the former Secretary of
State described Hezbollah as part of the political process in
Lebanon and we are not--I think we'd be foolish to disregard
that.
But I just wonder if there's any concern from State that
this tends to legitimize a violent theological extremist group
whose stated goal is to destroy Israel.
Mr. Satterfield. In no way do we intend to delegitimize
Hezbollah. In no way do we distinguish between Hezbollah's
terrorist activities, it's so-called military wing from its so-
called political wing.
That's a distinction many in the world make. It is one we
reject completely and have done historically. It's the same.
Mr. Perry. I want to make sure that there is no--that
there's a bright line there and----
Mr. Satterfield. There is.
Mr. Perry [continuing]. And I appreciate that.
Let me ask you this, and maybe this for you, Dr. Mitchell,
if that--I am sorry if I got that wrong.
The EU seems to resist designated Hezbollah in its entirety
as a terrorist organization. Even though they are, obviously,
wreaking havoc in Syria and in Europe as well, what are we
doing to persuade the EU to designate, to make this
designation? I think it's important. What are we doing?
Mr. Mitchell. Well, thank you for that question.
We engage with our European partners on a regular basis on
this matter.
I would say it's fair to say, from the U.S. perspective, we
have a lot of frustration with the Europeans on this particular
question of Hezbollah.
I've been part of conversations where we've talked to the
French, the Germans, the British, and others. Those are ongoing
conversations; I think it's part of a broader mosaic.
Mr. Perry. What is their aversion? What could their
aversion be?
Mr. Mitchell. Well, I would refer you to the capitals of
those countries for the specifics of their concerns. I think--
--
Mr. Perry. Do you have any inclination? I understand I can
go ask them, but we are paying you to find these things out for
us. Do you know what--like, do they see them as not terrorist,
not subversive, not----
Mr. Mitchell. I am going to resist the temptation, sir, to
speak on behalf of those governments.
I would just say from our perspective we make it clear all
the way up to the level of the President not only on Hezbollah
but on the broader Iran problem that there can't only be an
American solution to this, long term--that we have to have
greater European participation, whether it's plugging the
gaps----
Mr. Perry. So other than the kind rhetoric and hoping
they'll come to the table on this, is there anything the United
States is doing from the diplomatic standpoint to kind of urge
them out, so to speak?
Is there--I get the carrot. Where's the stick? Is there a
stick?
Mr. Satterfield. This government has been in contact
continuously with our European partners in Paris and elsewhere.
I participated in a number of these talks.
We have a more extensive focused dialogue on the issue of
Iran and Hezbollah, the IRGC, than at any point in memory and I
have been part of this discussion for the last quarter century.
Mr. Perry. I appreciate it and I am sure you do.
Mr. Satterfield. Now, what have we done? Despite continued
resistance at a political level for making the same bright line
co-identification of political and military parts of Hezbollah
that the EU maintains, we have achieved much more in the way of
actual designation and sanctioning by critical European
partners than we have done in the course of the last many
years.
Is it enough? No. Is it progress? Yes, it is.
Mr. Perry. Well, I will just tell you that at least from
this point on the dais here there's not enough progress fast
enough. I know we are impatient. I know it's hard.
But you must have success in this regard. We cannot--and
please know that this is a point of concern and when you come
back we are going to continue to----
Mr. Satterfield. We agree.
Mr. Perry. Let me ask one more question with the chairman's
indulgence regarding the train and equip fund.
It's my understanding that in 2015 for Iraq $1.5 billion,
2016 $715 million. I ask this question in the context of I feel
like the American taxpayer is now left in the position to train
and equip the IRGC and the Quds Force operating individually as
units and individuals that have infiltrated the Iraqi army.
Local municipal elections are looming and I am wondering
what the number is that we are currently spending on train and
equip funding in Iraq and what's going to be done about that?
Or do you disagree that we are not training and equipping
IRGC elements and individuals that are operating in uniform in
Iraq?
Mr. Satterfield. Congressman I strongly disagree with the
premise that our support for the Iraqi armed forces is support
for the IRGC or the Shi'a PMF--the Popular Mobilization
Forces--some of which are affiliated with Iran.
We have supported a legitimate institution of the Iraqi
state that has performed exceptionally well in the fight
against ISIS and in the reclaiming and holding of Iraqi
territory.
Now, the issue of whether there are individuals who are
present within the Iraqi security forces whose allegiance may
lie to the PMF, undoubtedly there are.
But there is a confabulation between that reality and
saying we are facilitating the IRGC or the PMF. Absolutely not.
It's not----
Mr. Perry. So I don't want to be hyper critical and I am
concerned not only for our national security but for the
taxpayers and the fidelity and the future of Iraq.
Are you willing to say that there are no IRGC forces using
any United States-provided military equipment in Iraq right
now?
Mr. Satterfield. I will review the record. But to my
knowledge, there is no provision of U.S. military equipment or
funding to the IRGC.
Mr. Perry. I know it's not the IRGC----
Chairman Royce. Here's a strategy. How about having the
Ambassador--Ambassador, if you will review the record and get
back to General Scott Perry on the issue.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, sir. Happy to--thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Now we go to David Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Like many of my colleagues, I am extremely concerned about
the implications of Turkish incursions into Syria, particularly
Afrin. I requested a classified member-level briefing from your
offices on the situation on February 6th. That was 10 weeks
ago.
And the briefing still has not happened it's been cancelled
again. I know there's a briefing after this hearing on the
entire region. But I want to start by saying how disappointed I
am that it's taken 10 weeks and I still don't have a hearing.
So I would like a commitment from both of you that you will
schedule a classified briefing for members on the situation in
Afrin in the very near future.
That's a yes? Thank you.
Could you speak to how the Turkish incursion has affected
the U.S. coalition's fight against ISIS? Obviously, Turkey and
the U.S. coalition have different priorities in Syria and how
is the U.S. supporting our partners on the ground, which
include both the Kurdish YPG and our NATO ally, Turkey.
Because I am hearing a lot of concern from the Kurdish
community that they feel that the U.S. has abandoned them after
they played such an important role in the fight against ISIS.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, sir, for that question and I can
assure you we will follow up on that request, and I apologize
on behalf of our bureau that that hasn't happened yet.
It's a crucial matter. I will take the olive branch part of
your question and defer to my colleague on the Kurdish
question.
I will just keep it simple and say that Operation Olive
Branch has very much complicated the defeat ISIS campaign by
creating a demand signal that draws fighters from the Euphrates
Valley toward Afrin.
Our focus has been to call on the Turks to show restraint
and address the humanitarian crises. I have led the U.S.
delegation in most of those recent conversations but also to
create a sequenced approach to some of the areas that the
Turkish Government has concerns about and to try where possible
to balance the Turkish and Kurdish equities on this.
David can say a word about the Kurdish element.
Mr. Satterfield. The situation in north and northeast Syria
has recently stabilized. We have seen no further movement of
Turkish forces beyond Afrin.
Our dialogue with the Syrian Democratic Forces, the SDF, is
deep, extraordinary and at senior levels and that dialogue is
continuing at a senior level, literally as we meet here today.
We believe that it is possible to continue the fight
against ISIS with the support and help of the SDF. That, of
course, requires not just their commitment to us but our
commitment to continue to work with them.
We understand that very well.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you, and I look forward to
the classified briefing.
Ambassador Satterfield, are you aware of any evidence that
Iran has violated the terms of the JCPOA?
Mr. Satterfield. It is the assessment of the IAEA that Iran
remains in essential compliance with the provisions of the----
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Thank you. You talked about the
ongoing discussions with our European partners.
Is there a plan for that moment when the sanctions waiver
is required to be addressed by the President that if that
doesn't happen is there a plan in place if--in other words, is
the President willing to sign the waiver so that this process
can play out or is it the May deadline and is there a
contingency?
Mr. Satterfield. The administration is prepared for a
number of options depending on the circumstances, including the
outcome of discussions with the E3, and whatever decision the
President may at the time take. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. So if the negotiations are not
complete, there's no assurance that the President is going to
issue the waiver and that could be the end of the agreement?
Mr. Satterfield. Under no circumstances would I prejudge or
circumscribe the President's options.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Okay.
And I am just turning for a moment now to Egypt. In your
view, does Egypt's new NGO law violate the Brown back amendment
by giving the Egyptian Government veto power over U.S.-funded
democracy programs?
Our ability to operate many assistance programs in Egypt
has been severely limited since the change in government in
2011 with this new law in place.
What kind of economic development or democracy program is
even possible for the United States assistance to support in
Egypt and do you believe that the repeal of this NGO law should
be a prerequisite for the United States providing continued
economic aid to Egypt?
Mr. Satterfield. Congressman, there are provisions of that
law which, if executed, would indeed violate U.S. statute, no
question about that.
With respect to our demands of the Government of Egypt,
they've been very clear. Our strong recommendation and one of
the basis for Secretary Tillerson's withholding of the $195
million was exactly the issue of a pledge to not implement
these offending provisions of that law.
Mr. Cicilline. Great. And my final question for both of you
really, do you think that it is inconsistent--or I am sorry, do
you think that it is consistent policy that we say that we must
intervene militarily in Syria, as we've said to the world,
because of our grave concerns of the humanitarian situation for
Syrians facing chemical attacks by their own government, and at
the same time to severely restrict refugees from the region
that we have only allowed 11 Syrian refugees into the United
States in 2018?
Do you see that as a consistent position and doesn't it
present a challenge to the world to take us seriously?
Mr. Satterfield. The issue of the administration's position
with respect with national security in relation to refugee
admission is one that we are happy to take back for response to
you.
Mr. Cicilline. So you agree it's inexplicable and difficult
to defend?
Mr. Satterfield. No. I am simply saying this falls outside
my area of responsibility.
Mr. Cicilline. Yes. I mean, you would say not consistent to
say we are so worried about the children and women in Syria
that we have to intervene militarily but, by the way, the
administration has severely restricted the admission of those
very same women and children to the United States and in fact
only 11 Syrian refugees have come to the United States this
year.
Mr. Satterfield. Congressman, I understand your question.
Our focus----
Mr. Cicilline. I look forward to the answer.
Mr. Satterfield. Our focus in Syria is CW use and ISIS.
Chairman Royce. We go to Ann Wagner of Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for organizing this
hearing and I thank you to our witnesses for their service.
The violent Assad regime in Syria continues to perpetuate
crimes against humanity, aided and abetted by a revisionist
Iran.
Amid regional instability, Hezbollah, Hamas, al-Qaeda, the
Islamic State, and other terrorist groups operate with
impunity.
The United States must continue to exercise leadership in
holding bad actors accountable for committing human rights
abuses and for their terrorist activities.
Dr. Mitchell, you have been outspoken in your support for
NATO. Would you advocate for a similar arrangement in the
Middle East?
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you for the question, ma'am.
I consider it beyond the remit of my duties to speculate
much on security arrangements among allies in the Middle East
on the model of NATO.
I will say that there are a number of states in the region
who are threatened by Iran in particular and I think we have
both an opportunity and responsibility in U.S. diplomacy to
strengthen our security arrangements with those states.
Mrs. Wagner. You have argued for deterrence by denial
rather than deterrence by punishment. As I understand it, this
means shoring up defensive forces to discourage adversaries
rather than relying on threats.
I agree that we may need to tweak our strategic calculus.
Bad actors like Syria and Iran have unquestionably undermined
the United States' traditional modes of deterrence.
Can you explain what deterrence by denial would look like
in the Middle East?
Mr. Mitchell. Ma'am, I am so flattered that you have read
my past work. I will point out that this was written in a
previous life, before I was in this job, and was written with
regards to the Baltic States specifically.
I will say, broadly, from the position that I hold now that
I think a strong American deterrence in many parts of the world
is really the essential fabric of stability.
I think strengthening that deterrence in Europe and in NATO
and in northeastern Europe has a particular set of requirements
at present.
I think it's a very different situation in the Middle East
and I would defer to Ambassador Satterfield on the specifics of
deterrence there.
Mrs. Wagner. Ambassador.
Mr. Satterfield. We are looking at what more can be done by
individual states and in a collective sense by parties in the
Middle East including those parties who have considerable
military resources and capabilities of their own.
The President has made very clear that while we are
shouldering the responsibility for the destruction of the
remnants of the so-called caliphate of ISIS that in the period
beyond the maintenance of that destruction needs to fall
squarely on the shoulders of those in the region and we are
exploring right now very actively whether and how a construct
can be made, what we've turned in past years a regional
security architecture that has a real ability to step in and
take on responsibilities which we do not believe the U.S.
should have to have indefinitely.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, I appreciate that, and to that point, I
know that the Ambassador to the United States relies on
regional partners to counter Iran's malign influence.
Traditionally, the United States has worked closely with
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, or GCC. However, GCC
member states--Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab
Emirates--have cut ties with Qatar, which they maintain
secretly supports Iran.
The United States postponed a planned summit with Gulf
leaders until September, I believe, of 2018. Do U.S. officials
anticipate a resolution to the Qatar diplomatic crisis before
the summit?
Are we doing anything as the United States to try and deal
with this rift?
Mr. Satterfield. The President of the United States and
every official in government has been focused on the issue of
closing this rift since it occurred.
The President has directly engaged with the heads of state
and government of all of the countries involved on both sides
of this divide, and his message has been exceedingly clear from
the beginning and it has been reiterated in his recent personal
and phone contacts with that leadership, which is it is high
time this get resolved.
We face a common challenge from Iran. We face a common
challenge from other foes in the region and beyond. This rift
serves their interests, not ours. It needs to be mended and we
hope very much that the states act on this.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank the witnesses for the testimony, and
yes, Dr. Mitchell, I do my homework.
And I thank the chairman again for his timeliness of
putting this hearing together. I thank the witnesses for their
tremendous service, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We go to Lois Frankel of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for your service.
And I know we'll all probably agree that the Syrian civil
war has been one of the greatest humanitarian crises of our
time. Over 500 million dead at the hands of Assad, millions
fleeing their homes trying to escape to other countries with
great impact to those countries.
And I think it's fair to say that there's been a lot of
dereliction on, I would say, on the world, maybe because--not
knowing really what to do.
So you can point fingers in a lot of different places. But
since we are here now, I am going to talk about this
administration because I think Mr. Trump has sort of a
whackadoo behavior, how he goes about all these things.
So the President acts--I don't whether it's impulsively or
emotionally or correctly but he--I think all of us, when we see
the chemical warfare on Assad on human beings it's horrendous.
And so I am not critical of the President feeling this is
horrendous action, but what I don't understand is this
President only allowed 11 Syrian refugees into this country
last year compared to 15,000 in 2016.
So my question is, where is the humanity in that? Then he
can't decide where he's pulling--he's staying in Syria, out
Syria. One week he's pulling out of Syria and then the next
week we have these air strikes.
So I think this inconsistency is not very helpful. One
night of air strikes is, as I think many of my colleagues have
said, is not a substitute for a comprehensive strategy, which
should include robust political and diplomatic engagement.
And one of my questions I also have is was the State
Department consulted at all and involved in this decision on
the air strikes.
I am the mother of a United States war veteran who went to
two wars. I came to this Congress purposely because I wanted to
weigh in on decisions of war and peace.
And so I can tell you that, in my humble opinion, I think
the President should have come to this Congress for a military
authorization before these air strikes, because it's not like
it was a surprise.
The President tweeted this out days before. So, I mean, it
wasn't exactly that he surprised anybody with these air
strikes, and I think it's a dangerous precedent that he is
setting.
So just, if I come back on the question number one is was
the State Department consulted on these attacks? Why are we not
allowing refugees?
Are we going to allow some more refugees and, if you know,
could you tell me what the cost of these air strikes were?
Mr. Satterfield. Yes. The State Department was involved
throughout the deliberative process that led to this decision,
as we were in all prior considerations of use of military force
in Syria.
Ms. Frankel. May I ask you something? Was there any
recommendation from the State Department or any member of the
administration that you know that the President come to
Congress for an authorization before the strikes?
Mr. Satterfield. I can comment on the authorities that were
used, not on the deliberative process, and it was Article 2 of
the Constitution that the President relied upon.
With respect to the refugee question, which you and your
colleague have raised, that's outside my area of authority but
we will provide you with a response from the State Department
on that.
Ms. Frankel. Do you know the cost of the air strikes, by
any chance?
Mr. Satterfield. That question has been posed to the
Department of Defense. We will refer that question to OSD, the
Office of the Secretary.
Ms. Frankel. Dr. Mitchell, did you want to respond to any
of those questions?
Mr. Mitchell. I would only add that I appreciate the
questions and we are happy to take a closer look and get back
to you in written form.
Ms. Frankel. And one more quick question. Why did the
President change his mind on these sanctions against Russia?
Mr. Mitchell. There has been, and continues to be, a
discussion about future steps with regards to sanctions on
Russia. That's an ongoing process, and I would refer you to the
White House for any more recent developments.
Ms. Frankel. Okay. Well, I guess we are not going to get an
answer on that.
Well, anyway, thank you very much for being here. I yield
back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go to Adam Kinzinger of Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you both
for being here. It's very appreciated.
You guys have a lot of tough work to do and you have done a
lot of great work. I've always said when it comes to state-
related issues, you never know what you are able to mitigate,
the conflicts you were able to stop that never happened, and
it's hard to put a price on that. So we appreciate all the hard
work.
Obviously, Syria has been a failed policy since the last
administration. In fact, the failure to follow through on the
2013 red line had massive implications not just in the Middle
East but all over the world.
I think there's no doubt about it. You look at the foreign
policy challenges we had before 2013 and the foreign policies
we have post-2013 and there's a direct correlation to when bad
actors felt like they could challenge the United States of
America.
And, frankly, we said a lot of good words for a long time
but followed through with no action.
Now, it's nice to see a President that's willing to follow
through with action. I think the strikes in Syria were correct.
The American people, according to a poll today by two-to-
one agreed that they were the correct thing to do, and I also
don't think the President needed to come to Congress for every
military move does require--there's not 535 Commanders in
Chief. There's one.
Our job is to declare if a state of war exists and then to
put the funding in to do that to follow through on that war.
The President has a lot of authority as envisioned and
written by the Constitution.
But having served in the Air Force and still continuing to
serve, Syria's been one of my big concerns as I've gotten to
Congress. What I worry about is a lack of long-term strategy in
Syria.
I think holding strong that chemical weapons have no place
is a really good thing to do. But I think on the broader level
the question is what is going to be the future of Syria.
And I think when we talk about the destruction of ISIS in
the Middle East I don't think these two exist in a vacuum. I
think part of the reason ISIS has been able to grow and thrive
is because of the existence of a terrible dictator that
basically creates an environment where somebody feels the only
option they have to turn to is to a terrorist group because
nobody else is coming to help them and the Assad family has
been the biggest enemy of all time and you find yourself in
that process radicalized.
And so when we fight this generational war on terror, we
have to keep in mind that it's the seven and the 8-year-olds
that are in these refugee camps right now that are either going
to be the people that reject Islam or reject ISIS within Islam
or they are going to be the people that, frankly, propagate
ISIS or ISIS 2 or al-Qaeda 3 or whatever that next generation
is.
So you cannot look at Syria and the challenges in Syria in
a vacuum in isolation of the fight against ISIS. I think they
are together.
But Ambassador Satterfield, last month the administration
ordered the State Department to freeze $200 million in
stabilization funds that would enable those displaced by the
conflict to return to their homes, which is exactly what I
think is the opposite of what needs to happen to create a
better environment.
Early recovery efforts and the restoration of basic
services and security are critical elements to establishing
inclusive local governance outside of Assad's control.
What are the specific accounts that have been frozen--
economic support fund or nonproliferation, antiterrorism, or
any related programs.
Mr. Satterfield. Representative, we can get back to you
with the specifics in response for that last part of your
question.
What I will say in general over the funding that was
suspended, we are reviewing now carefully with the White House,
within the government, how best to move forward with respect to
expenditure of taxpayer moneys in Syria.
Mr. Kinzinger. If you could get back to me with the first
part, that would be great.
And what evidence have you seen of partner nations making
assurances that no stabilization or reconstruction assistance
will benefit the Assad regime?
Mr. Satterfield. In September of last year at the United
Nations, then Secretary Tillerson chaired a meeting of the so-
called like-minded countries on Syria, a broad representative
group of Arab and non-Arab countries, all of whom supported one
fundamental principle--there should be no reconstruction
assistance provided to the Assad regime or areas controlled by
the Assad regime, minus significant progress on the U.N.-led
Geneva political process. That progress has not taken place.
Mr. Kinzinger. Right. And let me ask about Iraq
specifically.
I am a veteran of that war. A lot of American blood,
treasure, toil went into bringing a free Iraq. I believe, as
President Obama said, we did leave behind a free and fair Iraq
and, unfortunately, we left them behind and now we have the
challenges we have as we are back there again.
One of my concerns is we have an election in a few weeks in
Iraq. Can you talk about what you have seen, either of you, in
terms of Iranian influence and how to push back against that?
Because as somebody that was part of, frankly, fighting
Iranian influence in Iraq it's extremely concerning.
Mr. Satterfield. We can better address that question in
another setting. Suffice it to say we believe there is a
vigorous and truly democratic political debate in process
underway in Iraq. But the specifics of your question in another
closed setting can be best addressed.
Mr. Kinzinger. Understood.
Do you have anything to add, Dr. Mitchell, to any of that?
Mr. Mitchell. No. Unfortunately, I agree with much of what
you have said but most of what you have asked falls under Near
East Bureau and not EUR.
Mr. Kinzinger. Okay. You get away with that one, and I
appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you all for being here.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Norma Torres of California.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador, I too want to associate myself with some of the
comments that my colleagues on this side have stated, regarding
that we need specific actions that you plan to take and
specific outcomes that you expect to see as in regards to the
forces in Syria. I would really hope that you can follow up.
Like many of my colleagues, I am very concerned. Iran is
provoking Israel into conflict in Syria. Iran is intent on
building a permanent presence inside Syria.
And it's shocking that the Trump administration has failed
to articulate that strategy to deal with Iran's growing
presence in Syria.
While the most recent missile attacks on Syria and the area
where they have the chemical weapons has been applauded by
many, I am very concerned at our lack of care for the children
that have been injured.
And I understand that you have stated already that it's not
within your jurisdiction to deal with refugees. But I am
curious to know if you have given an opinion to that cause
since to date this year it is my understanding that we've only
received or allowed 11 Syrian refugees to this country.
Mr. Satterfield. Ms. Torres, the best resolution to the
suffering of the Syrian people, whether we are speaking about
those who have been displaced internally and externally or----
Mrs. Torres. I am sorry. I am talking about the injured
children that need medical assistance and have been orphaned.
Mr. Satterfield. Or with respect to individual cases of
suffering and hardship is to end this war, to end the brutality
of the Assad regime.
That requires a political process, and while we may like to
believe that the U.S. simply saying something or deploying U.S.
soldiers will fix it, the issue is far more complex than that.
It requires a comprehensive international approach and that is
what we have been very active in trying to generate.
But we have been frustrated. We have been frustrated by
Russian efforts, which have blocked every move to place Assad
and his regime before their responsibilities--every effort to
move them to Geneva, and we continue to engage.
We continue to hope that through our engagement, through
messages both positive and negative, Moscow recognizes it ought
to be in their interest to move this forward.
I know the images are extraordinarily painful they are. We
are trying to address them. But at the end, they are best
addressed through changing the character of Syria itself,
allowing these people to move forward with lives in peace,
security, and stability.
Mrs. Torres. So what is our strategy as it relates to
Russia? The White House, from day to day, from tweet to tweet,
you know, they seem to have a different opinion.
I am concerned as to what does that do for your long-term
planning strategy.
Mr. Mitchell. Russia's behavior internationally is very
concerning. I agree with the premise of your question.
I would say that this administration takes that seriously
in all of its forms, in multiple regions.
Our strategy, broadly, has consisted of two planks. The
first is cost and position, so to raise the cost of an
aggressive foreign policy until the Russian Government decides
that the cost benefit analysis does not support further
aggression. And we've done that through a variety of tools,
from the executive branch, tools that were provided to us by
Congress.
And the second plank has been to keep channels of dialogue
open where possible. The Russians very often do not want to use
those channels.
We have diplomatic and military channels on Syria, on
Ukraine, in a number of fields related to strategic stability.
So the strategy has been to increase the pressure and point
the way to a door for dialogue. At the end of the day, the
responsibility rests with the Russian Government for whether or
not they choose to embrace those opportunities for dialogue.
They have not embraced those opportunities and so we will
continue to impose costs until they do.
Mrs. Torres. So how have we increased the pressure on
Russia lately?
Mr. Mitchell. Well, in the period since January of last
year, this administration has brought forth sanctions against
189 individuals and entities in Russia. We presided over----
Mrs. Torres. My time has expired. It's my understanding,
though, that most recently the President has removed some of
those sanctions. So I am going to have to----
Mr. Mitchell. I am sorry. What's the question?
Mrs. Torres. I am going to have to yield back. My time has
expired.
Chairman Royce. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back.
We go to Lee Zeldin of New York.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Satterfield, it's been asked of you, but just
to--I don't want to make any bad assumptions so I will just ask
again. Has Iran violated the letter of the JCPOA?
Mr. Satterfield. The IAEA has not found significant
violations----
Mr. Zeldin. I am not asking the IAEA. I am asking you.
Mr. Satterfield. That is what we rely upon. The IAEA has
not found significant violations.
Mr. Zeldin. So is it--is it the State Department's position
that Iran has not violated the letter of the JCPOA?
Mr. Satterfield. That is the judgement of the IAEA, upon--
--
Mr. Zeldin. I am not asking the IAEA. I am asking you, sir.
Mr. Satterfield. I've responded, sir.
Mr. Zeldin. Okay. Does Annex 1, paragraph 61 of the JCPOA
state, ``Iran will only engage in production of centrifuges to
meet the enrichment R&D requirements?'' Are you familiar with
that?
Mr. Satterfield. I would have to respond in formal fashion
to that.
Mr. Zeldin. Okay. Well, formally, that is what that Annex 1
Paragraph 61 states. Is it true that Iran has acquired more
than the necessary amount of IR-8 centrifuge rotor assemblies
for R&D purposes with 16 times more capacity than the IR-1 to
enrich uranium?
Mr. Satterfield. Again, I would have to respond in a formal
written----
Mr. Zeldin. You could respond right now, sir.
Mr. Satterfield. I would have to consult. I am not a
technical expert.
Mr. Zeldin. I thought you were the Acting Secretary for----
Mr. Satterfield. I am, sir. But those questions are highly
technical and they demand a very technical and specific
response, which we will provide.
Mr. Zeldin. As part of the JCPOA, an enrichment, research,
and development plan was submitted to the IAEA that permitted,
roughly, 10 IR-6 centrifuges.
Are you aware that Iran has assembled 13 to 15 IR-6
centrifuges which should have been limited or destroyed under
this plan?
Mr. Satterfield. Representative, all questions of this
character can be responded to in the appropriate level of
classification in writing.
Mr. Zeldin. Well, but you're stating that Iran has not
violated the letter of the deal. So what I am going to do right
now is go through all the different ways Iran is violating the
letter of the deal.
Is it your position that you're not going to respond with
regards to any of the ways that Iran has violated the letter of
the deal?
Mr. Satterfield. These technical questions will require a
sufficiently classified written response.
Mr. Zeldin. Under Annex 1 paragraph 76 of the JCPOA, the
IAEA can request access to military locations such as Parchin
to verify compliance. Is that right?
Mr. Satterfield. Representative, my response is the same to
all questions at this time.
Mr. Zeldin. It's a technical question. Is your position you
can't tell me whether or not the JCPOA grants access to Iran's
military sites for inspection for verification?
Mr. Satterfield. It does, sir.
Mr. Zeldin. It does state that?
Mr. Satterfield. That is part of the JCPOA.
Mr. Zeldin. Correct. Okay. So you're able to answer that.
Now, has it not been crystal clear that it's Iran's
position both before, during, and after the JCPOA was finalized
that they will not grant any access to their military sites?
Mr. Satterfield. I will respond to that question in
writing.
Mr. Zeldin. You can't respond to that now?
Mr. Satterfield. No, I cannot.
Mr. Zeldin. I mean, Rohani hasn't had a problem saying this
over video. I don't know why that requires a classification. I
mean, it is well known open-sourced information Rohani has made
crystal clear that we do not have access to their military
sites.
Mr. Satterfield. There is much well-known open-sourced
material that is also not correct or is nuanced. I will provide
a detailed response from appropriate U.S. Government agencies
to all of these questions.
Mr. Zeldin. Has Iran acquired more heavy water than you're
allowed under the JCPOA?
Mr. Satterfield. Same response, sir.
Mr. Zeldin. What's the response?
Mr. Satterfield. We will provide a detailed response in an
appropriate fashion.
Mr. Zeldin. See, here's the problem. You have no problem
coming before Congress and others will come before Congress
saying in no uncertain terms Iran has not violated the letter
of the JCPOA.
But then when you're asked questions about all the
different ways Iran has violated the letter of the JCPOA, you
have to respond in writing or it's a technical question that
someone else's expertise--you don't have the expertise to
engage in any answers with regards to ways that Iran is
violating the letter of the JCPOA.
Yet, you do have the expertise to come to Congress and say
they are not violating the letter of the JCPOA and you do have
the expertise to come before Congress and explain the
justification for your position.
Yet, when asked about all the different ways--Iran
collecting more IR-6 rotor assemblies than they are allowed to,
assembling more IR-8 rotor assemblies than they are allowed
to--the centrifuges, to deny access to their military sites, to
collect more heavy water than they are permitted to.
And that list goes on. When we went to Parchin and we found
nuclear particles that we wanted to follow up on, Iran's new
position was, you can't visit Parchin. So we were not able to
inspect with regards to those particles that were discovered.
So if you do not have the technical capabilities to answer
any questions with regard to all the known specifics of how
Iran is violating the letter of the deal, then we should not
have one witness after another coming before this committee and
others making the flat-out statement that Iran is not violating
the letter of the JCPOA because that has consequences.
Mr. Satterfield. For the sake of the record, Congressman,
my comment was the IAEA has in its most recent reporting not
found significant violations of the provision.
Mr. Zeldin. And until the IAEA comes before this
committee--and if they do come before the committee I will be
happy to ask the same exact questions--but you're here
representing the United States State Department and I am asking
you about different specific questions.
Mr. Satterfield. And I've answered we will provide you
detailed answers to all of those questions.
Mr. Zeldin. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Brad Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, and I want to thank the chairman
and the ranking member for having this hearing. I want to thank
the witnesses for your service to our country and your patience
today and staying to the end.
Tonight in Israel, in fact, with the time change, as we are
speaking this moment, Israelis are celebrating Independence
Day, marking the 70th anniversary of the birth of the state.
Seventy years ago when Israel declared its independence,
the United States was the first nation in the entire world to
recognize the new state.
But there were five armies from five nations--Arab states--
who immediately attacked--Arab states of Egypt, Jordan,
Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq.
Today, Israel has peace treaties with Egypt and Jordan.
Today, Iran controls, effectively, Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq.
Yesterday, the Israeli Government released a map locating
five Iranian airbases in Syria--two in the south near Damascus,
one in the north--one in the east, one in the northwest, and
one in the center of the country, T-4.
In February, T-4 was the base from which Iran launched a
drone to attack Israel. Israel responded by destroying some of
the base and lost a jet and then had to go in and take out much
of the Syrian air defenses.
Over the past weekend, or April 8th, rather, Israel again
struck at T-4, taking out Iranian weapons, and it was announced
yesterday that they believe that Iran was installing advanced
sophisticated air defense systems.
Some of my concern--just quoting a couple of article
headlines--Business Insider yesterday noted that Israeli
intelligence reportedly said Trump's Syria strike failed,
didn't take out much of anything. That's a quote from the
headline.
Times of Israel on April 14th said Israel fears Trump may
see job as done in Syria--leave Israel alone to face Iran.
So my question for you today, as we sit here--and I've
asked this question of others every chance I get--what
specifically is the United States strategy in ensuring that
Iran does not get a permanent presence in Syria to threaten our
allies, Israel, and others. What are we doing--what more can we
be doing?
Mr. Satterfield. We, certainly, are concerned with the
threat which Iran presents in Syria and through Syria to
Lebanon, to Israel, and to our other allies and partners in the
region and beyond.
Our strategy in working with Israel, with Jordan, with the
Gulf States, with all the countries of the region and the
broader international community is to deny to Iran the ability
to proliferate in the fashion that it does into and through
Syria.
It's our work with the Iraqi armed forces and the Iraqi
Government on the border. It is our work in the northeast with
our own forces and our work, more broadly, with the
international community to deny the resources and support which
Iran and the Revolutionary Guard Corps depend upon for this
very threatening activity.
But I have to challenge the assertion in the opening part
of your remarks that Iraq and Lebanon are controlled by Iran.
They are not. They are both independent states.
Mr. Schneider. It's hard to say that Lebanon is independent
when it includes in its government Hezbollah, and Hezbollah has
150,000 rockets increasingly more accurate, increasingly more
powerful delivered by Iran.
Iran is developing indigenous weapons manufacturing
capability not just in Lebanon but in Syria. Iran has five
permanent air bases in Syria.
It's hard to say that, A, what we are doing is working if
Iran is increasing its malign influence in the region and I am
having a hard time understanding what specifically we are doing
to push back against Iran's progress.
Mr. Satterfield. We are working on Iran's proliferation,
the sources of that proliferation, its ability to conduct the
physical movements of materiel throughout the region and not
just in Syria or in Lebanon.
And in all of this we are partnered very closely with the
Government of Israel as we are with other governments.
Mr. Schneider. But when the President of the United States
said couple weeks ago within 6 months U.S. troops are going to
be out of Iran, we are washing our hands, what signal does that
send to all of our allies in the region?
And as I noted in some of the headlines, Israel is
increasingly concerned that they are going to be left alone to
push back against Iran's malign influence on its borders.
Mr. Satterfield. The President has made clear, Secretary
Mattis, and Chairman Dunford have made clear the primary
purpose of our military presence in Syria is the defeat of ISIS
and the caliphate.
We look to other diplomatic, economic, and cooperative
measures with Israel, with other states in the region to
achieve these broader goals.
Mr. Schneider. I am running out of time. A quick question.
I request a quick response.
The strike on the three Syrian chemical weapon sites--were
they a part of a greater strategy or merely a punitive strike
for Syria's chemical weapons?
Mr. Satterfield. The President has made clear--the
Department of Defense and other spokesmen for the U.S.
Government have made clear they were aimed at both responding
to and deterring the use of chemical weapons both in Syria and
more broadly.
Mr. Schneider. But is that a part of our broader strategy
in the region and----
Mr. Satterfield. It's an international strategy, sir.
Mr. Schneider. And I believe that we have to do all that we
can. We have a moral responsibility to do all that we can to
make sure that not just Syria but the world understands
chemical weapons.
Mr. Satterfield. It's a global--it's a global----
Mr. Schneider. But that's distinct from the strategy of
pushing back against Iran's malign influence in the region.
Mr. Satterfield. It is a separate issue entirely.
Mr. Schneider. And so that's why I have my concern.
I am over time. I thank the chairman for the indulgence. I
do want to associate myself with the remarks of the chairman
and the ranking member, in particular with respect to the
Caesar Syrian Protection Act, Russian sanction, filling the
positions that we have at the State Department.
It is unacceptable 15 months into this administration how
many open positions remain, and in particular the importance of
a robust investment of resources, energy, and money, and focus
into diplomacy and development.
Without those two, our defense requirements only grow.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Schneider.
We now go to John Curtis of Utah.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My appreciation to
these two witnesses for their endurance, for staff, and for
yourself and ranking member. I have just a few brief questions.
Thank you.
There was an article at Reuters last week that Russia was
supporting Assad through civilian aircraft. The House passed
the Caesar bill and which would impose sanctions for this type
of action.
So my question is, realizing the bill has not made it
through the Senate, are sanctions being considered for this,
and could you speak to the importance of getting this bill
through the Senate and how helpful that would be to the
administration?
Mr. Satterfield. With respect to any assistance being
provided to Iran or the Assad regime, we are quite keen to use
all existing authorities to address any states, any entities
that may be involved and that certainly includes Russia.
With respect to the Caesar bill, we would have to get back
with a considered position on this, particularly with respect
to the question you just posed.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you.
Let me ask you for a moment to consider a different
audience. Consider my constituents back home who will hopefully
be watching this and are struggling to understand war powers
and perhaps if you could just take a minute and explain the
difference between Article 2 and the AUMF and what was applied
here in a way that they might be able to digest that.
Mr. Satterfield. I will try to take that on. Volumes have
been written on this topic----
Mr. Curtis. Right.
Mr. Satterfield [continuing]. Over the course of the last
200 years.
The Article 2 authority granted to the President by the
Constitution as Commander in Chief is quite broad. There are
requirements which follow upon use of that authority. That is,
the White House must report use of forces to the Congress
within a specified time limit.
But the authority itself is constitutional and it is quite
sweeping, and AUMF and in the case of Syria, Iraq--we typically
deal with to extent AUMF--one from 2001, one from 2002--our
focus on substance. They deal with certain specified entities
or types, categories of threat. They are sometimes limited in
time. These two were not, but they could be.
So an AUMF is specific to purpose, often to the time they
remain valid. The Article 2 authorities are not constrained by
either of those considerations.
Mr. Curtis. By way of clarification, I want to make clear
that the strikes were based on Article 2. Is that correct?
Mr. Satterfield. That's correct, sir.
Mr. Curtis. Right. Help me and my constituents understand
at what point we go past Article 2. We talked about if this
happens again we'll be back with some type of--I don't want to
say retaliation but some type of action, and how do we know
where that fine line is?
Mr. Satterfield. I am going to give you with some
diffidence a non-lawyer's response to your question for the
constituents back home, which is every President, every
administration, in every instance where there is contemplation
of the use of military force or forces must consider what the
appropriate authority, Article 2--in extent, AUMF--soliciting
from the Congress an explicit and new authorization should best
be used, depending upon the circumstances, and it is very much
circumstance condition-dependent.
Mr. Curtis. And I am sure I don't need to define this, but
let me, just for my own sake, say that there's, obviously, some
urgency in Congress to be involved, balancing, very carefully
with this concept of 535 generals, right, and appreciating any
involvement in this--as we pass the line, right, in
understanding that Congress is anxious to be supportive but
also to be involved.
Mr. Satterfield. Well understood.
Mr. Curtis. Let me also ask some questions about our
allies.
I was pleased to hear that we were joined by two of our
allies--the United Kingdom and France. I was pleased that
others spoke up to support that but kind of the question in my
mind why they weren't there to be a part of the strikes.
Can you help me understand that process and how they are in
or out?
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you for that question.
We have had ongoing consultations, certainly, with European
allies and with Turkey for a very long time on Syria, broadly.
There were consultations in the lead-up to the strikes,
particularly with France and Britain; and the French and
British, for geopolitical and historical reasons and reasons of
national interest, chose to support us.
There are certain constraints in the German system on legal
constraints, political constraints, on the ability to
participate directly in a strike.
I was in Berlin in the lead-up to the strikes and I know
that there were a lot of consultations internally. The Germans
came out in their own system with the highest level of and most
fulsome level of support they could provide.
The Italians were supportive. Turkey was supportive. But I
will just say that from our perspective at State Department, we
were pleased with the level of engagement and material--not
only support but in the case of France and Great Britain, this
was leadership in showing the way toward both the need for the
strikes and then taking action and engaging with us when we
worked through that.
Mr. Curtis. I apologize. I am out of time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go now to Adriano Espaillat from New York.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to come in like Mariana Rivera and perhaps close
the gate, right.
Yes, it remains an essential axiom of U.S. interests to
have Iran not obtain a nuclear weapon, and though the President
continues to suggest terminating the Iran nuclear deal it is
necessary to maintain it and strengthen it so that we can
prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon so that we can
further build upon diplomatic efforts to combat Iran's nuclear
program and aggressive actions.
Iran's malicious actions are not just confined to nuclear
weapons. It supports the Houthis rebels in Yemen and poses a
threat to the stability of that region and the continuation of
this war has led to one of the largest humanitarian crises in
the world.
The U.S. has continued to aid Saudi Arabia in this conflict
despite the heavy civilian casualties contributed by all sides
in the conflict.
I wanted to ask the first question regarding the JCPOA and
the issues with the sunset provision. I know that the ballistic
missile program and the human rights abuse issues are critical.
But what do you see--do you see this agreement surviving
past May 2018, Ambassador? Where do you see the JCPOA? Do you
see it surviving or do you feel that the sunset provision is
sort of like a line in the sand that will derail the entire
agreement?
Mr. Satterfield. The President has made very clear there
are critical areas of the JCPOA and areas surrounding the
JCPOA--missile and ballistic missile technology--that require
addressing.
We are working actively to succeed in that addressing of
those defects. We hope very much that we achieve a success, but
with respect to what happens on or around May 12th, that is a
decision for the President which will be shaped by what in fact
is the outcome of the discussions underway now.
Mr. Espaillat. And where do you see our allies? Do they
feel confident that in fact perhaps attacking the ballistic
issue and the human rights issue without the--having a concrete
agreement on the sunset--is that enough for them? Are they with
us all the way on this or it's just--are they half stepping us?
Mr. Satterfield. We are mid-stream, sir, in our
conversations with the European allies about this, and the
sense that I have from our engagements, at least with the
European allies, is that there is a greater awareness of the
extent of the Iranian challenge than there was in the past and
there's a greater political willingness in the U.K., France,
and Germany to take actions to address the shortcomings of
JCPOA.
Mr. Espaillat. Okay. On the second issue of Yemen,
Ambassador, the Obama administration reduced the number of U.S.
servicemen there, helping the coalition due to the concerns
that I stipulated earlier--the humanitarian crisis that this
coalition and others have helped create.
Has this assessment changed under the current
administration and if so what is the justification for such
change?
Mr. Satterfield. The administration is quite concerned with
different aspects of the Yemen crisis. First is humanitarian.
This is an extraordinarily large humanitarian disaster--one of
the greatest man-made disasters in modern history.
And while the coalition campaign is not the exclusive cause
or sustainer of the crisis, the Houthis themselves bear very
significant responsibility.
The fact is we are associated with the Saudi-led campaign,
not with the Houthis. We have engaged at the highest levels of
the government, including the President repeatedly, to impress
upon the governments involved in this campaign, led by Saudi
Arabia that there might be every possible action taken first to
maintain free and full access for humanitarian and commercial
goods including fuel into Yemen, secondly, that the campaign
directed with the purpose of bringing the Houthis to the
negotiating table is not, in our view, a campaign that can
succeed.
Saudi Arabia has legitimate self-defense needs and
requirements which do require military action. We work with
them to help shape and support those actions in a way that
mitigates or diminishes civilian casualties.
But the campaign to force a political resolution is not one
that we believe has a military calculus to it. It's political.
It should lie in enabling the United Nations to move forward.
We have the new representative of the United Nations for Yemen
in Washington today, and we hope very much that his efforts can
achieve success.
Mr. Espaillat. And so why is the administration so far away
from reaching the 45,000-person cap on refugees? If we have
this issue of--not just in Yemen but across the region with so
many refugees, why have we not carried our own load, as some of
the European countries have done?
Mr. Satterfield. That is an issue which involves various
departments of the U.S. Government beyond the Department of
State and broader security and policy concerns, Congressman.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you. Thank you, Ambassador.
Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
And I want to remind committee members of the classified
briefing we are holding on these issues immediately following
the hearing and I invite them to join us in the SCIF.
And with that, I want to thank the witnesses for appearing
before our committee today. We very much appreciate your work
on these critical issues and we look forward to greater
consultation between the committee and the department in the
weeks ahead on these issues.
And we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[all]