- ERDOS NOMINATION
[Senate Hearing 116-350]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
S. Hrg. 116-350
ERDOS NOMINATION
=======================================================================
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
to
CONSIDER THE NOMINATION OF LANNY E. ERDOS TO BE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE
OF SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT AT THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERIOR
__________
DECEMBER 17, 2019
__________
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Printed for the use of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-875
WASHINGTON : 2021
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
LISA MURKOWSKI, Alaska, Chairman
JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming
JOE MANCHIN III, West Virginia
JAMES E. RISCH, Idaho
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE LEE, Utah
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
STEVE DAINES, Montana
BERNARD SANDERS, Vermont
BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
CORY GARDNER, Colorado
MARTIN HEINRICH, New Mexico
CINDY HYDE-SMITH, Mississippi
MAZIE K. HIRONO, Hawaii
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
ANGUS S. KING, JR., Maine
LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada
JOHN HOEVEN, North Dakota
Brian Hughes, Staff Director
Kellie Donnelly, Chief Counsel
Lucy Murfitt, Deputy Chief Counsel
Sarah Venuto, Democratic Staff Director
Sam E. Fowler, Democratic Chief Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, Chairman and a U.S. Senator from Alaska....
1
Manchin III, Hon. Joe, Ranking Member and a U.S. Senator from
West Virginia..................................................
2
WITNESSES
Johnson, Hon. Bill, a U.S. Representative from Ohio..............
5
Erdos, Lanny E., nominated to be Director of the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement at the Department of
the Interior...................................................
6
ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
Baker, Robert:
Letter for the Record........................................
34
Bowman, Jennifer:
Letter for the Record........................................
24
Butalia, Dr. Tarunjit:
Letter for the Record........................................
35
Cera, Hon. Jack:
Letter for the Record........................................
37
Department of Environmental Quality, State of Wyoming:
Letter for the Record........................................
16
DeWine, Hon. Mike:
Letter for the Record........................................
38
Erdos, Lanny E.:
Opening Statement............................................
6
Written Testimony............................................
8
Responses to Questions for the Record........................
31
Interstate Mining Compact Commission:
Letter for the Record........................................
39
Resolution...................................................
41
Johnson, Hon. Bill:
Introduction.................................................
5
Manchin III, Hon. Joe:
Opening Statement............................................
2
Mertz, Mary:
Letter for the Record........................................
26
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa:
Opening Statement............................................
1
Ohio Aggregates & Industrial Minerals Association:
Letter for the Record........................................
27
Phillips, Debbie:
Letter for the Record........................................
28
ERDOS NOMINATION
----------
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 17, 2019
U.S. Senate,
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:10 a.m. in
Room SD-366, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Lisa
Murkowski, Chairman of the Committee, presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
U.S. SENATOR FROM ALASKA
The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. The Committee will
come to order.
We are here this morning to consider the nomination of Mr.
Lanny Erdos to be the Director of the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement within the Department of the
Interior. This is an important position. I certainly think that
you, Mr. Erdos, are qualified for it. Apparently you are going
to be receiving an endorsement from my colleague here. I don't
want to preempt----
Senator Manchin. Absolutely.
The Chairman. ----but he verifies that you are from a good
place in West Virginia and that is certainly helpful.
Since Congress enacted the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act (SMCRA) in 1977, OSM has overseen coal mining
throughout the country. The Office also manages the Abandoned
Mine Lands (AML) Fund which is used to reclaim historic mines
that pose a risk to human health and the environment. While OSM
plays an important role in approving and monitoring projects,
SMCRA clearly envisions states as the lead regulator of coal
mines. Currently 23 states have primacy over coal mining and
reclamation programs, and 13 states have been delegated
authority to regulate coal-related activities on federal lands
within their boundaries. This structure allows federal laws and
programs to be implemented efficiently by those who are closest
to the impacts and best understand the unique challenges of
their region.
In my home State of Alaska, the coal regulatory program has
regulated mining since 1983 and, together with Usibelli Coal
Mine, our only operating coal mine, it has demonstrated that
safe and responsible operations can be assured with minimal
permitting delays. We have also seen the State of Alaska make
good progress reducing its inventory of abandoned mine lands
through the efficient use of federal AML dollars. This
cooperative framework can also bring challenges. We have
certainly seen some of those back home. There is a fine line
between appropriate oversight and unnecessary delays, second
guessing, or duplication of work.
During the last Administration, we saw federal regulators
slow walk or deny the approval of state permits. This has
improved in the current Administration, but I think it is
critical that we avoid backsliding in Alaska or really anywhere
else. I have also heard concerns about the need to increase
transparency and improve management of AML funds to ensure the
program's goals are being accomplished as effectively as
possible, especially as the economics of coal remain volatile.
Mr. Erdos, your experience is impressive. You started your
career at a mine before working your way up through Ohio's
Division of Mineral Resource Management first serving as a
Reclamation Inspector, an AML Design Specialist and leading the
Division as Deputy Chief and then Chief. The perspective that
you have gained by working at an operational coal mine and then
in multiple technical and leadership positions at the state
level, I think, will be invaluable as you seek to balance
between state and federal authority. Your reputation is very
good on this issue. You are a known pragmatic regulator who has
consistently promoted solutions that make sense for all sides.
If confirmed, and I am pretty confident that you will be,
you will use your 31+ years of service to renew OSM's
partnership with the states and to produce the energy resources
that we need in a fashion that protects people and the
environment.
So thank you, again, for being here today, and for your
willingness to serve. I now turn to my colleague, Senator
Manchin, and then we will go to Congressman Johnson, who will
introduce Mr. Erdos.
STATEMENT OF HON. JOE MANCHIN III,
U.S. SENATOR FROM WEST VIRGINIA
Senator Manchin. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for holding
this hearing on the nomination of Lanny Erdos to be the
Director of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement, which we refer to as OSMRE.
Thank you, Mr. Erdos, for your willingness to take on this
very important task and for being here this morning and
bringing your expertise to the table. I enjoyed meeting you in
my office. We had a great conversation, talked about old home
areas and have a lot in common.
The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
was created in 1977 by the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act. Any of us old enough to remember mining prior
to '77, especially in the mountains of West Virginia, the way
the mining was done at that time, there was no such thing as
mountaintop removal, but there was strip mining. They would go
around like peeling an orange, the peeling of an orange, and go
around the mountain and basically leave whatever was left. They
did not have to reclaim it or put it back to contour. They did
not have to backfill it, make it look like it was before they
got it. And then, basically, we never treated any of the
drainage coming from some of the acid mines.
So all of this came in after SMCRA, which was much needed
with the AML, abandoned mine lands. I remember it very vividly
and I think it is much better. But then we have mountaintop
coming in, that is a whole other challenge that we have.
The Act became law after six long years of exhaustive
legislative consideration. It didn't just happen. It really had
been needed for a long time, but it was really a fight because
of the strength in the industry. Congress found that surface
coal mining was creating disturbances to the surrounding
terrain and impacting the welfare of communities, but it also
recognized that mining coal was necessary to meet the nation's
energy needs. And I have often said, there has to be a balance
between the economy and the environment and that has to be
basically predetermined before you go in.
So what is going to happen in post mine? A post mine,
basically, is when you leave it, what is left and what can you
do with it? That is why SMCRA was so important. Additionally,
Congress recognized the need to replace the patchwork of state-
by-state laws with a uniform federal standard, but one that
recognized the need for a cooperative role with the states to
successfully regulate coal mining within their individual
borders. SMCRA was enacted to remedy these problems and to
ensure that the nation could continue to mine coal to meet our
energy needs without harming the health and safety of our
citizens and the environment. What we basically said, if we
couldn't do it in a safe and environmentally conscious way,
don't do it. And we try to meet those balances. SMCRA places
the primary responsibility for implementing and administering
its programs in the hands of the Director of the Office of
Surface Mining. It is a Director's job to protect the public
and the environment from the effects of surface coal mining
operations and to ensure that lands are restored to beneficial
use when mining operations are finished.
Let me give you another example of how crazy this was. If
there is mountain disturbances in West Virginia, sometimes, we
have no flat land. You cannot even build a house, let alone
build any type of manufacturing or industry. And then they came
up with a plan. Well, fine, if you are going to do mountaintop
removal, you have to put the mountain back. It makes no sense
whatsoever. If you are going to do mountaintop removal, it
should be done with the land that was needed after it was
completed so we can use it and put it in commercial use because
we had none. That is what we have been asking for and what you
all have been responsible for.
Most coal states, including my own State of West Virginia,
and several Indian tribes, now have their own surface mining
and reclamation programs. The Director works closely with the
state and tribal programs and provides them with technical
assistance. The Office of Surface Mining helps train state and
tribal professionals to ensure they have the skills needed to
do the job and it works with colleges and universities to
further reclamation science and develop the tools the states
and tribes need to get the job done. Basically, what they have
been doing is soil enhancement so they can replant, refurbish,
do things of this sort where there is reforestation or
agriculture and it has been very successful.
Although the Office of Surface Mining might appear small
compared to some of the Interior Department's larger bureaus,
the task it has been given is enormous and it is critically
important to coal states like mine and like Senator Barrasso's
and to the nation as a whole, which has long benefited and
continues to benefit from the coal that our states produce. The
Office of Surface Mining is responsible for distributing money
to the mine workers' combined health and benefit funds. I
cannot stress enough how important this is to me and my state.
That is why I am so proud that a fix to the Miner's Pension
Fund and health care benefits is included in the year-end
appropriation deals.
And what we are talking about, we are talking about the
surplus funds. We are not talking about the primary funds that
are needed to restore and refurbish the ground, but there are
excess funds there and we have used them to the benefit of the
people that mine the coal. Because of this, 82,000 current
pensioners, 10,000 future pensioners and an additional 13,000
health care beneficiaries will not see their benefits gutted or
eliminated next year. Everybody here has worked so hard on
this, basically making sure that the Miner's Protection Act,
the bipartisan Miner's Protection Act, passed. What we have
been able to do in the last three years is protect almost
34,000 miners and their families with their healthcare and
92,000 miners and their families from getting their pensions
absolutely gutted to the bone. It is unbelievable what was able
to be done to save people in some of the most challenging areas
of our country.
As you know, Mr. Erdos, the Office of Surface Mining has a
very important role to play in this implementation. I
understand you are the nephew of Babe Erdos, a member of the
MWA International Executive Board. I have no doubt you
understand the importance of making sure the necessary
transfers take place and that we keep the promise made in the
Krug-Lewis Agreement of 1946. Congress specified the employees
of the Office must have the professional competence and
capacity to administer the program, and I believe you do and
you have that experience and integrity.
I believe Mr. Erdos plainly has the necessary competence
and capacity. He spent 31 years working for Ohio's Department
of Natural Resources. During that time, he worked as a
Reclamation Inspector, an Abandoned Mine Lands Design
Specialist, a Permitting Manager, Deputy Chief of the Mineral
Resources Management Division and, finally, for eight years, as
Chief of the Mineral Resources Management Division. For the
past four months, he has served as the Principal Deputy
Director, as the Acting Director of the Office of Surface
Mining.
So again, thank you for holding this hearing, Madam
Chairman, and we look forward to hearing from our appointee.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
We are honored to have one of the Representatives from the
6th District, Ohio Representative Bill Johnson, come all the
way over from the House side to introduce Mr. Erdos to the
Committee this morning. We welcome you, and you may proceed.
Thank you for coming over.
STATEMENT OF HON. BILL JOHNSON,
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM OHIO
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Murkowski and
Ranking Member Manchin, members of the Committee. I appreciate
the opportunity to be here this morning. As you might imagine,
votes have been called on the House Floor, so I'm gonna try and
get through this as quickly as possible, but I'm gonna give it
its due diligence as well because I am very, very proud to
introduce Mr. Lanny Erdos, a gentleman I've had the distinct
honor of working with on many issues important to Eastern and
Southeastern Ohio, where I represent.
Mr. Erdos has a well-earned reputation, as you pointed out,
Madam Chairwoman, for being a hard-working professional, and I
know he will do an excellent job as Director for the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement.
Before his work at the Department of the Interior, Mr.
Erdos was the Chief at the Ohio Department of Natural Resources
Division of Mineral Resources Management. This position
involved a broad range of responsibilities including the
management and regulation of Ohio's coal and aggregate
resources as well as management of the Division's Abandoned
Mine Lands, or AML, and Mine Safety Programs. This meant he
managed Ohio's AML grant monies and projects utilized for
reclamation and remediation of coal. He also oversaw Ohio's
Mine Safety Program which is tasked with training, testing and
certifying Ohio's mining workforce, as well as inspection of
Ohio's mines to ensure compliance with Ohio's mine safety laws.
Mr. Erdos has worked with many stakeholders relevant to his
nominated role of Director, such as the U.S. and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agencies, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Ohio Aggregate and
Industrial Minerals Association, Ohio Coal Association, Rural
Action of Ohio, the Ohio Mideastern Governments Association
and, of course, the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement. Mr. Erdos has also worked with industry and
government representatives on various task forces created to
address environmental concerns such as stream and wetland
restoration and preservation, impoundment design, offsite
effectment and remediation.
Throughout his 31 years of state service at ODNR, Mr. Erdos
has done great work for the great State of Ohio and for our
country. And I have no doubt that he will continue to serve the
public in that same fashion as the Director for the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement. I therefore
recommend him to your Committee for due consideration.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Congressman. We appreciate the
introduction, and we know you have a busy day over there. Good
luck with things.
At this time, we will ask you, Mr. Erdos, to stand.
The rules of this Committee which apply to all nominees
require that they be sworn in in connection with their
testimony. So I would ask that you raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about to
give the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources shall
be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
Mr. Erdos. I do.
The Chairman. You may be seated.
Before you begin your statement, I will ask you three
questions addressed to each nominee who appear before the
Committee.
Will you be available to appear before this Committee and
other Congressional committees to represent departmental
positions and respond to issues of concern to the Congress?
Mr. Erdos. I will.
The Chairman. Are you aware of any personal holdings,
investments or interests that could constitute a conflict or
create an appearance of such a conflict should you be confirmed
and assume the office to which you've been nominated by the
President?
Mr. Erdos. No, I do not.
The Chairman. Are you involved or do you have any assets
held in blind trusts?
Mr. Erdos. I do not.
The Chairman. You may proceed.
STATEMENT OF LANNY E. ERDOS, NOMINATED TO BE DIRECTOR OF THE
OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Mr. Erdos. Thank you.
Chairman Murkowski, Ranking Member Manchin and members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today as President Trump's nominee for the position of
Director of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement, OSMRE. I would like to thank President Trump and
Secretary Bernhardt for their confidence in me. I'm excited to
be here today to share with you my vision for OSMRE. I also
appreciate the opportunity to share with you my background,
give you an idea about where I come from and provide insight
into my professional career at the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources, or Ohio DNR.
If I am honored enough to be confirmed, my 31 years of
experience and public service at the Ohio DNR has uniquely
prepared me for the position of Director of OSMRE. I have
working knowledge and a specific experience in almost every
aspect of OSMRE's mission. I began my career as an
Environmental Technician primarily responsible for collecting
field data and reviewing mine maps for accuracy. I was soon
promoted to Reclamation Inspector where for seven years I was
responsible for inspections associated with coal and industrial
mineral mining. My responsibilities included ensuring that the
coal operator was following the requirements of the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, or SMCRA, and
inspection of mining operation and reclamation activities.
I later transferred to the Abandoned Mine Lands program, or
AML, as a design specialist. Working under the supervision of a
registered professional engineer, I designed AML projects such
as high wall backfills, subsidence caused by pre-law
underground mining, coal refuse reclamation projects and stream
restorations, to name a few. I've also been a Permitting
Manager where my responsibilities included oversight of all
coal and industrial mineral applications.
In 2008 I was promoted to Deputy Chief responsible for
managing the state's coal, industrial minerals and mine safety
programs. My responsibilities included statewide management of
nearly 1,000 permits and the protection, training and
certification of the state's mining workforce. Three years
later, I was promoted to Chief of the Ohio DNR. I maintained my
Deputy Chief responsibilities and also assumed management of
the AML program.
As Chief, I worked with federal partners such as the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Office of Surface Mining,
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Mine Safety and Health
Administration as well as state and local partners such as
state fish and wildlife, dam safety, forestry and engineering
and higher education partners such as Ohio University and The
Ohio State University. I also worked with local watershed
groups. At the Ohio DNR, we funded numerous watershed
coordinator positions throughout the eastern portion of the
state. In connection with Ohio Rural Action we supported
positions to assist with stream restoration projects and stream
data collection.
From a personal perspective, I come from a very strong-
willed, blue-collar background where family comes first. From a
very young age my mother and father instilled into my brother,
sister and me, the lessons that hard work is important, that it
matters. They led by example and taught us this lesson through
their own hard work.
My father worked for nearly 30 years in an underground
mine, and it gives me great pride to tell you today that I am
the son of an American coal miner. Although it was an
incredibly difficult job, he enjoyed it as well as the life it
provided his family. He worked rotating shifts but somehow he
always managed to make it to my sporting events and there were
many because I thought I had to play every sport imaginable, as
did my brother. My sister's band and scholastic events were
just as important to him. My mother worked as a cook at the
local school and later in the county court system for one of
the local judges. Like my father, she always managed to make it
to the kids' events and still managed to have supper ready back
in the days when families sat together around the table for
every meal.
They both worked hard to support our family, and seeing
that day after day stuck with me. I have tremendous respect for
the men and women who mine the coal, that help to supply the
country's energy needs like my son-in-law, who still, today,
works in an underground mine in Pennsylvania. But I also
understand the need to protect our lands and water. Striking
that environmental balance, as I have tried to do for more than
30 years, ensures the protection of our natural resources and
supports the country's energy needs.
If confirmed, it would be an honor to serve the citizens of
this great country, President Trump and Secretary Bernhardt as
Director of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement. Thank you for today's opportunity, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Erdos follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Erdos, I appreciate that and
appreciate learning a little bit more about the family
background. That is important.
I want to just speak to the Alaska specifics of our
resource development. I know that you are familiar with it, but
when we say that we are somewhat unique in terms of resource
development and our regulatory framework, it actually turns out
that we are. We have some of the highest electricity costs in
the country and for many, coal is one of those low-cost energy
sources for the state.
I mentioned in my opening statement, we have one coal
producer. They have mining operations in a couple different
locations, but it is basically one coal operator. Almost all of
the coal now is used in state, so as we work through these
state and federal partnerships, I think it is important that
you just, kind of, keep that in mind.
One issue that I would like to touch on which is causing
some concern is the potential bonding requirement changes. So
if you could just share with me how you view OSM's role and
process for setting up and approving bonding?
Mr. Erdos. Thank you for the question, Senator.
So, as you're aware, there are many bonding instruments out
there available to the various states and tribes as well as
OSM. The primacy states essentially set the bond limits. They
also determine those instruments. And there are 24 primacy
states, 23 of those states, I believe, are actually mining coal
today. So OSM's role is to oversee those bonding requirements
for each one of those states, to work with the state regulator
relative to what those bonding requirements look like and to
ensure that there is sufficient bond to ensure reclamation.
What I can say to you at OSM, if I'm fortunate enough to be
confirmed, I certainly would not, coming into the job--come
into the job looking to change anything that's currently
working.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate that. I would welcome you
to come up to the state and have that opportunity to talk to
folks yourself. What I would ask this morning is that you would
commit to work with me, my office, and consider, again, these
unique aspects of Alaska's coal operations and regulations to
ensure that any of the changes that could be made to bonding
requirements in the Lower 48 are then workable within the
state.
Mr. Erdos. So again, thank you for the question, Senator. I
certainly would enjoy doing that. And if I'm fortunate enough
to be confirmed, I'm looking forward to coming back to Alaska.
I've been there once.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Erdos. And I certainly would love to come back.
What I will say is any changes, and again, I'm not looking
to change anything at this point, any change would have to work
for all the states, certainly including Alaska.
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
The AML fund has been touched on here in opening
statements. In Alaska we have about $44 million in remaining
high priority AML projects. I think we are making some good
progress in the state, but I have heard some concerns about the
lack of progress made on the AML inventory nationally when
compared against amounts that have been paid into the fund. I
think we all recognize that there is a very dynamic nature to
the list. You have some projects that are added while others
are completed.
How can OSM ensure that the coal producers and their
customers as well have confidence that there is a plan to
complete the identified projects efficiently and that this
inventory list just does not represent, kind of, this never-
ending goal?
Mr. Erdos. Well again, thank you for the question and
that's a very, very good question. So I spoke to in my opening
statement relative to the AML program and I, in actuality, I
spent about two-thirds of my career working in the AML program
back in Ohio. So it's a very important program. I certainly get
that.
Back in Ohio under my tenure as Chief, we completed 242
health and safety projects and 217 emergency projects at a cost
of about $46 million. And I have certainly read the articles,
the same articles I'm sure that you've read, Senator, relative
to the numbers and what those numbers look like. So with that
being said, I recognize when I came on board three and a half
months ago at OSM that that was an issue that we needed to
address.
So within the first two weeks I sat down with staff to talk
about how we represent those numbers. What do those numbers
look like on our webpage? Are they accurate? I've been very
pleased with the progress we've made. We're working with our
stakeholders like the Interstate Mining Compact Commission,
relative to making sure that the numbers that are shown on our
webpage represent true numbers relative to the cost of
construction, design, administrative costs, those kind of
things.
And one of the concerns that, certainly, I had the same
concern as a hired regulator was administrative cost. When I
looked at those numbers, the actual administrative cost is
around seven to eight percent which is a very good number when
you start talking about administrative costs associated with a
$10 billion program. So we're going to continue to work on
that.
We have a system to track projects. It's called e-AMLIS.
It's the electronic Abandoned Mine Land Inventory System. It's
a dynamic system. It changes all the time. States input data.
We verify the data is accurate. We verify that, in fact, that
project that was input into the system is, in fact, eligible as
an AML project. So it is a number that does move up and down.
Certainly we're going to continue to work with the states to
ensure that's accurate.
One of the things I would really like to do if I'm
confirmed is sit down with our stakeholders and talk about the
AML program, talk about appropriations, talk about
unappropriated dollars and what those look like and how we can
best, together, move forward relative to the AML program.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I appreciate that
detail.
Senator Manchin.
Senator Manchin. Thank you very much.
Mr. Erdos, as you know, the transfer of the excess funds
into the United Mine Workers Retirement Fund is the lifeblood
of what we are trying to accomplish right now with all the
backlog that we have. The only thing I would ask is that you
commit to ensuring the timely and uneventful transfer of these
funds as directed by Congress, as we voted on. So your
commitment to that is essential to what we are doing right now.
Mr. Erdos. So, Senator, I'm aware. We talked about this
when we met in your office, and I certainly understand the
importance of legislation. What I have said, and I believe I
shared this with you, is I'm working with my staff relative to
what those numbers represent----
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Mr. Erdos. ----and what it means as far as AML
distribution. I'm certainly willing to continue to work with
you on what those numbers represent. I'd like to get briefed by
my staff. I realize there's Treasury money and interest money
relative to AML.
Senator Manchin. Well, let me just say, the number that we
have is about $10 billion in backlog, $10 billion with a B. But
the majority of that is due to pre-SMCRA, as I talked about how
the land was left before that. We are going back and doing
water projects which, I think, the most critical thing we can
do for the Clean Water Act is to make sure we are cleaning up
these water problems that we have in a lot of the underground
mines that have acid mine drainage.
But with that, do you have a way to address the reclamation
state-by-state to produce to exactly where we are post-SMCRA
versus pre-SMCRA so we can really see what are the commitments
we have and the obligations we have?
Mr. Erdos. So, we do, Senator, we're working on that.
Again, it's tracked through e-AMLIS which certainly is not the,
we don't believe it's the best mechanism to track what you're
looking----
Senator Manchin. Yes, I don't know, I cannot tell you
exactly to the penny in West Virginia how much has been
associated pre-SMCRA and how much do we still have ongoing for
after SMCRA passed in '77.
Mr. Erdos. So, what I would, what I would commit to,
Senator, I'll go back and work with our staff relative to that.
But yes, we do track it. I'm not overly confident in some of
those numbers. We're working on a new system to track AML--AML
projects pre-SMCRA, AML liability post-SMCRA.
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Mr. Erdos. So certainly, I'm willing to go back and look at
those numbers and look forward to working with you.
Senator Manchin. Here is another challenge that we have
that is the purpose of the AML. The Abandoned Mine Lands
program is due to expire 2021. It will be under your tutelage,
if you will. With that expiring--right now it takes $0.28 of
every mine, every time a coal mine on surface and I think $0.12
underground.
How do you look at these fees? There is going to be a lot
of pressure from the industry, all this is costing us and it
does not cost them a penny. It has been built into the mix for
many, many years, but no different than what they did with the
Black Lung Fund. They have cut it from a $1.10 to $0.55. And at
the time, I said, you are telling me then by cutting the fund
and the money that we need to fight this disease, that you
found a cure? If anything, we have more younger miners
contracting Black Lung than ever before. So I would like to
know what your commitment would be toward continuing the AML
fund?
Mr. Erdos. Well, certainly Senator, and thank you for the
question, Senator. I am well aware of the legislation that's
out there presently relative to AML reauthorization. I spoke to
AML in my opening statement and the importance of AML and the
fact that I've worked in the AML program for over 20 years. So
I certainly understand the importance of the program.
I want to continue to work with my staff and am certainly
committed to working with you, Senator, relative to
reauthorization.
Senator Manchin. Let me throw this one at you, okay?
In 2015 the Office of Surface Mining partnered with the
National Academy of Sciences to study the health impacts of
mountaintop removal mining to surrounding communities. Shortly
after the Trump Administration came into office, the study was
canceled. I have come around. I have come around on utilizing
mountaintop removal methods, and I think the method has
exceeded its useful life. So what are your thoughts on
mountaintop mining? Do you believe that there is a continuing
need for science-based data on the health impacts of
mountaintop mining that the canceled study was meant to provide
and do you have any intentions in reviving this?
Mr. Erdos. Thank you for the question, Senator.
So we talked a little bit about this, I believe, when we
got together. I'm aware of the study, the National Science
Academy study, relative to mountaintop removal. So I am aware
of it. It was, I think it was initiated in 2016 and was
canceled in 2018, long before my time at OSM.
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Mr. Erdos. As a state regulator, I was aware that it was
going on when I was in Ohio, but really not much beyond that. I
certainly haven't looked at any data associated with it or any
narrative associated with that study. I haven't been briefed by
staff relative to that.
Senator Manchin. The only thing I can ask you to do, if you
would, would you find out, when they canceled the study, did we
already have the study completed or is it incomplete and what
are the findings to date? Where do we stand on that and what
have they found relevant to mountaintop that would be in the
health and welfare of the people that live around it?
Mr. Erdos. So, certainly I'd be willing to go back and look
at that, Senator----
Senator Manchin. We can make a determination if we think it
needs to be continued or not, and then we will go from there in
Congress. But we need to have the facts on that, if you can.
Mr. Erdos. So again, I'm just not familiar with it----
Senator Manchin. Yes.
Mr. Erdos. ----relative to the study itself.
Senator Manchin. We will work with you if you will work
with us on that.
Mr. Erdos. I'm certainly willing to work with you, Senator.
Senator Manchin. Give us the study, where it stopped, yes.
Mr. Erdos. Absolutely.
Senator Manchin. Okay, thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Barrasso.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Well first, I want to thank you, Madam Chairman and Ranking
Member Manchin, for holding this important hearing today.
Wyoming has led the nation in coal production for decades. Our
local economy relies heavily on the jobs and the revenue that
the coal industry provides. We are proud to provide the nation
with a reliable and affordable source of energy generation.
Mr. Erdos, I enjoyed having time to visit with you last
month. We covered quite a few topics. I have heard good things
about you from folks in Wyoming. In fact, I have a letter right
here from Todd Parfitt, who is the Wyoming Director of the
Department of Environmental Quality and, Madam Chairman, I
would like to submit this for the record.
The Chairman. It will be included.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Madam Chair.
[Letter from Todd Parfitt follows.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Senator Barrasso. Under the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act, SMCRA, states are the primary implementers of
the Abandoned Mine Lands program. Can you elaborate on your
understanding of cooperative federalism and the role the states
play as the primary implementers of SMCRA?
Mr. Erdos. Thank you, Senator, very good question.
So our role at OSM is oversight of the state regulatory
authority, the programs, the primacy states across the country
and, again, there are 24 primacy states across the country. So
we are working very closely with those regulatory authorities.
They are the regulatory authority (RA) within their state. And
when it's appropriate, certainly, we will defer to states
relative to that authority.
But with that being said, we work very closely. We have a
close relationship with all the states. I represented Ohio on
the Interstate Mining Compact Commission for over a decade and
I developed relationships with all the RAs across the country,
including Todd. So, we have a very good relationship, work very
closely together.
Senator Barrasso. So talk a little bit more about how you
envision this oversight role that you talked about from OSM
over the states as they implement SMCRA locally?
Mr. Erdos. So again, our role is one of oversight. The
process of, actually enforcement is, that's a role of the
regulatory authority. The permitting process, the application
process, again, is that's under the authority of the regulatory
authority which in this case would be state, the primacy state.
So we work very closely with those folks. We developed a
relationship. We have relationships with all the states that
have primacy in regard to our oversight program but we work
with them. It's one of cooperation.
Senator Barrasso. I believe you are well-suited to serve as
Director, having served as the Chief of the Ohio Department of
Natural Resources and as an active member of the Interstate
Mining Compact Commission. How will your experiences in these
organizations influence your decision-making as the Director of
OSM?
Mr. Erdos. So one of the things that I've learned over the
years is that communication is very important which everyone on
this Committee fully understands. If you're not communicating,
you're not moving forward. So I have a relationship with the
folks across the country as a result of my time with the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission. So we're gonna continue,
I'm going to continue, to foster those relationships. We're
gonna have, we're gonna continue to have conversations relative
to regulation of the SMCRA permits across the country. So I'm
very excited about the opportunity, if I'm fortunate enough to
be confirmed, to do that with the states.
Senator Barrasso. When we met last month, we discussed the
need for OSM to advance programmatic amendments. Wyoming cannot
finalize our own rules to our AML program without this, and we
mentioned we have been waiting since 2014 for these amendments
to be finalized. Will you commit to finalizing these
programmatic amendments as soon as possible?
Mr. Erdos. So Senator, one of the first things I did when I
came aboard with OSM is I sat down with our staff. We had the
conversation relative to program amendments. I recognized we
had a backlog of 45 at OSM. Ohio has eight. So I knew coming in
that it was an issue and certainly I understand the importance
to the states. And I can assure you that we are gonna move
those through the system.
It's important to the states, and it's important to OSM
that we do that and certainly make that commitment to review
the program amendments timely. I've been working with staff
relative to the process that we use, the system that we use in
making modifications to that to make sure that it is timely.
What I can say now, we have probably 35, I believe, left to
review and approve, and we're working through those as quickly
as we possibly can.
Senator Barrasso. How are OSM and states improving the
assessment of abandoned mine land sites? What technologies are
you using to modernize the process?
Mr. Erdos. So, what we're doing again, is, and again I'll
talk to cooperation with the states. We work with the states
very closely relative to identifying those sites that meet the
requirements under SMCRA relative to AML sites. We're using e-
AMLIS. We're also looking at putting together a new database to
track, to actively and accurately track AML projects and the
costs associated with those.
Senator Barrasso. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Heinrich.
Senator Heinrich. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Erdos, as you probably know, OSMRE lost a series of
court cases back in 2015 and 2016 with regard to analyzing the
impacts of climate change where the courts found that the
agency failed to look at those impacts and the impacts of its
individual decisions on climate. Can you commit to complying
with the law and fully considering climate impacts in OSMRE's
permitting decisions moving forward?
Mr. Erdos. Thank you, Senator.
So what I will say is I agree the climate is changing.
Senator Heinrich. I did not ask that.
Mr. Erdos. Okay, I'm sorry.
Senator Heinrich. I am asking if you will commit to
implementing what the court ruled and analyze the impacts of
climate in the permitting decisions that OSMRE makes moving
forward.
Mr. Erdos. So, thank you, Senator.
So we do that every day. So part of what we do is science-
based and part of that science includes looking at climate. And
as I said, I certainly agree that it's something that we need
to look at. So we are doing that.
Senator Heinrich. It's--so, maybe I am not being clear. I
am just asking if you will commit to analyzing the impacts of
your permitting decisions on climate moving forward as the
courts ruled? Will you commit to complying with the court
ruling?
Mr. Erdos. So what I will say, Senator, is that, again, we
do look at climate.
Senator Heinrich. You cannot commit to complying with what
the court ruled?
Mr. Erdos. So, at OSM----
Senator Heinrich. That seems like a pretty low bar.
Mr. Erdos. So at OSM our job is to comply with the law,
Senator. So that law requires us to ensure that the
requirements of SMCRA are being met. And what I am committing
to you is we will continue to do that using the best available
science.
Senator Heinrich. OSMRE is also responsible for making sure
that the Kayenta mine on the Navajo Nation, which recently
ceased mining operations, is fully and safely reclaimed before
being returned to the Navajo Nation. It is important that this
work be completed in full consultation and collaboration with
the Navajo Nation and that the communities in the vicinity of
the mine have confidence that their air and their water are
being protected.
Can you commit to ensuring the full and safe reclamation of
the Kayenta mine area in direct consultation with the Navajo
Nation?
Mr. Erdos. Thank you, Senator.
So certainly we're going to ensure that all reclamation is
done relative to any permit that meets requirements of SMCRA
that's associated with that permit. So we will certainly, we
will certainly do that. We will ensure that reclamation is
completed per the SMCRA permit.
Senator Heinrich. And what about consultation with the
Navajo Nation?
Mr. Erdos. So I'm certainly, again, I talked about
communication. I think communication is important.
Senator Heinrich. I did not ask about communication. There
are legal requirements for consultation with tribal
governments.
Mr. Erdos. So certainly, Senator, we will follow the law
and we will certainly make sure that we have those
communications with the tribes.
Senator Heinrich. Okay.
Mr. Erdos, I have got to say, I think you are making this a
lot harder than it needs to be.
Senator Manchin. If I can just add one thing? And I think
it might help a little bit, Senator.
If you are a mining company, you have to pay a bond. You
put up a bond for any land and then basically you pay a fee on
top of that that goes into AML. Your office has a discretion
not to release that bond back to the company, and they can be
held liable if it has not been done to specifications.
Think what the Senator is saying. Are you enforcing that?
Do you have enough enforcement powers and are you willing to
basically enforce SMCRA law and basically putting the land
back, if not as good, better than what they started mining
with? A lot of times it can be done, whether it be trout
streams or whatever. They can improve the quality. But if they
do not do it, then you have the ability to basically keep that
bond, forfeit that bond that they had and they get no
reimbursement whatsoever. Is that correct?
Mr. Erdos. So that's correct, Senator, on states where OSM
has regulatory authority. We work with the regulatory authority
in the primacy states to ensure the bond is not released, if
it's not reclaimed further----
Senator Manchin. How about the tribal law, from tribal law?
Mr. Erdos. Tribes as well.
Senator Manchin. Do you have oversight on tribal land?
Mr. Erdos. We do.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Senator King.
Senator Manchin, do you have further questions for Mr.
Erdos?
Senator Manchin. I think what everyone would like to know
is that sometimes maybe the White House might be going, the
Executive Branch might be going in a little bit different
direction than what the law tells us that we must do and have
to do. And with that, you have to have the will and the
fortitude to be able to say this makes no sense whatsoever.
All we are saying, and I have always said this, and I have
been in some tough situations in mining in West Virginia. I
lost my uncle. I have lost a lot of my friends to mining
accidents. I have seen it done right, and I have seen it gone
horribly wrong. What we are asking, we are depending on your
agency to make sure that we do it right and make sure that you
enforce it. I have never seen a good operator that had not
taken that initiative, even gone further. But I have seen a lot
of people on the fringes willing to cut corners. That is what
we need to make sure that you are able to do and have the
resources to do that, and openly report back to us to see if
you need additional legislation that will give you more
enforcement powers.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Lee.
Senator Lee. Thanks so much, Madam Chair and Mr. Presiding
Member.
Mr. Erdos, thank you for joining us today. Could you walk
us through the process that one would have to go through in
order to obtain a surface mining permit?
Mr. Erdos. So thank you for the question, Senator.
So if I were to explain that to you in its entirety, it
would take us about an hour. So it's a very complicated
process. They have to submit, obviously, an application. But
before they submit the application, there's 12 to 24 months of
background data that's required that they have to, they have to
submit to the regulatory authority, or where OSM has regulatory
authority, to OSM. So it's a very long process. I'm gonna speak
to, if it's okay, I'm going to speak to my time in Ohio as a
regulator on how we went through that process.
So the application, the applicant submits an application to
the State of Ohio, in this case, and we review it. So that
review process--hydrology, topsoil, water quality, reclamation,
those kind of things--is all completed. It's a very complex,
time-consuming process. It generally takes anywhere from, in
Ohio, two to three years to obtain a permit. So it's a very
long, challenging, complicated process.
Senator Lee. On average, how much time does Department of
the Interior spend conducting a NEPA analysis?
Mr. Erdos. So thank you for that question, Senator.
So that's one of the things when I came onboard that I had
to take a step back because it was taking six to ten years,
roughly, on federal lands to achieve, for an operator to
receive a permit to mine coal. So one of the things that's
occurring today is BLM and OSM are working together relative to
the NEPA process.
Prior to that there was a process where we had BLM doing
their NEPA review and at OSM we were doing ours. It was
separate and certainly it's duplicative, taking far too long.
So what we're doing today is we're working together. So BLM and
OSM are working together, going out into the field together
relative to environmental assessments, and we're also meeting
in the office to discuss those environmental assessments. So
it's certainly reduced the time relative to permitting.
Senator Lee. It seems to me that one of the things that has
happened in that process with it taking six to ten years within
that window, that is a pretty broad window and it creates a lot
of uncertainty, not knowing whether or when the project will
finally be completed--certainty is, very often, what someone
like a mining company would need most, would be certainty.
There are other countries, other, sort of, peer nations
that have pretty good environmental track records, pretty
protective environmental laws, for example, Canada, Australia,
just to name a few, where you do not see any disrespect for the
environment, you do not see the land being destroyed or
hazardous conditions being created, but you do have a process
that is relatively predictable.
In the end, the uncertainty in the length of time expands
the cost and while it is easy to be unsympathetic toward a cost
if you are looking at what you perceive as a large mining
conglomerate of some sort, but ultimately the folks who own
that end up, in many cases, being teachers, pensioners, people
who invest in the company. And perhaps, more acutely they, the
people who end up getting affected by it are consumers who find
that everything they buy--so many of the things we buy today
have something in them that at some point was mined, was taken
out of the ground or was produced using something that was
taken out of the ground--they find everything they purchase
more expensive as a result.
What changes would you suggest that Congress consider in
order to address this problem, in order to make sure that the
NEPA process on the one hand balances environmental concerns
and takes those into account while balancing them also with the
need for commonsense regulatory reform?
Mr. Erdos. Thank you, Senator.
So what I would say is I think we're doing a pretty good
job today relative to working with our sister agency at BLM in
regard to the NEPA process. It's a process we're going to
continue to use, and I've made that statement to our folks.
It's a new process. It hasn't been done before. We're going to
continue to do it.
My expectations are that we're gonna reduce the timeframe
associated with permitting from six to ten years to two or
less. So we're heading in, we're certainly headed in the right
direction. I've talked to my counterparts at BLM, and we've
both committed to--this is a process that we have to continue.
This is the process we have to continue to work together on to
reduce timeframes relative to permitting.
But at the same time, we're also ensuring protection of the
environment. We have two sets of eyes looking at these areas
relative to environmental assessments. I'm very confident that
timeframes will be reduced, streamlined, and at the same time,
we're gonna ensure that the environment is protected.
Senator Lee. Madam Chair, I have one more question I would
like to ask, if that is okay? Thank you.
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, SMCRA,
allows states to take the lead on issuing coal mining permits
with limited OSMRE oversight. When OSMRE sees a violation or
receives a complaint, my understanding is that it has the
authority then to issue a 10-day notice. State regulators are
then expected to investigate the issue, follow up on it and if
the state fails to act, OSMRE can issue a notice of violation
or, as a last resort, can take over either all or part of the
state's coal mine regulatory program. Have I got that right so
far?
Mr. Erdos. You do.
Senator Lee. The Obama administration issued guidance to
expand the use of 10-day notices in instances where a citizen
complaint, ``establishes a reason to believe that a violation
may exist.'' The Trump administration has since rescinded that
use and has said that there is an upcoming proposal that will
allow greater deference and flexibility.
Now the 10-day notice seems to be a tool that can be
weaponized by administrations that do not like coal and want to
harm the industry. What do you feel would be the proper use of
a 10-day rule?
Mr. Erdos. So currently at OSM we work very closely with
the states relative to the 10-day notice process. We generally
give the states, if we get a call from a citizen relative to a
complaint, we'll have a conversation with the state relative to
that complaint, give the state the opportunity to address
whatever that complaint may be, to do the investigation and
report back to us. Obviously, if the citizen complaint is
valid, then certainly the expectations are enforcement actions
will be taken by the state.
And if it's not taken by the state, then certainly, OSM has
the authority to take enforcement action at the federal level,
if necessary. We certainly haven't seen many cases where that
has happened. Again, we have a good relationship with the
states. They work very closely with us. So, the process, the
process is certainly working. It's a tool that we have in our
tool chest at OSM, but we certainly, certainly like to work
with the states when that's an option.
Senator Lee. Thank you so much. I really appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Lee.
I have several letters that have been received by the
Committee that will be included as part of the record here this
morning in support of you, Mr. Erdos--one from the Rural
Action, one from the Ohio Aggregate and Industrial Minerals
Association, the Department of Environmental Quality in
Wyoming, and a letter from Ohio University as well as the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources. Those will be incorporated as
part of the record.
[Letters of support follow.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
The Chairman. Mr. Erdos, thank you. I appreciate, as I said
at the outset, your willingness to serve in this capacity. You
clearly come with years of experience in the field, a practical
approach that, I think, serves us well in a regulatory
environment. So I thank you for your willingness to come before
the Committee and answer questions. If other members of the
Committee have questions that they would like submitted, they
will be included in the record and we hope that you would be
able to respond to those in a timely manner.
But based on what I have heard this morning, my hope is
that you will move quickly through the process. Although I will
just note the obvious that on a Tuesday of the week that we are
set to be closing down here before the end of the year, you are
probably not going to get your name to the Floor for a vote
before the Christmas holidays and the New Year. But it is
something that I would hope with Senator Manchin we can process
quickly come the New Year.
So we thank you. Thank you for your willingness to serve,
and we wish you well.
Senator Manchin. I only had to say that I appreciate you
bringing your expertise and your experience level to the people
that really build America and your father and your family being
one of them, and I appreciate that and respect that very much.
I was born and raised in the coal fields at some of the
deepest coal mines at Pittsburgh, same as we mined, and up your
way also, so we both know that tradition and the culture. And
with that, they have a right to be protected and they have a
right to make a living but they also have a responsibility as
the owners to do it in the most prudent way and the most
efficient way and the safest manner and with the most concerns
about what we leave behind.
I think your office has that responsibility to make sure
that they fulfill that. We are here to help and work with you,
and I will enjoy working with you and your staff. I think we
laid out some of the things we have concerns about. My staff
will follow up on that with you, and I look forward to
supporting you in this endeavor.
Thank you and Merry Christmas to everybody.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
With that, Mr. Erdos, again, thank you and the Committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m. the hearing was adjourned.]
APPENDIX MATERIAL SUBMITTED
----------
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]