- PROTECTING OUR FUTURE: ADDRESSING SCHOOL SECURITY CHALLENGES IN AMERICA
[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
PROTECTING OUR FUTURE: ADDRESSING SCHOOL SECURITY CHALLENGES IN AMERICA
=======================================================================
FIELD HEARING
before the
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS,
RESPONSE, AND COMMUNICATIONS
of the
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
__________
JULY 9, 2018
__________
Serial No. 115-69
__________
Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________
U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-941 PDF
WASHINGTON : 2018
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York
Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania
Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania
William R. Keating, Massachusetts
John Katko, New York
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas
Filemon Vela, Texas
Martha McSally, Arizona
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
J. Luis Correa, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
Val Butler Demings, Florida
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Ron Estes, Kansas
Don Bacon, Nebraska
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Steven S. Giaier, General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
------
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND COMMUNICATIONS
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York, Chairman
Peter T. King, New York
Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Martha McSally, Arizona
James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Debbie Lesko, Arizona
Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex
(ex officio)
officio)
Kerry A. Kinirons, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director/Counsel
C O N T E N T S
----------
Page
STATEMENTS
The Honorable Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., a Representative in
Congress From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................
1
Prepared Statement.............................................
3
The Honorable Donald M. Payne, Jr., a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................
3
Prepared Statement.............................................
5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................
5
WITNESSES
Panel I
Mr. Jason Botel, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Elementary
and Secondary Education, U.S. Department of Education:
Oral Statement.................................................
6
Prepared Statement.............................................
8
Mr. Alan R. Hanson, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General,
Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice:
Oral Statement.................................................
10
Prepared Statement.............................................
12
Mr. Robert Kolasky, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of
Infrastructure Protection, National Protection and Programs
Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................
14
Prepared Statement.............................................
16
Panel II
Mr. Jared M. Maples, Director, Office of Homeland Security and
Preparedness, State of New Jersey:
Oral Statement.................................................
28
Prepared Statement.............................................
30
Mr. Ben Castillo, Director, Office of School Preparedness and
Emergency Planning, Department of Education, State of New
Jersey:
Oral Statement.................................................
32
Prepared Statement.............................................
35
Ms. Jeanne Hengemuhle, Commanding Officer, Division of Human
Resources Section, New Jersey State Police:
Oral Statement.................................................
37
Prepared Statement.............................................
39
Mr. Timothy P. Gerity, President, New Jersey Association of
School Resource Officers:
Oral Statement.................................................
41
Prepared Statement.............................................
42
Mr. Michael Reilly, President, Community Education Council 31,
Staten Island, New York:
Oral Statement.................................................
45
Prepared Statement.............................................
48
FOR THE RECORD
The Honorable Donald M. Payne, Jr., a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Letter from the National Education Association.................
21
Statement of the New Jersey School Boards Association..........
21
APPENDIX
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Jason
Botel..........................................................
63
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Alan R.
Hanson.........................................................
64
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Robert
Kolasky........................................................
64
PROTECTING OUR FUTURE: ADDRESSING SCHOOL SECURITY CHALLENGES IN AMERICA
----------
Monday, July 9, 2018
U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response,
and Communications,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Newark, NJ.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:04 a.m., in
the Agile Strategy Lab, Room L70, Central King Building, New
Jersey Institute of Technology, 100 Summit Street, Newark, NJ,
Hon. Daniel M. Donovan, Jr. [Chairman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Donovan [presiding] and Payne.
Mr. Donovan. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and
Communications will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to examine efforts to
enhance school security. I appreciate the effort taken on
behalf of all those involved to have this important field
hearing take place, and I want to thank the New Jersey
Institute of Technology for hosting us today.
I also want to thank my colleague and my friend, Don Payne,
whose home town we are conducting this hearing in, for his
concern for our children, particularly since I am the father of
a 3-year-old. Don's concern is my concern, as it is all the
people here today. So thank you, my friend, for leading us here
today for this important hearing.
This is an official Congressional hearing, so we must abide
by certain rules of the Committee on Homeland Security and the
House of Representatives. I kindly wish to remind our guests
today that demonstrations from the audience, including applause
and verbal outbursts, as well as any use of signs or placards,
are a violation of the rules of the House of Representatives.
It is important that we respect the decorum and the rules of
this committee. I have also been requested to state that
photography and cameras are limited to accredited press only.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
School may be out for the summer, but for parents, the
security of their children while at school is never far from
their minds. No parent should drop off a child at school and
fear for his or her safety. But, unfortunately, we have seen
too many incidents of violence at our schools this year alone.
Securing our educational institutions and ensuring a safe,
healthy, and productive learning environment for our children
is a priority for me and for all of our witnesses here today,
along with Mr. Payne.
Whether it be a grant funding, guidance, technical
assistance, threat and vulnerability assessments, training, or
exercises, the Federal Government has a number of resources
available to support States and localities as they work to
secure our schools.
Working together in the aftermath of the tragedy at Sandy
Hook, Federal agencies developed the Guide for Developing High
Quality School Emergency Operations Plans. Protective Security
Advisors from the Department of Homeland Security's Office of
Infrastructure Protection have completed more than 1,000 visits
with K-12 schools to discuss security.
In light of the recent tragedies in Florida and Texas,
Federal agencies have taken an ``all hands on deck'' approach
to this issue and have made a concerted effort to better
coordinate the resources available for schools, including
through the Federal Commission on School Safety.
The Fiscal Year 2018 Consolidated Appropriations Act
provided more than $2 billion in funding for grants that can be
used to enhance the security of our schools through the Title
IV grants at the Department of Education, STOP School Violence
Act grants at the Department of Justice, or Homeland Security
Grant Program at the Department of Homeland Security. However,
I am concerned that the States and localities may not be aware
that these funds exist or that they may be used to enhance
school security.
This subcommittee has a history of working together,
including on this very important issue. Along with one of my
predecessors, the Ranking Member requested a review of Federal
efforts to assist K-12 schools in conducting emergency planning
and addressing security needs. Last Congress, he and I
requested a follow-up review of efforts to assist institutions
of higher education to address security needs. Both reports
acknowledged the work that the Departments of Education,
Justice, and Homeland Security are doing to support schools.
However, they found that, in many cases, there was a lack of
awareness of availability of resources and a need to better
coordinate Federal efforts.
I am eager to learn more about how the three Federal
agencies represented here today are working to coordinate the
various forms of assistance so that they will be most
beneficial to our State and local partners. I am also
interested in how these agencies are conducting outreach to
educate our State and local partners on these resources.
Efforts to secure schools must begin at the local level,
and I know that States and localities across the country have
taken steps to address this important issue, including through
security enhancements in school buildings, the assignment of
school resource officers, increased information sharing with
law enforcement, training and exercises. It will be beneficial
to hear about the innovative practices our second panel of
witnesses are undertaking to provide security in their areas.
I am looking forward to our dialog today and the
opportunity to work together to ensure the safety and security
of all of our children.
[The statement of Chairman Donovan follows:]
Statement of Chairman Daniel M. Donovan, Jr.
July 9, 2018
School may be out for the summer, but for parents, the security of
their children while at school is never far from their minds. No parent
should drop off a child at school and fear for his or her safety. But,
unfortunately, we have seen too many incidents of violence at our
schools this year alone.
Securing our educational institutions and ensuring a safe, healthy,
and productive learning environment for our kids is a priority for me
and for all of our witnesses here today.
Whether it be grant funding, guidance, technical assistance, threat
and vulnerability assessments, training, or exercises, the Federal
Government has a number of resources available to support States and
localities as they work to secure our schools.
Working together in the aftermath of the tragedy at Sandy Hook,
Federal agencies developed the Guide for Developing High Quality School
Emergency Operations Plans. Protective Security Advisors from the
Department of Homeland Security's Office of Infrastructure Protection
have completed more than 1,000 visits with K-12 schools to discuss
security.
In light of the recent tragedies in Florida and Texas, Federal
agencies have taken an ``all hands on deck'' approach to this issue and
have made a concerted effort to better coordinate the resources
available for schools, including through the Federal Commission on
School Safety.
The Fiscal Year 2018 Consolidated Appropriations Act provided more
than $2 billion in funding for grants that can be used to enhance the
security of our schools: Through the Title IV grants at the Department
of Education, STOP School Violence Act grants at the Department of
Justice, or Homeland Security Grant Program at the Department of
Homeland Security.
However, I am concerned that States and localities may not be aware
that these funds exist or that they may be used to enhance school
security.
This subcommittee has a history of working together, including on
this very important issue. Along with one of my predecessors, the
Ranking Member requested a review of Federal efforts to assist K-12
schools in conducting emergency planning and addressing security needs.
Last Congress, he and I requested a follow-on review of efforts to
assist institutions of higher education address security needs. Both
reports acknowledged the work that the Departments of Education,
Justice, and Homeland Security are doing to support schools. However,
they found that, in many cases, there was a lack of awareness of
available resources and a need to better coordinate Federal efforts.
I am eager to learn more about how the three Federal agencies
represented here today are working to coordinate the various forms of
assistance so they are most beneficial to our State and local partners.
I am also interested in how these agencies are conducting outreach to
educate our State and local partners on these resources.
Efforts to secure schools must begin at the local level and I know
that States and localities across the country have taken steps to
address this important issue, including through security enhancements
to school buildings, the assignment of school resource officers,
increased information sharing with law enforcement, training, and
exercises. It will be beneficial to hear about the innovative practices
our second panel of witnesses are undertaking to provide security in
their areas.
I am looking forward to our dialog today and the opportunity to
work together to ensure the safety and security of our children.
Mr. Donovan. The Chair now recognizes Ranking Member, my
friend, the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne, for any
statement that he may have.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for agreeing first to
hold this hearing today in northern New Jersey in my
Congressional district, in my home town. As a parent of
triplets, the concerns regarding school security have kept me
up many nights. Tragically, school violence has taken the lives
of far too many American children. It has been 19 years since
the Columbine High School massacre which left 13 victims dead,
and sadly, our children are still incredibly vulnerable while
attending school. Unfortunately, there has been a significant
uptick in violence in our Nation's schools in the last 2
decades.
The 2012 Sandy Hook shooting left a staggering 20 children
and 6 adults dead, yet Congress fell short of passing
legislation to combat gun violence in schools.
This year there was about one school shooting a week in
this country, including the shooting in Marjory Stoneham
Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida that left 14 children
and 3 teachers dead. Still, the response from Congress and the
Trump administration has been lacking.
Beyond making more grant funding available, Congress has
done little to address the issue of keeping guns out of the
hands of bad actors targeting schools. Even funding is not
guaranteed. As we speak, the House Appropriations Committee is
planning to consider an education spending bill that would cut
school safety spending by $110 million. The idea of cutting
financial support around school security amid the uptick in
violence in and around schools is unconscionable. It is also
worth noting that these proposed cuts come at a time when
Congress is increasing spending for its own security. I hope my
Homeland Security Committee colleagues will join me in opposing
the cuts to school security funding.
I hope to hear today from our witnesses about what Congress
needs to respond to the threat of school violence with the
urgency needed. Additionally, in looking at the issue of school
safety, we need to be mindful that many children in urban
settings experience safety threats daily which impacts their
school performance. We need to incorporate threat of violence
to children in urban areas into the conversation of school
safety.
I have introduced legislation, H.R. 3613, the Safer
Neighborhoods Gun Buy-Back Act of 2017, to address neighborhood
violence and to keep weapons off the streets. I would welcome
the support of all the Members on this important bill.
While many challenges remain at the Federal level, I am
pleased to say that New Jersey is one of the leading States in
school safety. New Jersey has implemented all the major
security measures identified by the Secure Schools Alliance.
Further, New Jersey has recently passed a series of gun safety
measures, making it a leader in gun reform. It is my hope that
New Jersey will continue to set the example in this area.
In my time on the committee, this is the first hearing that
we have had on this issue of school safety. Mr. Chairman, I
hope we can continue to work together to ensure that our
committee will see this issue as a homeland security priority.
I want to thank all the witnesses for attending today's
hearing. I look forward to hearing what each of you are doing
to address and further protect children in all communities
around the country facing challenges around school violence. We
must do more to protect the next generation. This country and
communities like the ones I serve are counting on us.
With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Payne follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr.
July 9, 2018
As a parent of triplets, the concerns regarding school security has
kept me up many nights. Tragically, school violence has taken the lives
of far too many American children. It has been 19 years since the
Columbine High School massacre, which left 13 victims dead, and sadly
our children are still incredibly vulnerable while attending school.
Unfortunately, there has been a significant uptick in violence in
our Nation's schools in the last 2 decades. The 2012 Sandy Hook
shooting left a staggering 20 children and 6 adults dead, yet Congress
fell short of passing legislation to combat gun violence in schools.
This year, there was about 1 school shooting a week in this country,
including the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in
Parkland, Florida that left 14 children and 3 teachers dead. Still, the
response from Congress and the Trump administration has been lacking.
Beyond making more grant funding available, Congress has done
little to address the issue of keeping guns out of the hands of bad
actors targeting schools. Even funding is not guaranteed. As we speak,
the House Appropriations Committee is planning to consider an education
spending bill that would cut school safety pending by $110 million.
The idea of cutting financial support around school security amid
the uptick in violence in and around schools is unconscionable. It is
also worth noting that these proposed cuts come at a time when Congress
is increasing spending for its own security. I hope my Homeland
Security Committee colleagues will join me in opposing cuts to school
security funding. I hope to hear today from our witnesses about what
Congress needs to respond to the threat of school violence with the
urgency needed.
Additionally, in looking at the issue of school safety, we need to
be mindful that many children in urban settings experience safety
threats daily, which impacts their school performance. We need to
incorporate violence and the threat of violence children experience in
urban areas into the conversation of school safety.
I have introduced legislation (H.R. 3613, the Safer Neighborhoods
Gun Buyback Act of 2017) to address neighborhood violence and keep
weapons off the streets. I would welcome the support of all Members on
this important bill.
While many challenges remain at the Federal level, I am pleased to
say that New Jersey is one of the leading States in school safety. New
Jersey has implemented all the major school security measures
identified by the Secure Schools Alliance. Further, New Jersey has
recently passed a series of gun safety measures, making it a leader in
gun reform. It is my hope that New Jersey will continue to set the
example in this area.
In my time on the committee this is the first hearing that we have
had on the issue of school safety. Mr. Chairman, I hope we can continue
to work together to ensure that our committee will see this issue as a
homeland security priority.
I thank all the witnesses for attending today's hearing. I look
forward to hearing what each of you are doing to address and further
protect children in all communities around the country facing
challenges around school violence. We must do more to protect the next
generation. This country and communities, like the ones I serve, are
counting on us.
Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields.
Although we are the only two Members of Congress here,
Members of the committee may be submitting opening statements
and questions, and they may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
July 9, 2018
Good morning. I would like to thank the Subcommittee Chairman and
Ranking Member for holding today's hearing on school security.
School violence continues to take the lives of so many young
people, leaving behind devastated families and communities.
Unfortunately, Congress has refused to address this issue head-on,
despite the devastating increase in school shootings over the last 20
years, including at least 1 shooting about every week of the 2018
school year.
In the aftermath of the massacre at Marjory Stoneman Douglass High
School in Parkland, Florida, where 17 people were killed, President
Trump made several proposals geared toward improving school
preparedness. One of those proposals called for the establishment of a
Federal Commission on School Safety, a group comprised of Cabinet
Secretaries tasked with developing school safety strategies.
Predictably, the Trump administration's school safety commission
has stated that it will not study how access to guns affects school
violence, which is completely senseless. Why are we wasting time
discussing school violence when the Federal Commission on School Safety
will not engage on the common factor in every catastrophic school
shooting? The Commission's willful ignorance has caused students and
parents alike to criticize the Commission's efforts. I hope that the
administration will wake up and reconsider its stance on research guns
and school violence.
In the mean time, Congress needs to do its part to protect children
in schools, which includes making sure there are adequate resources for
communities to combat school violence and enacting common-sense gun
safety legislation. I hope today's hearing will serve a launching point
for meaningful action in school safety and security by the Committee on
Homeland Security.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today and learning how
Congress can be a better partner in solving the tragic problem of
school violence.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Donovan. We are pleased to have two distinguished
panels of witnesses before us today on this important topic.
The first panel includes Mr. Jason Botel, principal deputy
assistant secretary of the Department of Education's Office of
Elementary and Secondary Education. Welcome, sir.
Mr. Alan Hanson, principal deputy assistant attorney
general in the Department of Justice's Office of Justice
Programs. Welcome, sir.
Mr. Robert Kolasky, deputy assistant secretary for the
Office of Infrastructure Protection in the Department of
Homeland Security's National Protection and Programs
Directorate. Welcome, sir.
Thank you all for being here today. The witnesses' full
written testimony will appear in the record.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Botel to testify in his
opening statement.
STATEMENT OF JASON BOTEL, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF
ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION
Mr. Botel. Thank you, Chairman Donovan and Ranking Member
Payne. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to share what we at the U.S. Department of Education are doing
to help States, school districts, and schools keep our children
safe.
The violent incidents occurring in our Nation's schools in
recent months and years, as Secretary DeVos has observed, are
``devastating reminders that our Nation must come together to
address the underlying issues that create a culture of
violence.'' Today, I am here to share what the Department has
been doing to promote school safety and security and what we
have learned about what works.
First, over the past 5 years, following the terrible
tragedy at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown,
Connecticut, the Department has maintained a portfolio of
competitive grant programs designed to help States and school
districts improve school climate and safety. Thanks to
Congress, which provided increased funding for school safety in
fiscal year 2018, later this summer we will make new awards
under two of these programs.
First, we expect to make grants to States for school
emergency management to an estimated 16 States. These grants
will build State and local capacity to develop and implement
high-quality school emergency operations plans.
Second, the Department will make new State-level school
climate transformation grants to provide technical assistance
and other support for local implementation of evidence-based
behavioral practices to improve school climate and behavioral
outcomes for all students.
You also will be pleased to know that on July 1, we awarded
$1.1 billion in State formula grants under the Student Support
and Academic Enrichment Grants authorized by Title IV, Part A
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, ESEA. This was a
$700 million increase over the $400 million provided for Title
IV, Part A in fiscal year 2017, and will provide nearly every
school district in the country the significant new resources
that can be used for locally-determined school safety
activities.
To support these efforts, the Department is developing
additional guidance on how States, districts, and schools can
use Title IV, Part A funds to promote school safety and
security. In addition, the Department's senior leadership has
been personally involved in reaching out to schools and
communities affected by violence. For example, after the tragic
school shooting at Marjory Stoneham Douglas High School in
Parkland, Florida, Secretary DeVos met with the superintendent
and principal to offer support from the Department. Following
the shootings at Santa Fe High School in Texas, Deputy
Secretary Mick Zais and I made a similar visit to meet with the
superintendent and principal in Santa Fe. In each case, the
Department followed up with material support, making $1 million
awards to both districts under our Project SERV program, which
helps districts and schools restore the learning environment
following a traumatic natural disaster or violent incident.
Most importantly, at least for our long-term efforts to
reduce the incidence of school violence and keep students safe,
the President established the Federal Commission on School
Safety, which is responsible for providing evidence-based
actionable recommendations to keep students safe and secure at
school. Under Secretary DeVos' leadership, the Commission held
its initial meeting on March 28 and immediately arranged a
series of meetings, field visits, and listening sessions that
over the past 3 months have generated input from students,
parents, teachers, school safety personnel, administrators, law
enforcement officials, mental health professionals, school
counselors, security professionals, and researchers. These
sessions have explored evidence-based and promising approaches
to safety and security that include building the social-
emotional competencies of students and staff, developing
student character, preventing bullying via social media,
engaging school safety personnel in schools, studying the
effects of violent entertainment and media coverage of mass
shootings, and improving school climate.
At the Commission's request, the Department also is
considering conducting a survey of all State educational
agencies on how they are complying with the Unsafe School
Choice option requirement in Section 8532 of the ESEA. This
long-standing provision of law requires each State to have a
State-wide policy that any student who attends a persistently
dangerous school or who is the victim of a violent crime while
on school grounds be allowed to transfer to a safe public
school in the same school district. Such a survey could help
highlight both weaknesses and best practices related to
implementation of this important provision of the ESEA while
also helping to identify ways that the Department can and
should provide technical assistance in this area.
The Commission will continue to collect information and
data over the next few months on evidence-based interventions
and best practices in a wide range of areas related to school
climate and student safety. Commission members then will review
this information, identify the most promising and actionable
recommendations for State and local leaders responsible for
school safety, and deliver its final report to the President.
The Department of Education will always stand ready to do
everything possible to help districts and schools recover from
violent incidents. However, as the President has recognized in
creating the Commission, our goal must be to prevent further
violence in our schools. This hearing is yet another
demonstration that Congress shares this goal, and I am
confident that by working together with State and local leaders
across the Nation, we will be successful in achieving it.
Thank you again for this opportunity to discuss this
important issue. I look forward to answering any questions you
might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Botel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jason Botel
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and other Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to share what we at the U.S. Department of Education are doing to help
States, school districts, and schools keep our children safe.
Mass violent incidents occurring in our Nation's schools in recent
months and years, as Secretary DeVos noted, are ``devastating reminders
that our Nation must come together to address the underlying issues
that create a culture of violence.'' Today, I am here to share what the
Department has been doing to promote school safety and security and
what we have learned about what works.
First, with the support of Congress, for several years the
Department of Education has been actively supporting States and school
districts in promoting school safety and security, including:
Since 2014, funding States with the Grants to States for
School Emergency Management Program to increase their capacity
to assist districts in developing and implementing high-quality
school emergency operations plans. Funding has been provided to
26 States thus far. States that have not previously received a
grant under this program will receive a priority for a grant in
fiscal year 2018. We expect to make 16 new awards.
Since 2014, funding 12 States and 71 districts with School
Climate Transformation Grants that support evidence-based
behavioral practices to improve school climate and behavioral
outcomes for all students, a key aspect to violence prevention.
Since 2014, funding 22 school districts with Project Prevent
Grants to increase their capacity to identify, assess, and
serve students who have been exposed to pervasive violence;
help to ensure that affected students are offered mental health
services for trauma or anxiety; support conflict resolution
programs; and implement other school-based violence prevention
strategies that will reduce the likelihood that students will
commit violent acts in the future.
Over the past 3 years, funding more than 30 awards to
States, school districts, and institutions of higher education
with Project School Emergency Response to Violence (SERV)
grants to help restore the learning environment after it has
been disrupted by a violent or traumatic crisis, including to
support the provision of mental health services after a
learning environment has been disrupted by violence or an
otherwise traumatic crisis.
Over the past 8 years, funding to the National Center on
Safe Supportive Learning Environments to provide technical
assistance and support to States, school districts, and schools
across this country in helping to provide safe and healthy
school environments that prevent substance abuse, support
student academic success, and prevent violence. Specifically,
the Center supports States, school districts, and schools in
using the U.S. Department of Education School Climate Surveys,
a suite of free, high-quality and adaptable school climate
surveys and an associated web-based platform. The School
Climate Surveys measure 5 areas of school safety that can be
used to assess school safety needs.
Since 2004, funding the Readiness Emergency Management for
Schools (REMS) Technical Assistance Center, which supports
school districts, schools, and institutions of higher education
across the country in preventing, protecting, mitigating,
responding, recovering from emergencies, and school shootings.
The REMS Technical Assistance Center has guided emergency
planning and helped schools consider what technologies are
available and the role of security personnel.
Second, since the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) was signed into
law, the Department has been planning for and actively implementing the
Title IV, Part A, Student Support and Academic Enrichment program. This
program is intended to improve students' academic achievement by
increasing the capacity of State educational agencies, local
educational agencies, and local communities to provide all students
with access to a well-rounded education; improve school conditions,
including school safety and security, for student learning; and improve
the use of technology to improve the academic achievement and digital
literacy of all students. The Department issued non-regulatory guidance
on Title IV, Part A, in 2016 that addressed issues relating to
improving school conditions for learning, and we are currently
developing additional guidance on how States, districts, and schools
can use Title IV, Part A funds to promote school safety and security.
Third, after the tragic school shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas
High School in Parkland, Florida, Secretary DeVos met with the school
superintendent and principal to offer support from the Department.
Deputy Secretary Mick Zais and I visited Santa Fe High School in Texas
to meet with the superintendent and principal to do the same. After
visits to Parkland and Santa Fe, the Department provided SERV Grants,
in the amount of $1 million each, to both school districts.
Soon after the Parkland shooting, the President established the
Federal Commission on School Safety and appointed Secretary Betsy DeVos
as chair of the Commission. The Commission is responsible for providing
meaningful and actionable recommendations to keep students safe and
secure at school. By way of a series of formal meetings, listening
sessions, and field visits, the members of the Commission are gathering
information from a long list of stakeholders including students,
parents, teachers, school safety personnel, administrators, law
enforcement officials, mental health professionals, school counselors,
security professionals, and researchers.
The Commission held an organizational meeting on March 28, 2018 and
arranged a series of meetings, site visits, and listening sessions
which have occurred over the last several months. Formal Commission
meetings provide a forum for presentations from subject-matter experts,
individuals affected by school violence, and other key stakeholders.
Listening sessions provide opportunities for the public to be heard and
provide recommendations to the Commission. Field visits involve travel
to schools and other sites to observe and learn first-hand about
current best practices in school safety.
On May 17, 2018, the Commission hosted a discussion to learn from
survivors and family members affected by the mass shootings at
Columbine High School, Virginia Tech University, Sandy Hook Elementary
School, and Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, in addition to
authors of official reports following incidents of school violence.
The first field visit occurred on May 31, 2018, at Frank Hebron-
Harman Elementary School in Hanover, MD. Commission members and their
representatives heard from administrators, principals, teachers,
students, and a National expert about Positive Behavioral Interventions
and Supports (PBIS), a framework designed to improve social, emotional,
and academic outcomes for all students.
On June 6, 2018, the Commission hosted a public listening session
at the Department's headquarters. In total, 62 individuals shared their
views on school safety. The forum was broadcasted on-line, and
information was publicized on how members of the public can share
additional comments with the Commission.
On June 21, 2018, the Commission held a formal meeting at the White
House. The meeting titled, ``The Ecology of Schools: Fostering a
Culture of Human Flourishing and Developing Charter,'' featured three
different panels of experts focusing on effects of entertainment,
media, cyber bullying and social media on violence and student safety.
On June 26, 2018, in Lexington, Kentucky, the Commission conducted
roundtable discussions with State and local officials as well as
gathered information from the public on how schools, districts,
institutions of higher education, and other local and State government
agencies can improve school safety.
These sessions have explored evidence-based and promising
approaches to school safety and security that include:
Building the social emotional competencies of students and
staff
Developing student character
Preventing bullying via social media
Engaging school safety personnel in schools
Studying the effects of violent entertainment and media
coverage of mass shootings, and
Improving school climate.
At the Commission's request, the Department is also considering a
survey to all State educational agencies on how they are complying with
the Unsafe School Choice Option requirement in section 8532 of ESSA,
which requires that each State that receives funds under ESSA (and all
States choose to do so) have a State-wide policy that any student who
attends a ``persistently dangerous'' school, or who is the victim of a
violent crime while on school grounds, be allowed to attend a safe
public school in the same school district. A review of States' Unsafe
School Choice Option policies is necessary to ensure that State
policies are consistent with the law's requirements and to identify
ways that the Department can and should provide technical assistance in
this area.
The information and data collected will inform the Commission's
recommendations and best practices, which will be included in the final
report.
Based on the best available research and experience from
implementing these activities, the Department has learned that
prevention is key: Schools need to be prepared and provide needed
student supports. For example, we have received reports from school
district leaders that while schools may have experienced a traumatic
incident, the emergency planning training they received from the REMS
TA Center helped prevent or lessen the trauma the school experienced
had they not been prepared to respond to these incidents.
Working to improve school climate, build social emotional skills
and provide access to mental health services; knowing the signs of
youth violence; and being prepared with emergency protocols can help to
identify and reduce safety and security risks in schools. Through the
activities I have described today, we will continue to work tirelessly
with our State and local school partners to ensure that children are
safe and secure when they are at school.
Thank you again for providing an opportunity for us to discuss this
important issue. I look forward to answering any questions you may
have.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Hanson for his opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF ALAN R. HANSON, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
ATTORNEY GENERAL, OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE
Mr. Hanson. Thank you, Chairman Donovan, and thank you,
Ranking Member Payne. It is a privilege to be here in Newark to
tell you about the research and grant programs we are
supporting at the Department of Justice to prevent and reduce
school violence.
My name is Alan Hanson, and I am the principal deputy
assistant attorney general for the Office of Justice Programs.
OJP is the funding, policy, research, and statistical arm of
the Justice Department. We work closely with our partners at
the COPS Office to support State, local, and Tribal public
safety efforts. As you will hear, OJP and the COPS Office are
devoting substantial resources to addressing the crisis of
school violence in America.
First of all, I commend the Members of this committee for
appreciating the urgency of this issue and for taking steps to
meet the challenges our schools and communities are facing.
Congress has already taken a very important step by including
the Students, Teachers, and Officers Preventing School Violence
Act, also known as the STOP School Violence Act, in this
spring's omnibus spending bill.
As you well know, the Act authorizes funds to address
school violence and improve school security. Of the $75 million
appropriated under the law, $50 million will be administered by
OJP's Bureau of Justice Assistance in the form of grants
through States, local units of government, and Tribal
governments. The balance of the funding is being administered
by the COPS Office.
BJA recently released two grant solicitations: No. 1, the
BJA STOP Prevention Training and Response to Mental Health
Crisis Program, which will train teachers to prevent student
violence against others and self and provide specialized
training for school officials and responding to mental health
crises; it will also provide education to students with the
intent to prevent violence against others and self.
The second program, the BJA STOP Threat Assessment and
Technology Reporting Program, will help States, communities,
and Tribes develop threat assessments and create crisis
intervention teams. Additionally under this program, projects
will be funded to develop and implement anonymous reporting
methods such as mobile applications, hotlines, or websites.
We are requiring that these programs be evidence-based and
involve cooperation with law enforcement, and we plan to
distribute grants evenly across geographic regions. Grantees
will be required to put up a 25 percent cash or in-kind match.
Federal resources will fund the other 75 percent of each
project.
The $25 million being administered by the COPS Office will
go toward helping States, Tribes, and units of local government
purchase equipment and technology, provide training, and take
other measures to improve school security. These new
investments will build on previous COPS efforts which have
included funding for almost 7,400 school resource officers
across the country.
It is important to mention that OJP has already been
working to understand the causes of school violence and to find
research-based solutions to school violence problems. Our
National Institute of Justice has funded more than 90 research
projects totaling nearly $250 million under the Comprehensive
School Safety Initiative. These projects cover a wide range of
topics, from threat assessments and school discipline to
bullying, mental health, and effective use of school resource
officers. More than half of these projects examine the impact
of interventions on shootings and other forms of school
violence.
The first of these research grants were made in 2015, with
most being carried out over a period of 3 to 5 years. We expect
the first of the final reports to become available in 2019,
with further releases in the 3 to 4 years that follow. Once
they are available, we expect those findings to be an
invaluable source of information for school administrators, law
enforcement officials, and other practitioners.
In the mean time, information on existing evidence-based
school safety efforts is available at our research
clearinghouse, CrimeSolutions.gov.
We are also carrying out research through NIJ's Firearm
Violence Portfolio. Several research programs are under way
that we hope will give us a better understanding of mass
violence and illegal firearm use by youth. Our goal is to
develop evidence-based strategies that can be used by
communities throughout the Nation.
School violence has claimed too many lives and robbed our
Nation of far too much potential. I am grateful to the
committee's efforts to secure the resources we need to tackle
this challenge. DOJ is committed to protecting students,
faculty, and staff, to making our schools the safe havens of
learning that they were intended to be.
I thank you for your time and look forward to answering any
questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hanson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Alan R. Hanson
July 9, 2018
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, Members of the committee,
thank you for this opportunity to discuss research-based approaches to
preventing school violence and school safety grant programs
administered by the Department of Justice (Department). My name is Alan
Hanson, and I am the principal deputy assistant attorney general for
the Office of Justice Programs (OJP).
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018, enacted on March 23 of
this year, included the Student, Teachers, and Officers Preventing
(STOP) School Violence Act of 2018, which authorizes funds to address
school violence and improve school security by providing students,
school personnel, and community members with the tools they need to
recognize, respond quickly to, and prevent acts of violence.
OJP's grant programs and initiatives that address school safety are
administered by several components: The National Institute of Justice
(NIJ), the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA), the Office of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP), and the Office for Victims
of Crime (OVC). These offices collaborate with other Department
components, like the Office of Community Oriented Policing Services
(COPS) Office, and Federal agencies to identify and develop school
safety approaches, with the goal of reducing crime and ensuring public
safety.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 also provides $75
million to the STOP School Violence Act program to address school
violence. BJA received $50 million to provide grants to States, units
of local government, and Indian tribes. These grants are used for the
training of teachers and the education of students to prevent student
violence, and to support threat assessments, crisis intervention teams,
and the use of technology for anonymous reporting. The balance ($25
million) was provided to the COPS Office to provide grants for law
enforcement training and coordination to prevent school violence and
for a variety of school safety equipment (e.g., metal detectors, locks,
lighting) and alerting technologies.
To address the legislative goals of the STOP School Violence Act,
OJP developed two solicitations. The first is the BJA STOP Prevention
Training and Response to Mental Health Crisis Program and the second is
the BJA STOP Threat Assessment and Technology Reporting Program. Both
solicitations opened on June 7, 2018, with a closing date of July 23,
2018.
The BJA STOP Prevention Training and Response to Mental Health
Crisis Program will fund States, units of local government, and
Federally-recognized Indian Tribes to provide training to teachers and
administrators. The training will help teachers and administrators
identify and react to potential acts of violence and situations that
may involve mental health issues. The program will also help educate
students on violence prevention measures. This could include reporting
potential threats and situations that students believe could lead to
acts of violence.
The BJA STOP Threat Assessment and Technology Reporting Program
will provide funding to States, units of local government, and
Federally-recognized Indian Tribes to develop and conduct threat
assessments and implement crisis intervention teams. These efforts will
encourage cooperation and partnership with local/Tribal law enforcement
and the community to assist with the proposed programs. Under this
solicitation, grantees can apply for funds to develop and implement a
reporting program that can include mobile applications, web-based
programs, or hotlines intended to ensure that any individual reporting
can remain anonymous. This technology may be useful in sharing vital
data with law enforcement to prevent incidents.
Funding under the COPS Office may be used for coordination with
local and Tribal law enforcement; training for local and Tribal law
enforcement officers to prevent school violence against others and
self; the placement and use of metal detectors, locks, lighting and
other deterrent measures, or target hardening; the acquisition and
installation of technology for expedited notification of local and
Tribal law enforcement during an emergency; and any other measures that
may provide a significant improvement in security.
The Act requires that grants be evidence-based and have, to the
extent practicable, an equitable geographic distribution among the
regions of the United States and among urban, suburban, and rural
areas. To ensure that there is an equitable distribution, the BJA
solicitations are organized by categories based on population. This
allows applicants to be evaluated with others whose jurisdictions are
similar in size and face similar challenges. The Act also states that
the Federal Government can provide only 75 percent of the funding for
each project, thus requiring a 25 percent cash or in-kind match.
The Act stresses coordination and partnership with local and Tribal
law enforcement and emphasizes evaluation as a program element. All
programs must reflect an evidence-based approach. Performance measures
will help the Department identify successful programs and practices
that can be shared Nation-wide.
Prior to the STOP School Violence programs created this year, NIJ
was actively involved in school safety research. Since 2014, NIJ's
primary investments in school safety have been through the
Comprehensive School Safety Initiative (CSSI). CSSI is a research-
focused initiative designed to produce knowledge and identify evidence-
based programs that can potentially benefit K-12 schools and school
districts across the Nation for years to come.
Congress first funded CSSI in 2014 in the wake of the tragic
shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut. Altogether,
CSSI was funded from fiscal year 2014 to fiscal year 2017, and that
funding resulted in more than 90 CSSI grant-funded projects totaling
nearly $250 million.
CSSI projects build on other research, supported by NIJ and others,
to inform school safety efforts. CSSI projects cover a wide range of
topics, including school shootings, threat assessment, school resource
officers and police, mental and behavioral health, emergency operations
planning, school discipline, bullying, technology, and school climate.
Fifty-five percent of CSSI projects examine the impact of interventions
on shootings and other forms of school violence. Rigorous research
designs are a hallmark of these projects; almost half use randomized
experimental designs.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Information on all CSSI-funded projects is available here:
https://nij.gov/funding/awards/pages/awards-
list.aspx?tags=Comprehensive%20School%20Safety%20Initiative.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CSSI funding supports evaluations and research on the causes and
consequences of school violence. CSSI projects, like any research-
focused program, typically take 3 to 5 years to complete, and to ensure
that they produce scientifically valid results that can be translated
into effective policy. The earliest projects started in 2015, and only
a small number have reached completion; therefore, no final reports
have yet been published. The first final reports will be available
within the next year or so with others to follow in the next few years.
NIJ maintains CrimeSolutions.gov to help practitioners and policy
makers understand what works in justice-related programs and practices.
CrimeSolutions.gov is a valuable tool for school administrators and
others to have for a more comprehensive understanding about evidence-
based school safety efforts. Because this information is not static,
CrimeSolutions.gov will be continuously updated as results from CSSI
projects and other research efforts become available.
In addition to CSSI, two other NIJ research portfolios will
contribute to our understanding about keeping students safe: (1) The
NIJ firearm violence portfolio will contribute to our understanding of
mass shooting incidents and perpetrators as well as the illegal use of
firearms by youths; and (2) the NIJ victims of crime portfolio includes
a study examining the short- and long-term impacts of school shootings.
OVC has the capacity to support schools that wish to plan for, and
need to respond to, mass violence and terrorism. Following any incident
of mass violence, including school shootings, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's Victim Services Division collaborates with OVC on
emergency response as well as immediate and long-term community needs.
OVC's ``Helping Victims of Mass Violence & Terrorism Toolkit'' is a
comprehensive resource to aid communities in the aftermath of incidents
of mass violence. In addition, through OVC's Training and Technical
Assistance Center, consultants can provide free technical assistance
for schools and communities to better prepare them for these incidents.
Through the Antiterrorism and Emergency Assistance Program (AEAP),
OVC supports victims and jurisdictions that have experienced incidents
of domestic terrorism or mass violence. In fact, OVC has made AEAP
awards following incidents of mass shootings violence at Virginia Tech,
and Sandy Hook Elementary School. OVC is also in consultation regarding
recent incidents that occurred in Parkland, Florida; Santa Fe, Texas;
and Marshal County, Kentucky.
OJJPD also funds Gang Resistance Education and Training, an
evidence-based and effective gang and violence prevention program built
around school-based, law enforcement officer-instructed classroom
curricula. The Department's National Gang Center, jointly funded by
OJJDP and BJA, disseminates information, knowledge, and outcome-driven
practices that engage and empower those in local communities with
chronic and emerging gang problems.
This information helps create comprehensive solutions to prevent
gang violence, reduce gang involvement, and suppress gang-related
crime. Additionally, OJJDP supported the International Association of
Chiefs of Police in the development of a tool kit on Enhancing Police
Responses to Children Exposed to Violence, which may be helpful to law
enforcement officials addressing school shootings.
The Department is also collaborating with other Federal agencies
and continues to consult with key school safety stakeholders across the
country to learn about what challenges they face when it comes to
keeping their schools and students safe. Findings from NIJ-funded
studies will inform our decisions on how to best design future programs
and equip schools and communities with the necessary tools to address
and avoid future tragedies. Our goal is to develop evidence-based
programs and comprehensive strategies that can be replicated throughout
the Nation.
The Department's commitment to ensuring safety in our schools
remains a top priority. We are committed to addressing these issues and
will continue to work with Congress, States, and communities to
maintain supportive and safe environments for our children.
Thank you again for this opportunity to discuss these programs, and
I look forward to addressing your questions.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Hanson.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Kolasky for his opening
statement.
STATEMENT OF ROBERT KOLASKY, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE
OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, NATIONAL PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS
DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Mr. Kolasky. Thank you. Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member
Payne, thank you for today's opportunity to testify before you
regarding the Department of Homeland Security's on-going
efforts to improve school security and preparedness in the face
of the horrific massacres that we have seen in Florida and
Texas earlier this year. Protecting against such horrors must
be part of homeland security.
In America, children should not have to worry about their
safety when in school, and yet our Nation has witnessed and
mourned the deaths and injuries of dozens of students and
teachers. This year alone, there have been two mass shootings--
in Parkland, Florida and Santa Fe, Texas--that remind us that
we must do more to protect our students.
DHS's primary mission is to safeguard the American people.
As the acting assistant secretary for the Office of
Infrastructure Protection and the National Protection Programs
Directorate, I help lead National efforts to reduce the risk to
the Nation's critical infrastructure to include efforts to
enhance security at commercial facilities and public gatherings
around the country. These efforts have provided DHS with deep
expertise and extensive capabilities around security that can
be leveraged by schools to improve the safety of students and
teachers.
While DHS does not and should not provide direct security
to schools, we do support those organizations with direct
missions to keep schools safe and secure. I have worked with
critical infrastructure owners and operators, which has endowed
us with the know-how to elevate the overall level of security
around the country. We are using this experience to support a
unified response to incidents and to better equip the
community-level response when prevention efforts falter.
We share our tools and knowledge with State, local, Tribal,
and territorial partners, the law enforcement community, first
responders, school administrators, teachers, students, parents,
and other stakeholders who are directly connected to the
Nation's more than 130,000 kindergartens through high schools,
K-12. This is accomplished through numerous DHS resources and
programs.
These critical initiatives include the Hometown Security
Initiative through which the Department works with schools and
community leaders to proactively think about security and
implement security measures. The Department's protective
security advisors, as you mentioned at the beginning, Chairman
Donovan, perform security-focused community-level outreach at
educators' conferences, school board meetings, and within the
scope of existing resources help schools conduct security
vulnerability assessments.
Based on that work, DHS recently issued a K-12 security
practice guide that can be used by communities to deter
threats, address hazards and risks, and minimize gun violence
incidents in our Nation's schools. We will be providing these
guides to schools and support organizations, and it will also
be publicly available through the Hometown Security Initiative
outreach website.
We are doing all of this work as part of the Federal
Commission on School Safety, which is charged with quickly
providing meaningful and actionable recommendations and best
practices to keep students safe at school. The Commission,
which is chaired by Secretary DeVos at the U.S. Department of
Education, also includes my Secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen,
Attorney General Jeff Sessions, and HHS Secretary Alex Azar.
To facilitate the Department's participation in the
Commission and enable coordination of future efforts to enhance
school security across DHS, the Department established a School
Security Working Group, jointly led by NPPD, my organization,
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the Office of
Partnership and Engagement.
Since the attack at Marjory Stoneham Douglas High School in
February 2018, the Department has also conducted over 200
engagements with State and local representatives, including
schools, State committees, State school security forums, and
school districts. DHS supported the Dallas Independent School
District and the International Association of Venue Managers
with a community outreach program, See Say Do, to provide
Dallas schools with the tools, training, and resources to
prevent an active-shooter incident through increased
situational awareness.
DHS has also been a leader in the Arizona Fusion Center,
which has partnered with the Phoenix Police Department's Threat
Mitigation Unit and other Federal agencies, on the development
of a community liaison program which is responsible for
maintaining strong working relationships with private-sector
partners. The community liaison program is now working with
school districts to provide active-shooter training and to
foster open lines of communication between schools and the
public safety community.
DHS has also participated in the Marjory Stoneham Douglas
High School Public Safety Commission meeting, which is part of
an effort to analyze information from the school shooting and
other mass violence incidents in the State of Florida and
address recommendations and system improvements.
I use these examples not to try to provide a comprehensive
picture of all that the Department is doing but instead to
bring tangible examples of how our work is supporting local
communities. There are dozens of others like this.
So in summary, recognizing that most of the Nation's school
administrators and educators are not experts in security, DHS
is committed to utilizing our expertise to facilitate
solutions. This means leveraging the capabilities of industry,
school administrators, State and local officials, and our field
personnel to ensure that the K-12 community has the tools and
resources they need to make the best informed security
decisions.
In closing, I want to underscore the importance of the role
that every one of us plays in the Nation's schools. A
multifaceted program like this requires the skills, expertise,
knowledge, and action of a wide and diverse community of
interests. School security must remain a continuing high
priority for the Nation, and I look forward to working with
this committee to chair a path that will move schools toward
enhancing approaches for managing risk and violence in the
education environment.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kolasky follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Kolasky
July 9, 2018
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) efforts to
improve school security and preparedness, in coordination with
interagency partners.
school security
The Department of Homeland Security's mission states ``with honor
and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and
our values.'' The most important part of our mission is safeguarding
the American people, which we do through a variety of means. The DHS
National Protection and Programs Directorate (NPPD) is the Nation's
risk manager for securing cyber space and physical infrastructure.
Through the implementation of our mission, we have developed deep
expertise and extensive capabilities around security that can be
leveraged by schools across the country.
NPPD has been working with our partners in the public and private
sectors for many years to defend against threats to crowded public
venues. We have seen attacks on civilians, in the United States and
abroad, as they go about their lives and participate in the offerings
of a free and democratic civil society. Attacks arrive while attending
services at houses of worship, enjoying a concert, or even going out
for a stroll on a public path. In America, we expect--and deserve--to
continue these normal activities free from harm.
Similarly, our youth deserve an education in a facility where they
are free from harm. Yet, in recent years, our Nation has witnessed and
mourned the deaths of, and injuries to, dozens of students and teachers
in our schools. Unfortunately, in this calendar year, two mass
shootings in Parkland, Florida and Santa Fe, Texas once again reminded
us that we must do more to protect our students. DHS is using our
experience working with critical infrastructure owners and operators to
secure facilities around the country to better secure our schools. Our
work with industry partners to secure the Nation's critical
infrastructure--through activities such as the development of security
standards for Federal buildings, the regulation of security at high-
risk chemical facilities, and the conduct of literally thousands of
risk assessments at critical infrastructure--has endowed us with the
know-how to elevate the overall level of security in the Nation. We are
also leveraging our experience in supporting a unified Federal response
to incidents to better support community-level response when our
prevention efforts falter. While DHS does not, and should not, provide
direct security to schools, we do support those organizations whose
direct mission it is to work with schools.
We readily share our tools and knowledge with State, local, Tribal,
and territorial partners, the law enforcement community and others who
are directly connected to the Nation's more than 130,000 kindergarten
through high schools (K-12).\1\ This sharing is accomplished through
our growing regional presence that supports a Nation-wide network of
our Protective Security Advisors, as well as other DHS resources and
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education
Statistics, 2015 Digest of Education Statistics, Table 105.50 (2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
working together for more secure schools
The Department is proud to be part of the Federal Commission on
School Safety, which is charged with providing meaningful and
actionable recommendations and best practices to keep students safe at
school. The Commission, which is chaired by U.S. Department of
Education Secretary DeVos, also includes Department of Homeland
Security Secretary Nielsen, Attorney General Sessions, and Department
of Health and Human Services Secretary Azar.
To help further the goals of this commission, DHS is focusing on
seven lines of effort:
Promoting a public awareness campaign modeled on the ``See
Something, Say Something'' program to encourage awareness and
reporting of suspicious activity;
Creating and sharing a guide on best practices for school-
based threat assessments and violence prevention;
Updating and disseminating guidance on best practices for
school building security;
Integrating and coordinating Federal resources focused on
prevention and mitigation of active-shooter incidents at
schools;
Providing active-shooter training for law enforcement
officers;
Assisting in the development and implementation of tabletop
exercises and workshops focused on security protocols,
notifications and alerts, response, and recovery capabilities
with schools and first responders; and
Establishing and sharing guidelines and training on tactical
emergency casualty care.
understanding the issues
The issue of mass shootings at schools is complex and multi-
layered, to include understanding behavioral issues as well as security
of facilities. The Commission is gathering information from a range of
experts. These include students, parents, teachers, school safety
personnel, administrators, law enforcement officials, mental health
professionals, school counselors, security professionals, and others.
Each member of the Commission has or will organize at least one meeting
focused on some of their respective lines of effort.
At past Commission meetings, we have discussed several of the
factors that may contribute to violence, including: Cyber bullying and
social media; youth consumption of violent entertainment; and effects
of press coverage on mass shootings. We have also reviewed past reports
and recommendations from experts following previous school shootings,
including Columbine, Virginia Tech, and Sandy Hook. DHS is planning a
Commission meeting for mid-August where experts in school security best
practices, threat assessment, and active-shooter mitigation will share
their insights and experiences with the Commission.
recognizing and learning from effective solutions
While the overall issue of school security remains complex, our
efforts to learn from past experiences are yielding results.
The Commission conducted a field visit to Hebron-Harman Elementary
School in Hanover, Maryland, to learn more about Positive Behavioral
Interventions and Supports (PBIS). PBIS is a framework for assisting
school personnel in organizing evidence-based interventions to help
improve academic performance and social behavior outcomes for students.
Three more field visits will take place over the next couple of
months, including one led by the Department currently being scheduled
in late August, which will focus on physical security for school
buildings.
The Commission has also hosted two Listening Sessions, the first
taking place at the U.S. Department of Education in the District of
Columbia, and the second in Lexington, KY. Members of Congress, State
and local officials, law enforcement, parents, teachers, and students
have taken this opportunity to provide input toward the Commission's
work. Individuals may also provide input directly to the Department of
Education, as outlined in the Federal Register.
raising the baseline of school security
As the Department contributes to the work of the Commission, we are
leveraging current programs that cut across the spectrum to boost
school security. This work falls within three lines of effort:
Education and Community Awareness; Building Capacity through Training
and Exercises; and Increasing Early Warning to Identify and Report
Potential Threats.
The work performed in support of these lines of effort take into
account five planning assumptions:
Enhanced school security can deter future attacks and
disrupt them prior to mass damage being done;
School security should be designed to minimize disruption to
the learning environment;
Investments in school security will be constrained by
limited budgets;
School security is a shared responsibility and benefits from
community involvement, empowering individuals, and leveraging
law enforcement, non-governmental, and private-sector
capability; and
The Department's mission is to support enhanced school
security in the face of potential threats and vulnerabilities,
but DHS does not directly secure schools.
Since the attack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in
February 2018, the Department has also conducted over 200 engagements
with State and local representatives including schools, State
committees, State school security forums, and school districts. DHS
supported the Dallas Independent School District and the International
Association of Venue Managers with a community outreach program--``SEE,
SAY, DO''--to provide Dallas schools with the tools, training, and
resources to prevent an active-shooter incident through increased
situational awareness.
Another example of DHS work in this area includes the Department's
support of the State of Arizona's fusion center, which has partnered
with the Phoenix Police Department's Threat Mitigation Unit and other
Federal agencies on the development of a Community Liaison Program,
which is responsible for maintaining strong working relationships with
private-sector partners. The Community Liaison Program is now working
with school districts to provide active-shooter training and to foster
open lines of communication between schools and the public safety
community. DHS has also participated in the Marjory Stoneman Douglas
High School Public Safety Commission meeting, which is part of an
effort to analyze information from the school shooting and other mass
violence incidents in the State and address recommendations and system
improvements.
Recognizing that most of the Nation's school administrators and
educators are not experts in security, DHS is committed to utilizing
our expertise to facilitate solutions. This means leveraging the
capabilities of industry, school administrators, State and local
officials, and our field personnel to ensure that the K-12 community
has the tools and resources they need to make the best-informed
security decisions.
In closing, I want to underscore the importance of the role that
every one of us plays in securing the Nation's schools. A multi-faceted
problem like this requires the skills, expertise, knowledge--and
action--of a wide and diverse community of interest. School safety must
remain a continuing high priority for the Nation.
I believe the Department is well-positioned to assist in raising
the base-line of security for K-12 schools, together with our partners
at all levels of government, in academia, and in communities and law
enforcement around the Nation. I look forward to working with this
committee to chart a path that will move schools toward enhancing
approaches for managing risks from violence in the education
environment. I thank you in advance for your continuing leadership in
this regard and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I would like to ask the entire panel to help us understand
this and ask each of you to respond.
At the subcommittee's request, the Government
Accountability Office conducted reviews of the Federal efforts
to support emergency preparedness and security efforts at K-12
schools and institutions of higher education. While both
reports acknowledge the good work of the Departments of
Education, Justice, and Homeland Security on this important
issue, they noted that Federal efforts could be better
coordinated and that education institutes were often unaware of
the available assistance.
How are agencies now working to coordinate these various
guidance programs, assistance related to school security, and
how are we working to allow localities to know of the
availability of the services the three of you just described in
great detail that are well-formed, well-thought-out, and would
be successful, but only if localities know of their existence?
So I would ask each of you to comment on what we are doing
to coordinate our three major agencies, and second, how are we
getting the word out to localities that your services are
available to them?
Mr. Botel. Sure. I will start. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, first of all, in response to the report coming out of
that GAO study, we did form a group called the Federal Partners
and School Emergency Management and Preparedness, and there are
a couple of components to that. There is a steering committee
and a task force, and that group has met periodically since
that report came out. Coming out of that, the agencies that
have been working together, one of my colleagues mentioned the
school guide for developing high-quality emergency operations.
We are now about to release a district guide, and that is
something we have worked together on.
In addition, in September as we roll that out, we plan to
have a portal that includes information about the resources
that all of the agencies have that helps support and provide
assistance to districts and schools in developing plans and
keeping their students safe.
Mr. Hanson. Similarly at the Department of Justice, we are
also engaged in that Federal partnership my colleague
described. That was created after the 2016 GAO report in
response to that, and I believe GAO reviewed our efforts and
closed that recommendation. So we have continued to work in
regular contact through that partnership. Of course, the
President created the Federal Commission on School Safety. So
all of our departments, plus HHS, are now working together
investigating best practices with the intention of
disseminating those in a study and report coming out in the
coming months.
What we do at the Office of Justice Programs in the
Department particularly is we regularly work with State and
local governments, particularly with regard to law enforcement,
less so with schools. So we will leverage those relationships
that we have long established for decades and work with our
colleagues at the Department of Education to make sure their
schools know about them as well.
The way the Stop School Violence Act grants work are only
State, local governments, and Tribal entities can apply for
them. So we are accustomed to working with those partners. Like
I said, we will also work with our partners at the Department
of Education to make sure the schools know about those as well.
Just last week we had a webinar about our grant programs
between COPS and OJP, and we had over 210 participants. We have
archived that on our website, and we will continue to reach out
via the internet, in local or trade publications as
appropriate, working with Congress and certainly making sure
your constituents know about them, and also then via social
media and other means that come up as we see as appropriate.
Mr. Kolasky. Then let me sort-of answer on top of that,
sort-of the last mile, the committee end of that. We talked a
couple of times, and you mentioned the protective security
advisors. What we have done, we have protective security
advisors in every high-risk urban area and State around the
country. We prioritized their security advice toward being
around school security, and really the folks who can help
influence decisions being made around school security. As you
know, Congressman, we were in Queens with school officials and
local homeland security, local police, emergency managers in
Staten Island. We appreciated you having us there.
We really have been able to take the guides that have been
coming out from across the Federal Government and then have an
individual who can really help school boards navigate that. So
that is something that we will continue to do because I think a
lot of what we need to get done is to demystify what all these
resources are and put them in the hands of people who want to
make security decisions but don't know how to do that, don't
know how to do so cost-effectively.
Mr. Donovan. We talk about education being really grounded
in the local level, and I am not too sure that when we think
about schools being overseen by cities, counties, or States,
that people look at the Federal Government as a resource for
schools. We look toward the Federal Government to protect our
Nation, to protect our interests overseas. But here in Newark,
New Jersey, or on Staten Island or South Brooklyn, what I
represent, do those communities who want to assess the
vulnerabilities of their schools, those folks who need finances
for whatever protective mechanisms are needed there, do they
look at the Federal Government? I always think it is our job to
allow them to know that these are available.
My time has expired with one question, so I am going to
yield what time I don't have left to my colleague, Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
But before I go into my questions, I would ask to have a
letter from the National Education Association and testimony
for the record from the New Jersey School Boards Association
entered into the record.
Mr. Donovan. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]
Letter from the National Education Association
July 6, 2018.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and
Communications, Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Representative: On behalf of our 3 million members and the 50
million students they service, we would like to submit the following
comments for the record in connection with the July 9 field hearing in
New Jersey, ``Protecting Our Future: Addressing School Security
Challenges in America.''
We thank you for holding this hearing. It is essential for all
stakeholders, especially educators, to have a seat at the table during
discussions of the vitally important issue of school security,
including gun violence prevention. At the same time, we need to ensure
that safeguards are in place to preserve the right to due process and
prevent the resurrection of failed ``zero tolerance'' policies that can
lead to the unnecessary and unjust expulsion of students of color.
For too long, Congress has failed to take common-sense steps to end
the uniquely American epidemic of gun violence and mass shootings.
According to Everytown for Gun Safety, there have been nearly 300
school shootings since 2013, including at least 50 incidents of gunfire
on school grounds in 2018. NEA and its members, like the public at
large, overwhelmingly support stronger gun violence prevention laws,
including comprehensive, enforceable background checks to prevent
dangerous people from buying guns.
In addition, we believe a comprehensive approach to providing a
safe and secure learning environment must include increased funding
for--and access to--school-based health centers and their staffs.
Proper diagnosis can and often does start in our schools, yet there is
a shortage of counselors, nurses, social workers, and psychologists in
public education.
We also support expanding--and increasing funding for--professional
development for educators in the areas of bullying, mental and
behavioral health, cultural competencies, and classroom management.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments.
Sincerely,
Marc Egan,
Director of Government Relations.
______
Statement of the New Jersey School Boards Association
July 9, 2018
njsba school security initiatives
Since the 2012 Newtown, Connecticut tragedy, the New Jersey School
Boards Association, a federation of the State's local boards of
education, has engaged in school security initiatives encompassing
research, policy (both NJSBA and local district), training/professional
development, and advocacy.
For the subcommittee's July 9 field hearing on school security,
NJSBA will focus on its activities in the area of research and
information. We request that the following information be read into the
record.
safe and secure schools initiative: state-wide forum
Immediately after the Newtown tragedy, NJSBA planned a series of
actions to assist public schools in addressing school security issues.
Among the first strategies identified was education--that is,
informing local school board members and their staffs of the
requirements now in place and strategies they may consider.
Our initial effort was ``Safe and Secure Schools: Perspectives
after Newtown,'' a State-wide forum that drew over 650 people to The
College of New Jersey in January 2013. The meeting featured experts
from law enforcement, security, school climate, insurance, and crisis
management.
To reach a vital element of the school community--that is,
parents--NJSBA also hosted two regional forums, with the participation
of county prosecutors, local law enforcement agencies, and school
district officials. Additionally, ``school security'' became a frequent
topic of county school boards association meetings throughout the year.
safe and secure schools: year-long study
Based on observations from these forums and other sources, then-
NJSBA President John Bulina identified a need to provide the
Association's membership with additional guidance and direction.
In March 2013, he appointed a School Security Task Force and asked
the group to take on the following tasks:
Survey school districts on their security practices and
consult with experts in law enforcement, security, school
climate, and other fields.
Review current developments affecting the implementation and
funding of school security measures.
Identify best practices and changes in statute and
regulation that would promote student safety and enable school
boards to fund and implement security measures.
Review relevant NJSBA policy.
More than 130 local school board members volunteered to serve on
the task force. Eleven were selected. Their employment experience
spanned several fields, including law enforcement, education, law, and
homeland security.
The task force study extended for over a year. The final report,
What Makes Schools Safe?, includes 45 recommendations for action by the
State and Federal Governments, local school districts and NJSBA. (The
full report, along with other resources, is available at www.njsba.org/
schoolsecurity.)
Areas addressed include security personnel, school climate, policy
and planning, communications, training, architecture and physical
security, and financing.
Four years after its release, the report remains relevant. It
provides recommendations on subjects, ranging from school security
plans and emergency response procedures to prevention strategies that
involve facility upgrades, school climate, and education programs.
The Final Report of the NJSBA School Security Task Force includes
45 recommendations addressing local school district practices and State
and Federal requirements in six key areas: Security personnel; school
climate; policy and planning; communications/community relations;
physical security; and finances.
Findings
Each of the report's recommendations is based on findings that were
developed following consultation with experts and additional research.
Key findings of the task force include the following:
New Jersey has strong and effective State-wide school
security measures in place. For example, our State is one of
only 10 that require periodic security drills throughout the
school year. It requires crisis plans in each district, as well
as agreements between school districts and local law
enforcement agencies. The procedures result from State law and
regulation, aggressive State initiative, local school board
policy, and the interest of caring adults, including teachers,
parents, school board members, and law enforcement personnel.
Effective security planning must involve every element of
the school community and the broader community.
A safe and secure environment for our students requires not
only protection from outside threats, but also the maintenance
of a supportive and caring day-to-day internal school climate.
A strong, positive relationship between school officials and
law enforcement/emergency responders--built on mutual respect
for, and adherence to their specific roles--is a cornerstone of
an effective school security program.
An information gap persists concerning the various types of
security personnel employed in schools (e.g., School Resource
Officers, private security, retired law enforcement, etc.) and
their training, qualifications and functions, a situation that
has led to public misperception and misunderstanding.
``Deter, Slow, and Detain'' intruders, a foundation of
effective physical security, requires a different set of
building blocks for each school and school district. However,
certain low-cost options are available to address the common
concern of controlling entry into schools and classrooms.
Funding for security upgrades and strategies has become
extremely limited due to competing demands of the academic
program and capital expenses, State regulation over non-
instructional expenditures, the 2 percent tax levy cap, and the
lapse of Federal funding for the School Resource Officer
program.
A list of the report's 45 recommendations is attached to this
statement.
next steps
NJSBA President Daniel Sinclair and Executive Director Dr.
Lawrence S. Feinsod have appointed a new security committee
that is reviewing the 2014 report and, as necessary, will
update information and recommendations. The update is expected
to be completed this summer.
Each year, NJSBA establishes priority goals related to its
Strategic Plan. For 2018-2019, the Association will study the
impact of the effective delivery of mental health services and
early intervention strategies on student health and wellness,
school climate, and school security.
This effort will include appointment of task force that will
explore the relationship of mental health services to school security.
The task force, which will consult with mental health practitioners and
other experts, will begin meeting in the fall and will issue a final
report, including recommendations for further action and information on
best practices, by June 2019.
Founded in 2014, the New Jersey School Boards Association is a
federation of the State's local boards of education and includes a
majority of New Jersey's charter schools. NJSBA provides training,
advocacy, and support to advance public education and promote the
achievement of all students through effective governance.
FINAL REPORT: SCHOOL SECURITY TASK FORCE
Appendix A: Summary of Recommendations
Based on its research, the New Jersey School Boards Association
School Security Task Force makes a total of 45 recommendations in the
following areas: Security Personnel; School Climate; Policy and
Planning; Communications; Training in School Security; Physical
Security; and Financing.
i. security personnel
Local School District/Community
1. Because of significant variations in the size of school
districts and local law enforcement agencies, building lay-outs,
student populations and community attitudes, the decision on whether or
not to employ security personnel--armed or un-armed, police or non-
police--must rest exclusively with the local school district and should
not be dictated by the State.
2. A school resource officer (SRO) can provide a critical safety
factor and valuable counseling and support services for students. The
employment of SROs is the ``preferred'' model for a law enforcement
presence in a school building.
3. In assigning SROs or other law enforcement officers to schools,
local law enforcement agencies must consider fully the qualifications
and aptitude of the individual, including his or her capability as a
first responder and ability to relate to students. Additionally, the
training of SROs must stress conflict resolution, restorative justice
and stationhouse adjustment practices, as well as awareness of gang and
drug abuse activities.
4. School districts should ensure that all security personnel: (a)
Receive training appropriate for employment in the school environment
and (b) have in-depth understanding of local emergency protocols.
5. In developing the Memorandum of Agreement, school districts/
charter schools and local law enforcement should clearly address the
intersection of school policy/disciplinary code, Criminal Code and the
Juvenile Justice Code. They must ensure that student behavior that is
in violation of school codes of conduct be addressed by school
officials and not be imposed on police. Based on Federal and State law
and school policy, such guidance should ensure the following: Immediate
response to crises; protection of the safety and interests of students
affected by violent acts; the appropriate avenues of discipline and
referral for student offenders; and the recognition of State
requirements in areas such as student possession of firearms and
weapons on school grounds, and harassment, intimidation, and bullying.
State and Federal
6. The State and Federal Governments, respectively, should provide
and increase grant funding to support the assignment of law enforcement
officers as School Resource Officers.
7. The Legislature and the Governor should enact legislation to
establish a new category of law enforcement officers, such as Special
Law Enforcement Officer Level III, who are specially trained in working
with students and assigned to protect our schools. Such law enforcement
personnel can provide an additional school security option to school
districts. The legislation should also relieve current limits on
working hours for special officers when they are assigned to schools
and should ease the restrictions on the number of such officers
employed by a municipality.
8. The New Jersey Department of Education and the Office of the
Attorney General should revise The New Jersey Guide to Establishing a
Safe Schools Resource Officer Program in Your Community, which was
published in 1998, so that the document reflects recent developments in
the areas of security, funding, and programming.
ii. school climate
Local School District/Community
9. Local school districts should engage in school climate
assessments and develop and implement plans to ensure that students
have safe, secure, and supportive learning environments that provide
meaningful communication and involvement with caring adults on the
school staff. (A list of climate assessment resources is found on page
30 of this report.)
10. Not all student groups experience school safety and the school
climate in the same manner. To enable students to learn in supportive
environments at each grade level, local school boards should adopt
policies that recognize the importance of social-emotional learning,
character development, restorative practices and community building. In
addition, the Task Force recommends that school boards review the
information on social-emotional learning, supportive practices, and
authoritative disciplinary structures in Section II of this report,
School Climate.
11. To build a respectful school climate that enables the
advancement of student achievement, local boards of education and
school administrators should ensure that the principles of social-
emotional learning and character development skill-building are infused
into academic instruction in a coordinated manner and that there is a
consistent application of discipline.
12. Local boards of education should ensure that the School Safety
Teams, required by the Anti-Bullying Bill of Rights, are not only
reviewing reports of harassment, intimidation, and bullying, but are
also focusing on practices and processes related to school climate, so
as to inform the school boards in their periodic review of HIB and
related policies.
13. To ensure their School Safety Teams have a positive impact on
school climate, local boards of education should consider requiring the
teams to meet more than the twice-yearly minimum.
State
14. As recommended by the NJ SAFE task force, the State should form
an ``interagency working group'' comprised of various departments,
including education, law and public safety, and health and human
services, to address policy and programs on early intervention and
mental health services at the community level. A similar State-level
approach (the Education-Law Enforcement Working Group) has had a
positive impact on local policy and procedures through the State's
Uniform Memorandum of Agreement.
15. To clarify the role of the School Safety Teams in improving
school climate, the New Jersey State Board of Education should amend
administrative code (N.J.A.C. 6A:16) to rename these bodies ``School
Safety/Climate Teams,'' as recommended by the State's Anti-Bullying
Task Force.
iii. policy and planning
Local School District/Community
16. The local board of education should ensure that the school
district has completed assessments of physical security, threats,
capacity, and school climate. The assessments, or audits, should be
conducted in concert with local law enforcement and emergency
responders, should follow guidelines published in the New Jersey School
Safety & Security Manual: Best Practices Guidelines (2006) and should
draw on the work of experts in the areas of school climate, security,
and building design.
17. Local board of education members should familiarize themselves
with the terms of the Memorandum of Agreement between the local school
district and the local law enforcement agency.
18. Local school districts should form committees representing all
stakeholders (staff, parents, administrators, emergency responders, law
enforcement, community members, etc.) as part of their efforts to
develop school security plans, to assess the plans on an on-going
basis, and to identify necessary enhancement of school security
protocols, equipment, and staffing.
19. Local school districts should ensure on-going, periodic review
of the school security plan, the Memorandum of Agreement,
administrative response procedures, and protocols governing security
drills.
20. School district security policies and regulations should
address administrators' responsibilities, building and site access
(including after-hours use of facilities), and distribution of keys and
access cards.
21. School districts should stage State-required security drills at
varying times and days of the week and under different weather
conditions. Drills should involve numerous crisis scenarios, so that
school officials and law enforcement can evaluate their effectiveness,
make necessary adjustments in procedures, identify safety weaknesses
and make recommendations for additional training.
22. School districts should make tabletop exercises a regular part
of the security protocol, especially when full-scale exercises and
testing of crisis response is not feasible. Tabletop exercises should
involve law enforcement, fire departments, and emergency response
agencies.
23. Local boards of education should review their policies related
to school security, including those that address violence and
vandalism, student conduct, emergencies/disaster preparedness, and
weapons/firearms, to ensure that they are compliant with current
statute and regulation and reflect district-specific factors and
concerns.
24. School boards should ensure that practices and procedures are
in place to address building access, emergency evacuation, security
personnel and emergency medical services for events and functions that
take place after the instructional day.
State
25. The New Jersey Department of Education should ensure that the
manual, School Safety and Security Manual: Best Practice Guidelines,
last published in 2006 is updated as needed to incorporate the most
recent developments in school security strategies and procedures,
emergency equipment, and technology.
iv. communications
Local School District/Community
26. As part of their school security plans, local boards of
education should: (a) Ensure that staff, students, parents, and members
of the community are informed of changes in school security procedures
in a timely manner and (b) convey the importance of reporting to school
or law enforcement authorities unusual incidents or behavior in or
around school facilities.
27. To ensure communication with all members of the school
community, law enforcement and emergency responders, school districts
should implement multi-platform emergency notification systems that use
telephone, email, text messaging, website, and other methods of
communication.
28. Because of the proven effectiveness of anonymous tip lines in
preventing incidents of violence and promoting the health and safety of
students, school districts should explore the use of such networks and
take advantage of the systems that are currently available.
State
29. The NJ SAFE Task Force recommendation to establish a State-wide
anonymous tip line should be pursued by the State Departments of
Education, Community Affairs, and Law and Public Safety, as well as the
Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness and other agencies.
v. security training
Local School District/Community
30. To ensure that all school staff members have the appropriate
knowledge to improve security and help prevent and respond to
emergencies, local school districts should: (a) Provide on-going
training, and (b) utilize the varying no-cost training resources
available to them at the local, county, State, and Federal levels.
31. Training provided to district staff should vary in scope and
should address specific threats that a district might face, along with
general school security and safety principles.
32. Training on security plans and response procedures should
involve any individual in charge of students at a given time, including
full-time staff, part-time staff, substitute teachers, and volunteers.
Districts should ensure that all individuals in charge of students
receive information on their role in emergencies.
33. When conducting training, school districts should involve
appropriate outside response entities, including personnel who would
respond to the schools in an emergency. Districts should also encourage
representatives of outside entities to visit schools and familiarize
themselves with the facilities and their layouts as part of training
exercises, such as active-shooter drills for law enforcement personnel.
vi. physical security
Local School District/Community
34. Local boards of education and school administrators should use
the State-required updates to their district's Long-Range Facility Plan
as an opportunity to ensure that security needs are met in an
effective, consistent, and financially prudent manner.
35. Local school boards should ensure that school security planning
includes consultation with professionals in the areas of architecture,
engineering, and information technology, as well as construction and
fire code officials.
36. For schools with extensive windows and glass doors,
particularly at ground level, districts should implement the most
effective and economical method to prevent penetration through the use
of firearms.
37. Through the use of security planning teams, school districts
should: (a) Regularly review the effectiveness of protocols governing
visitor entry, key distribution, and student, staff, vendor, and
visitor access to school buildings and (b) identify improvements to
these processes.
38. To the extent possible, school districts should incorporate the
Homeland Security Standards for new construction and the NJDOE
``Security Standards for Schools under Construction'' into renovations
and alterations of existing facilities.
39. School districts should routinely evaluate and review the
condition of their buildings and identify maintenance issues (e.g.,
repair of door locks, doors and windows, alarm systems, public address
systems, utility room access, etc.) in need of attention.
40. School districts should ensure the effectiveness of revised
school security procedures, new equipment, or building improvements/
alterations through a careful review of threat/risk assessment and
consideration of community desires and norms, and local budget
constraints.
vii. financing school security
Local School District/Community
41. Local school districts and municipalities are encouraged to
share costs to enable the assignment of School Resource Officers.
42. The Commissioner of Education should amend State regulation
(N.J.A.C. 6A:23A) to eliminate ``Operation and Maintenance of Plant
cost per pupil equal to or less than the State median'' as a standard
for receipt of State aid when reviewing proposed school district
budgets or requests to seek voter approval to exceed the tax levy cap.
43. The State should designate additional construction grant
funding for the express purpose of enhancing school security.
44. The legislature should provide additional options to enable
school districts to hire and retain appropriately trained security
personnel.
45. The Federal Government should restore grant funding to support
the assignment of School Resource Officers.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Botel, during the school year, school shootings have
averaged about 1 per week, and in response to the increase in
school violence President Trump released his proposal for
improving school preparedness on March 11, 2018 as part of the
proposal. The President formed the Federal Commission on School
Safety. Last month, Secretary DeVos stated that the Federal
Commission on School Safety would not research the role of guns
in school violence.
So, is the Commission still determined not to research gun
violence in schools? Just a yes or no answer.
Mr. Botel. There is in the charge that the President gave--
--
Mr. Payne. Is that a yes or a no?
Mr. Botel. The Commission is looking at firearms with
regard to age restrictions.
Mr. Payne. In terms of what?
Mr. Botel. Of age restrictions, of whether changes in
policy in terms of at what age someone could acquire firearms,
whether that could help make school safer.
Mr. Payne. So the Commission is going to study, or is not
going to study?
Mr. Botel. Is going to study.
Mr. Payne. That is a revelation. We were under the
impression--what was Secretary DeVos intimating in her
statement?
Mr. Botel. I just know that in the document that you
referenced that the President put out to form the Commission,
there were a number of things that the Commission was charged
to look at, and this issue of restrictions surrounding age and
gun ownership, that was one of the things that he charged the
Commission to look at, and they are looking at it.
Mr. Payne. So Ms. DeVos is wrong?
Mr. Botel. For that particular question, she may have seen
it as a more comprehensive question on the issue. Again, the
charge that the President gave the Commission is narrowed to
the age restriction issue.
Mr. Payne. It is interesting that as this administration
moves forward, one hand doesn't know what the other one is
doing. But, c'est la vie.
On June 6, the Federal Commission on School Safety held its
first public meeting, and at that meeting many people stood
before the Commission with concerns about the Commission's
work. Many asked that the Commission not ignore guns in its
research. How is the Commission utilizing that feedback? I
guess you are saying that they are looking at it. But based on
the feedback from the public, how is that being utilized in
formulating----
Mr. Botel. We have received a lot of feedback from the
public. There have been listening sessions, the meeting that
you are talking about. We also have an email address,
safetyated.gov, where we have received hundreds and hundreds of
pieces of input, and I can assure you that we have staff that
look at every single piece of input we receive and share that
with the Commission members, and they will determine ultimately
what their report includes. They are planning on releasing
their final report by the end of the calendar year. So all of
that input is being looked at closely.
Mr. Payne. But we agree that in all these instances, the
one common factor was a gun being used in these acts of
violence; correct?
Mr. Botel. Yes. In the acts of violence you are talking
about, there has been a lot of gun violence. That is right.
Mr. Payne. So we just want to make sure that Secretary
DeVos knows what the President is saying, and the President
knows what Secretary DeVos is saying, and we get one common
message coming out of the administration, because it just
appears that everybody is all over the place with this stuff.
No one knows what the other one is saying on a day-to-day
basis. So how can the American public be secure in the fact
that something is happening? If you are getting several
different scenarios from different people in the
administration, then who do you believe? Who do you follow? The
Secretary says there won't be any looking into gun usage, and
then the President says that that is part of the Commission's
job.
Mr. Botel. Well, I think in the report that gets issued, as
I said, I believe the plan is by the end of the calendar year
it is going to address all the things that the President
charged the Commission to look at. We are getting input on
other things as well. Some of that will be in the purview of
the Commission. Of course, I think we are getting a lot of
information that will be helpful to the Congress and to others
at the State level--you mentioned New Jersey--as obviously
States and localities make their own policies.
Mr. Payne. OK. Well, my time is up.
Boy, that is a quick 5 minutes.
Mr. Donovan. It is a quick 5 minutes.
We are going to thank all the witnesses for their
testimony. As you can tell, the Ranking Member and myself
didn't get to ask all the questions we would like to ask, so we
may have some additional questions to ask of you that we would
ask you to respond to in writing.
We are going to take a brief break so that the staff can
change over the panel for our second panel. I thank all of you
for your testimony, for what you are doing for our great
Nation. Thank you, sirs.
[Recess.]
Mr. Donovan. We are pleased to welcome our second panel of
witnesses. Our second panel includes Mr. Jared Maples, director
of New Jersey Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness; Mr.
Ben Castillo, director of the New Jersey Department of
Education, Office of School Preparedness and Emergency
Planning; Major Jeanne Hengemuhle of the New Jersey State
Police Department; Mr. Timothy Gerity, president of the New
Jersey Association of School Resource Officers; and Mr. Michael
Reilly, president of the Community Education Council 31 in
Staten Island, New York.
I thank you for being here today. The witnesses' full
written statements will appear in the record.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Maples for his testimony.
It is good to see you again, sir.
Mr. Maples. You, as well.
STATEMENT OF JARED M. MAPLES, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF HOMELAND
SECURITY AND PREPAREDNESS, STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Maples. Chairman Donovan and Ranking Member Payne,
thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I am
honored to speak on behalf of the dedicated professionals of
the New Jersey Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness,
NJOHSP, who are working tirelessly to ensure the safety and
security of the State of New Jersey.
Today my remarks will focus on the work we are doing in New
Jersey under Governor Murphy's leadership to reflect National
priorities while building local capabilities to address risk
and protect our communities using partnerships, continuous
improvement, and a whole-of-Government approach.
New Jersey faces a complex, diverse, and fluid security
environment, with persistent and evolving threats. We average
over 1,200 people per square mile, substantially higher than
the National average of 92. New Jersey has an undoubtedly
unique risk environment.
However, there is no threat more jarring or more important
to address than the one to our schools. As we have seen in the
appalling attacks like those in Florida and Texas, the tragic
lesson we have learned is that schools are often targets of
choice for those who wish to commit horrifying and attention-
grabbing acts of violence. New Jersey has more than 600 school
districts, with the number of schools exceeding 2,500. This
number alone, not to mention the number of colleges and
universities in the State, presents a vulnerability profile of
critical importance.
On March 26 of this year, Attorney General Grewal updated
Directive 2016-7 to explicitly mandate that threats of school
violence be sent to the New Jersey Suspicious Activity
Reporting System, maintained by my agency. Accordingly, all
school-related threats are reported to our Counterterrorism
Watch located at the Regional Operations and Intelligence
Center, our State Fusion Center, as well as the County
Counterterrorism Coordinators. In partnership with the New
Jersey State Police and the FBI, we work with law enforcement
to track and disseminate information regarding possible threats
to schools State-wide, which mitigates the possibility of
violence.
Regardless of the scope of our individual mission, all of
us leading the State have and will continue to marshal a full
contingent of resources for protecting our children and
educators.
As we continue our work, we recognize that continual
improvement is the only way to succeed. Resting on our laurels
will not strengthen security. We recognize that across the
country and here in New Jersey, we must strengthen prevention
efforts. Preventing an incident and avoiding the use of
response tactics is our goal. As communities, we must embrace a
culture of preparedness that invests equally in both prevention
and response.
We will continue to prioritize the identification of
suspicious activity, mental health indicators, and ensure that
there is a clear path for reporting and addressing issues
before an incident occurs. We will expand innovative efforts
such as suspicious activity reporting training for school bus
drivers, custodians, teachers, and administrators. We will
innovate our support for first responders by expanding
capabilities to create waves of first preventers.
Our strategic approach to security also includes supporting
and building response capabilities such as comprehensive after-
shooter training, including pre-incident indicators and
pathways to report those indicators. Our first responder
community here in New Jersey is one of the world's best.
Additionally, the New Jersey State Police, Departments of
Education, Human Services, Health, Children and Families, and
many other partners have built response capabilities that are
second to none. New Jersey Department of Education has staff
embedded with NJOHSP and conducts unannounced school security
drills across the State to test both plans and the actions of
faculty and staff in a controlled, realistic environment. We
continue to offer large-scale active-shooter exercises for K-12
and partner with Federal DHS for hometown security initiative
planning.
We recognize the consistent need to expand security
capabilities, focusing on where mass gatherings of people
occur, what those common vulnerabilities are, and ensuring that
individuals, especially school children, know what to do when
circumstances deviate from those they have practiced. To that
end, our colleges and universities are participating in a new
Mass Gathering Working Group to address these common
vulnerabilities and build missing capabilities at locations
where students gather throughout the State.
We will continue to ensure that our plans do not just
account for the security of the building, but build
capabilities that empower the safety of their precious content,
our children. We are currently working with the Office of the
Secretary of Higher Education, the New Jersey Office of
Emergency Management, and the New Jersey Department of Health
to review every institution of higher education's emergency
operations plan.
We will expand training models and traditional planning
assumptions to address changing tactics and enable capabilities
to deviate from the plans as situations dictate. We have
already begun to transform our thinking and focus on these
essential areas. Over the past 2 years, the State has
continually implemented recommendations from the 2015 New
Jersey School Security Task Force Report, including the
creation of the New Jersey School Safety Specialist Academy and
Certification Program; annual security training for public and
non-public school employees; additional training and
qualifications of Class III Special Law Enforcement Officers;
and new school construction to incorporate security measures
into architectural design.
Subsequently, we have created a School Security
subcommittee on the State's Domestic Security Preparedness Task
Force, which I chair, to coordinate horizontally across State
agencies, and integrate vertically with National priorities and
local needs. Part of that effort includes conducting security
assessments at schools, as well as providing assessment
training for local enforcement partners who can serve as force
multipliers to enhance security capabilities in schools
throughout the State.
Work remains, but there are people dedicated to getting it
right using a whole-of-Government approach. We will focus on
prevention, we will innovate, and we will continue to build
those capabilities that are vital to our overall security.
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, I thank you again for the
opportunity to testify today. I look forward to your questions
and yield back to the Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maples follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jared M. Maples
July 9, 2018
introduction
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today. I am honored to speak on behalf of the dedicated professionals
of the New Jersey Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness, who are
working tirelessly to ensure the safety and security of the State of
New Jersey.
New Jersey faces a complex, diverse, and fluid security
environment, with persistent and evolving threats. As you know, New
Jersey has the highest population density of any State in the Nation--3
times the population density of New York and Pennsylvania--with almost
9 million residents in the fourth-smallest State by land mass. We
average over 1,200 people per square mile, substantially higher than
the National average of 92. We have some of the most critical
infrastructure in the United States, and we are flanked by two of the
largest cities in the country. New Jersey has an undoubtedly unique
risk environment.
However, there is no threat more jarring or more important to
address than the one to our schools. As we have seen in the appalling
attacks in Florida and Texas, the tragic lessons we have learned is
that schools are often targets of choice for those who wish to commit
horrifying and attention-grabbing acts of violence. New Jersey has more
than 600 school districts with the number of schools exceeding 2,500.
This number alone, not to mention the number of colleges and
universities in the State, presents a vulnerability profile of
paramount importance.
On March 26 of this year, Attorney General Grewal updated Directive
2016-7 to explicitly mandate that threats of school violence be sent to
the New Jersey Suspicious Activity Reporting System. Accordingly, all
school-related threats are reported to our Counterterrorism (CT) Watch
located at the Regional Operations and Intelligence Center (ROIC), as
well as the County Counterterrorism Coordinators. In partnership with
the New Jersey State Police, we work with law enforcement to track and
disseminate information regarding possible threats to schools State-
wide. This collaboration and information sharing strengthens the
State's ability to mitigate the possibility of violence against
schools.
While some incidents call for an academic discussion to categorize
whether they are crime and terror, this is not one of them. The
distinction does not matter. The safety of our children is paramount.
Regardless of the scope of our individual mission, all of us leading
this State have, and will continue, to marshal a full contingent of
resources toward protecting our children.
njohsp actions
As we continue our work, we recognize that continual improvement is
the only way to succeed. Resting on our laurels will not strengthen
security. While we provide details of on-going efforts, be mindful that
we are constantly seeking to improve. The most effective improvement we
can take is to, quite simply, work to prevent these incidents from
occurring. We recognize that across the country, and here in New
Jersey, we must strengthen prevention efforts. Preventing an incident
and avoiding the use of response tactics is our goal. As communities,
we must embrace a culture of preparedness that invests equally in both
prevention and response.
We will continue to prioritize the identification of suspicious
activity, mental health indicators, and ensure that there is a clear
path for reporting and addressing issues before an incident occurs. We
will expand innovative efforts such as suspicious activity reporting
training for school bus drivers, custodians, teachers, and
administrators.
We will innovate our support for first responders by expanding
capabilities to create waves of first preventers. We will continue to
take a whole-of-Government approach under existing task forces to
provide comprehensive active-shooter training, including pre-incident
indicators and pathways to report those indicators.
Our strategic approach to security also includes supporting and
building response capabilities. Our first responder community here in
New Jersey is one of the world's best. The New Jersey State Police,
Departments of Education, Human Services, Health, Children and
Families, and many other partners have built response capabilities that
are second to none. New Jersey Department of Education has staff
embedded with NJOHSP and conducts unannounced school security drills
across the State to test both plans and the actions of faculty and
staff in a controlled, realistic environment. NJOHSP continues to offer
large-scale active-shooter exercises for K-12 schools, including
facilitating 2 last year in Bergen and Warren Counties.
We recognize the consistent need to expand security capabilities,
focusing on where mass gatherings of people occur, what those common
vulnerabilities are, and ensuring that individuals, especially school
children, know what to do when circumstances deviate from those they
have practiced. To that end, our colleges and universities are
participating in a new Mass Gathering Working Group to address these
common vulnerabilities and build missing capabilities at locations
where students gather throughout the State.
We will continue to ensure that our plans do not just account for
the security of the building, but build capabilities that empower the
safety of their precious content--our children. We are currently
working with the Office of the Secretary of Higher Education, the New
Jersey Office of Emergency Management, and the New Jersey Department of
Health to review every institution of higher education's emergency
operations plan, an effort required by New Jersey statute.
We will expand training models and traditional planning assumptions
to address changing tactics and enable capabilities to deviate from the
plans as situations dictate. We have already begun to transform our
thinking and focus on these essential areas. Over the past 2 years, the
State has continually implemented recommendations from the 2015 New
Jersey School Security Task Force Report, including:
The creation of the New Jersey School Safety Specialist
Academy and Certification Program;
Annual security training for public and non-public school
employees;
Additional training and qualifications of Class III Special
Law Enforcement Officers at schools and county colleges; and,
New school construction to incorporate security measures
into architectural design.
Subsequently, we have created a School Security Subcommittee on the
State's Domestic Security Preparedness Task Force to coordinate
horizontally across State agencies, and integrate vertically with
National priorities and local needs. Part of that effort includes
conducting security assessments at schools, as well as providing
assessment training for local enforcement partners who can serve as
force multipliers to enhance security capabilities in schools
throughout the State.
conclusion
Unfortunately, attacks on schools are just one facet of a larger
security threat to open access public facilities with limited security
and free movement. At the moment there remains a need to address
concerns and lack of information sharing among mass gathering
facilities such as amusement parks, arenas, casinos, colleges and
universities, convention centers, stadiums, and any other venues that
could be a potential target.
Through efforts such as the aforementioned Mass Gathering Working
Group, the Hometown Security Initiative, and our new Secure the Shore
Initiative, we are working to protect all of New Jersey from
terroristic threats to our public spaces. Work remains, but there are
people dedicated to getting it right. We will focus on prevention. We
will innovate. We will continue to build those capabilities that are
vital to our overall security.
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and distinguished Members
of the subcommittee. I thank you again for the opportunity to testify
today. Under Governor Murphy's leadership, we will continue to adapt to
meet the current threat environment and better secure our schools
through a whole-of-Government approach. I look forward to your
questions, and yield back to the Chairman.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Maples.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Castillo.
STATEMENT OF BEN CASTILLO, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF SCHOOL
PREPAREDNESS AND EMERGENCY PLANNING, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION,
STATE OF NEW JERSEY
Mr. Castillo. Thank you, sir. Good morning, Chairman
Donovan, Ranking Member Payne. Thank you for this opportunity
to testify today on behalf of the New Jersey Department of
Education to highlight our efforts in school security.
I first wish to convey my regrets for Commissioner Lamont
Repollet for not being here today, but I thank him for
entrusting me with this important task. I know I speak for the
commissioner when I say that he is personally and
professionally committed to school security. It is why he is
committed to the work of the School Security Subcommittee for
the New Jersey Domestic Security and Preparedness Task Force,
which Director Maples had referenced. It is also why he was
honored to provide an opportunity to attend this hearing to our
summer interns, seated behind us, students who will be our next
generation of teachers, principals, and parents who deserve a
seat to hear this important conversation. We are thrilled that
many of them are here with us this morning.
As Director Maples had mentioned, New Jersey has over 600
public schools and charter schools. In addition to that, there
are over 1,400 non-public schools serving almost 225,000
students. This equates to approximately 1.6 million students in
New Jersey's schools daily. During the academic year, most of
our children spend fully a third of their formative years in
schools. It is not only where they do their work of learning,
but it is also where they socialize with their friends, they
eat, they play, from kindergarten through high school. Recent
tragic acts of school violence around the country remind all of
us of our central moral and professional responsibility of
keeping our children in a safe and nurturing environment so
they can develop and mature to their fullest potentials.
To that end, the New Jersey Department of Education, along
with its partners and stakeholders, have been seeking to
improve student safety through a multifaceted and student-
centered approach that builds positive school cultures and
socio-emotional learning in addition to the security postures
of school buildings within the K-12 realm. Together with our
sister agencies, including the New Jersey Departments of
Community Affairs, Health, Children and Families, Law and
Public Safety, Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness,
State Police, and many other Federal and local government and
non-government partners, we have established the
Intergovernmental School Safety Group, and we have made student
safety a core part of our departments' value structure. This
model captures the commissioner's improvement model of ACE:
Assess, Create, and Execute. As a group we are assessing the
school security needs of the State and creating and executing
solutions.
For example, current administrative code requires districts
to have written, comprehensive all-hazards school safety and
security plans. Legislative mandates also require all schools
to conduct a school security drill each month, in addition to
the regular fire drill. This may very well represent the most
robust school security drill schedule in the Nation.
Furthermore, a number of recent directives were passed
which further enhance school security efforts, many of which
were mentioned by Director Maples, and they continue to be in
force.
In addition to the adoption of the latest school security
task force recommendations, the Department of Education
provides guidance to further enhance school safety and
security. In our view, of the 14 issues studied by the task
force, and of the 42 recommendations offered in its final
report, the establishment of the New Jersey School Safety
Specialist Academy and the associated School Safety Specialist
Certification Program are the most impactful. The enabling
legislation requires each school district to designate a school
administrator to be certified as a school safety specialist.
These school safety specialists will be our most valuable
points of contact in each school district with whom we can
share information and make direct contact should situations
warrant. They will be required to train annually on topics
including bullying, hazing, emergency planning, emergency
drills, drugs, weapons, gangs, and school policing.
Additionally, as a result of concerns voiced by district
personnel, we also included blocks of instruction on physical
security, bomb threat awareness and response, security
considerations for front office staff, school bus
transportation, and others.
Through the Office of School Preparedness and Emergency
Planning, the Department has been diligently providing
training, guidance, and assistance at the grassroots levels of
our K-12 educational communities. Through our outreach efforts,
we share preventive strategies and promising practices, and
identify many security challenges faced by our schools.
Our unannounced drill observation initiative has provided
opportunities for members of our office to collaborate directly
with schools. Since the 2014-2015 school year, we have
conducted over 850 such observations. This outreach has led to
an increasing number of requests for technical assistance,
which have resulted in members of our office providing
professional development sessions for school staff and
presentations to parents and board members.
Our office has provided site-specific security
observations, school safety and security plan reviews, and
drill guidance. We have responded to 205 requests for technical
assistance, provided 121 presentations to educational
organizations, and conducted 91 training assemblies.
I see I am very close to my time. May I continue, sir?
Thank you.
We, along with our partner agencies, understand that no
single entity bears the responsibility nor possesses the
capability to keep our students safe. There must be a
concerted, comprehensive, continual effort to make and keep our
schools as secure as possible.
We have partnered with U.S. Department of Education and the
Readiness and Emergency Management for Schools Technical
Assistance Center, FEMA, our own Office of Homeland Security
and Preparedness, the New Jersey State Police, our respective
county prosecutors' offices, local police, and others, in a
collaborative effort to improve school security. In partnership
with the Disaster and Terrorism Branch of the New Jersey
Department of Human Services, we provided training in
Comprehensive Active-Shooter Incident Management for Schools,
which speaks to the importance of emotional components before,
during, and after such horrific events.
To enhance information sharing, the Office of the Regional
Operations and Intelligence Center, in concert with our
department and the Office of Homeland Security and New Jersey
State Police, developed Intelligence Dissemination Reports for
the school sector. These were most recently distributed
following the aftermath of the shootings in Parkland, Florida;
in anticipation of the school walkouts which occurred across
the Nation; and prior to high school graduations to provide
situational awareness to schools throughout the State. We will
continue to seek additional collaboration in efforts to more
broadly face the challenges of school security.
Despite what seems to be a mounting tide of senseless
violence occurring within our schools, schools overall remain
relatively safe places for our children. However, we cannot
remain idly by and allow injury, both emotional and physical,
and deaths to occur among our students. We must reject that
this is the new normal. We must not only stem the tide of
school violence but turn it back. We must pledge to do more.
So in closing, if I may paraphrase Commissioner Repollet,
``While we cannot control individual student behavior, we must
continue to provide guidance and support through training and
resources to the school districts in order to identify
promising practices and effective preventive strategies.''
This has been our mission, and we, along with our partners
and stakeholders in school security, will continue to do so to
the best of our abilities.
I thank you again for the opportunity to address the
committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Castillo follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ben Castillo
July 9, 2018
introduction
Good morning Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am Ben Castillo, director
of the New Jersey Department of Education's Office of School
Preparedness and Emergency Planning. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the New Jersey Department of Education to
highlight our efforts in school security.
I wish to convey to the subcommittee, the regrets of our
Commissioner, Dr. Lamont Repollet for not being here today, but I thank
him for entrusting me with this important task. I know I speak for the
Commissioner when I say that he is personally and professionally
committed to school security. It's why he was named co-chair of the
school security subcommittee for the NJ Department of Homeland Security
and Preparedness. It's also why he was honored to provide an
opportunity to attend this hearing to our summer interns, students who
will be our next generation of teachers, principals, and parents who
deserve a seat at the table to participate in this conversation. We are
thrilled that many of them are here with us this afternoon.
As you may know, New Jersey has over 600 public school districts
and charter schools encompassing over 2,500 schools. Additionally,
there are over 1,400 nonpublic schools serving almost 225,000 students.
This equates to approximately 1.6 million students in New Jersey's
school daily. During the academic year, most of our children spend
fully a third of their formative years in schools. It's not only where
students learn, but it's also where they socialize with their friends,
eat, and play--from kindergarten through high school. Recent tragic
acts of school violence around the country remind all of us of our
central moral and professional responsibility of keeping our children
in a safe and nurturing environment so they can develop and mature to
their fullest potentials.
administrative code and legislative requirements
To that end, the NJDOE, along with its partners and stakeholders
have been seeking to improve student safety through a multi-faceted and
student-centered approach that builds positive school cultures and
socio-emotional learning in addition to the security postures of school
buildings within the K-12 realm. Together with our sister State
agencies, including the Departments of Community Affairs, Health,
Children and Families, Law and Public Safety, Office of Homeland
Security and Preparedness, State Police and many other Federal and
local government and non-government partners, we have established the
Intergovernmental School Safety Group and we've made student safety a
core part of our departments' value structure. This model captures the
Commissioner's improvement model of ACE: Assess, Create, and Execute.
As a group we are assessing the school security needs of the State and
creating and executing solutions.
For example, current administrative code requires districts to have
written, comprehensive all-hazards school safety and security plans.
These emergency operating plans are the cornerstones which are relied
upon in emergencies; and from which planning, training, and drills are
based. Legislative mandate also requires all schools to conduct a
school security drill each month, in addition to the mandatory monthly
fire drill. This may well represent the most robust school security
drill schedule in the Nation. Furthermore, a number of recent
directives were passed which further enhance school security efforts.
Many of these resulted directly from the work of the New Jersey School
Security Task Force, an interagency group created by State law in 2014
charged with studying and developing recommendations to improve school
safety and security. In addition to the adoption of the latest school
security task force recommendations, the DOE provides guidance to
further enhance school safety and security.
In our view, of the 14 issues studied by the task force; and of the
41 recommendations offered in their final report, the establishment of
the New Jersey School Safety Specialist Academy and the associated
School Safety Specialist Certification Program, are the most impactful.
The enabling legislation requires each school district to designate a
school administrator to be certified as a school safety specialist.
These school safety specialists will be our most valuable points of
contact in each school district with whom we can share information and
make direct contact should situations warrant. They will be required to
train annually on topics including bullying, hazing, emergency
planning, emergency drills, drugs, weapons, gangs, and school policing.
Additionally, as a result of concerns voiced by district personnel, we
also included blocks of instruction on physical security, bomb threat
awareness and response, security considerations for front office staff,
school bus transportation, and others.
njdoe school security efforts
Through the Office of School Preparedness and Emergency Planning,
the DOE has been diligently providing training, guidance, and
assistance at the grassroots levels of our K-12 educational
communities. Through our outreach efforts, we share preventative
strategies and promising practices, and identified many security
challenges faced by our schools.
Our unannounced drill observation initiative has provided
opportunities for members of our office to collaborate directly with
schools. Since the 2014-2015 school year, we have conducted over 850
such observations. This outreach has led to an increasing number of
requests for technical assistance, which have resulted in members of
our office providing professional development sessions for school staff
and presentations to parent and board members, and other audiences. Our
office has provided site-specific security observations, school safety
and security plan reviews, and drill guidance. We've responded to 205
technical assistance requests, provided 121 presentations to
educational organizations, and conducted 91 training assemblies. Just
last week, the Governor underlined the State's on-going commitment to
school safety by signing a State budget that significantly increased
the State's investment in Security Aid, allowing districts the
flexibility to support school safety initiatives that fit the needs of
their students.
While I can speak primarily to the Department's on-going work
regarding school security, a holistic approach to ensuring the safety,
including preventive efforts, is vital. The DOE understands the
importance of building strong, healthy, and positive school cultures
through social-emotional learning. The NJDOE's prevention and
intervention efforts to create an environment where students feel safe
to learn, align with New Jersey's anti-bullying law. Districts are
required to adopt and implement anti-bullying policies which include
prevention, responding to allegations, and reporting. Each school is
required to have a school safety/school climate team to focus on
developing, fostering, and maintaining positive school climates. A
School Climate Survey has been developed as part of a data-driven
school climate improvement process to inform development and
implementation of a School Climate Improvement Plan.
partnerships
We, along with our partner agencies understand that no single
entity bears the responsibility, nor the possesses the capability to
keep our students safe. There must be a concerted, comprehensive,
continual effort to make and keep our schools as secure as possible. We
have partnered with U.S. Department of Education and the Readiness and
Emergency Management for Schools Technical Assistance Center, FEMA, our
own Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness, the New Jersey State
Police, Department of Human Services, our respective County
Prosecutors' Offices, local police, and others, in a collaborative
effort to improve school security. In partnership with the Disaster and
Terrorism Branch of the New Jersey Department of Human Services, we
provided training in Comprehensive Active-Shooter Incident Management
for Schools which speaks to the importance of emotional components
before, during, and after such horrific events. To enhance information
sharing, the Office of the Regional Operations and Intelligence Center,
in concert with our department and the Office of Homeland Security and
Preparedness, developed Intelligence Dissemination Reports for the
school sector. These were most recently provided following the
aftermath of the school shootings in Parkland, Florida; in anticipation
of the school walkouts which occurred across the Nation; and prior to
high school graduation ceremonies to provide situational awareness to
schools throughout the State. We will continue to seek additional
collaboration in efforts to more broadly face the challenges of school
safety.
Finally, in an effort to learn from our colleagues around the
Nation who are all seeking to improve school safety and security in the
wake of the track act of school violence at Parkland Florida, in May of
this year the Commissioner and I attended a school safety training
hosted by the Indiana Department of Education. It was an honor to be a
guest of the Indiana Department of Education to learn how their school
and district leaders engage State and National best practices in school
safety. We look forward to attending additional professional learning
opportunities in the future.
conclusion
Despite what seems to be a mounting tide of senseless violence
occurring within our schools; schools overall, remain relatively safe
places for our children. However, we cannot remain idly by and allow
injury, both emotional and physical, and deaths to occur among our
students. We must reject that this is the new normal, stem, and turn
back the tide of school violence. We must pledge to do more.
Paraphrasing Commissioner Repollet: `` . . . while we cannot
control individual student behavior we [must continue] to provide
guidance and support through training and resources to the school
districts in order to identify promising practices and effective
preventative strategies.'' This has been our mission, and we, along
with our partners and stakeholders in school security will continue to
do so to the best of our abilities.
I again thank you for the opportunity to address this esteemed
subcommittee.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
The Chair now recognizes Major Hengemuhle.
STATEMENT OF JEANNE HENGEMUHLE, COMMANDING OFFICER, DIVISION OF
HUMAN RESOURCES SECTION, NEW JERSEY STATE POLICE
Ms. Hengemuhle. Good morning, Chairman Donovan, Ranking
Member Payne. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today. I am Major Jeanne Hengemuhle, commanding officer of
the Division Human Resources Section.
The Division of State Police consists of four primary
branches. Through these branches, the division preserves the
ability to augment assets to address all hazards and threats
from a holistic approach. Each branch works both independently
and in concert as they pool resources to address the State's
most pressing concerns. The members within these branches
actively seek out and maintain crucial relationships with
outside entities, community leaders, school administrators, and
other stakeholders to promote our abilities to counter school
violence and to implement initiatives on school safety and
security.
School safety and security plans as mandated by the
Department of Education effectively outline the State's
approach in preparing for threats and hazards that pose the
greatest risk to the security and safety of New Jersey schools.
Through the direction of the Department of Education, all
school districts in New Jersey are required to have a school
safety and security plan. These plans include procedures to
respond to critical incidents. All plans for those schools
located in State Police-patrolled areas are housed in both hard
copy and electronic copy so they are immediately available to
Troopers if an emergent situation occurs.
One constant message across all branches within the
Division is to develop innovative strategies and partnerships
with public and private entities to prevent, protect, and
respond to threats that specifically target our schools.
Evidence of this resides within the School Safety and Outreach
Unit, which was recreated under the Division's Recruiting and
Employee Development Bureau and is principally responsible for
school safety and community outreach programs. They have
established a partnership with the Department of Education,
Office of School Preparedness and Emergency Planning. Members
of the School Safety and Outreach Unit have participated in and
supported school safety and security planning efforts, which
include unannounced visits/drills and security planning
efforts, instructing anti-bullying and anti-violence programs,
and delivering drug prevention programs such as Law Enforcement
Against Drugs, LEAD.
The New Jersey State Police participates in the majority of
the unannounced drills conducted State-wide. Led by the
Department of Education, the unannounced drills provide
technical assistance and support to schools with their
preparedness efforts, while sharing best practices observed in
these other districts. The evaluation of the drill is
informational and provides an opportunity for cooperative
collaboration.
Presenting and instructing various programs through our
School Safety and Outreach Unit demonstrates the State Police's
commitment to protecting our youth and communities from the
proliferation of drugs, drug-related crimes, peer-to-peer cyber
bullying, and violence.
The Division has also partnered with the New Jersey
Department of Homeland Security and Preparedness in a
coordinated effort in planning and active participation in
active-shooter exercises. These exercises are intended to test
our abilities to respond effectively and efficiently to any
hazards and threats to our communities and schools. The New
Jersey State Police has looked at best practices in responding
to an active-shooter incident and has just begun rolling out a
restructure of our current protocols.
Field Operations Troopers normally assigned to general
policing stations throughout the State have received additional
training and certifications, and are positioned as School
Resource Troopers for 9 regional high schools. They have the
ability to immediately respond to all hazards and threats while
providing instruction to students on a variety of topics and
lessons at the school administration's request. The Troopers'
presence also provides a sense of comfort and deterrence while
further building public and community trust in law enforcement.
Finally, in an attempt to further bolster school safety and
public trust in law enforcement, the superintendent, Colonel
Patrick Callahan, with the support of the Governor and the
attorney general, has encouraged all enlisted members to visit
schools where the State police is the sole provider of law
enforcement services. These unannounced visits take place while
members are traversing the State during the course of their day
or in route to and from their primary work assignments. The
randomness of this program also affords the State Police
another layer of security via visible deterrence while building
community relations and trust with school entities.
Collaboration and community trust are essential components
that need to be developed and fostered in order to sustain
strong relations with our community leaders and school
administrators. The reality is that the State police, or any
single law enforcement entity, lacks the personnel to
appropriately address all hazards and threats independently.
The collaborative working relationship between the State
police, the Governor's office, the Office of Attorney General,
Office of Homeland Security, and all of the departments
critical to school safety will allow New Jersey to strengthen
our plans and responses with regard to school safety.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hengemuhle follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jeanne Hengemuhle
July 9, 2018
Good Morning Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today. I am honored to speak on behalf of the dedicated professionals
of the New Jersey State Police. I am Major Jeanne Hengemuhle,
commanding officer of the Division Human Resources Section of the New
Jersey State Police.
The division of State Police consists of four primary branches:
Administration, Investigations, Homeland Security, and Operations.
Through these branches, the division preserves the ability to augment
assets to address all-hazards and threats from a holistic approach.
Each branch works both independently and in concert, as they pool
resources to address the State's most pressing concerns. The members
within these branches actively seek out and maintain crucial
relationships with outside agencies, community leaders, school
administrators and other stakeholders to promote our abilities to
counter school violence and to implement initiatives on school safety
and security.
Under the direction of Attorney General Grewal, school safety and
security has been enhanced. On March 26 of this year, General Grewal
updated Directive 2016-7, to add school to the list of soft targets on
Suspicious Activities Reports. By doing this, all threats of violence
against schools (in any form, through any medium and from any source)
are reported to the Regional Operations and Intelligence Center (ROIC)
and the county terrorism coordinator. Now, the New Jersey Office of
Homeland Security and Preparedness (O.H.S.P.) and the ROIC can analyze,
track and disseminate threats against schools on a joint Intelligence
Dissemination Report which reaches law enforcement and school
superintendents State-wide, to name just a few entities. This flow of
information allows New Jersey law enforcement to strengthen their
ability to deter and/or stop school violence.
School safety and security plans as mandated by the Department of
Education in (6A:16-5.1), effectively outline the State's approach in
preparing for threats and hazards that pose the greatest risk to the
security and safety of New Jersey schools. Through the direction of the
Department of Education, all school districts in New Jersey are
required to have a school safety and security plan. Each plan must be
designed locally with the help of law enforcement, emergency management
officials, public health officials, and other key stakeholders. All
plans must be reviewed and updated on an annual basis. These plans
include procedures to respond to critical incidents ranging from bomb
threats, fires and gas leaks, to an active-shooter situation. All plans
for those schools located in State Police patrolled area are housed in
both hard copy and electronic copy so they are immediately available to
troopers if an emergent situation occurs.
The threat and reality of an active-shooter situation in our
schools has become all too familiar in the United States. While, here
in New Jersey, we have been generally spared from the truly horrific
events that have plagued other communities, we still need to plan
accordingly, collaborate, and to trust in our partner agencies in order
to prevent these criminal acts. In the past, the New Jersey State
Police has assumed a signature role in defending the State and its
communities against these crimes. However, a justly comprehensive
preparedness plan is a communal responsibility that requires a public
effort in promoting safety and resilience through shared common goals
and trust. It is vital that all partners build, organize, and enhance
security and safety capabilities in a unified approach to be better
prepared to counter all-hazards and threats in our communities and
schools.
One constant message across all branches within the division is to
develop innovative strategies and partnerships with public and private
entities to prevent, protect, and respond to threats that specifically
target our schools. Evidence of this resides within the School Safety &
Outreach Unit, which was recreated under the Division's Recruiting &
Employee Development Bureau, and is principally responsible for school
safety and community outreach programs. They have established a
partnership with the Department of Education, Office of School
Preparedness and Emergency Planning. Members of the School Safety &
Outreach Unit have participated in and supported school safety and
security planning efforts, which include ``Unannounced Visits/Drills
(UAD),'' instructing anti-bullying and anti-violence programs, and
delivering drug prevention programs (such as, Law Enforcement Against
Drugs--L.E.A.D.).
The New Jersey State Police participates in the majority of the
UAD's conducted State-wide. Led by the Department of Education, the
unannounced drills provide technical assistance and support to schools
with their preparedness efforts, while sharing best practices observed
in other districts. The evaluation of the drill is informational and
provides an opportunity for cooperative collaboration. Only one
scenario is drilled: Active Shooter. As of 6/12/18, 66 unannounced
drills were conducted State-wide.
By presenting and instructing anti-bullying, anti-violence, and
drug prevention programs, the division is afforded the opportunity to
address several concerns simultaneously. The most obvious benefit is
establishing trust between communities and their schools and law
enforcement officials. Further, these programs provide the State Police
with an avenue to stage a steady and visible deterrence for those who
may pose a threat or intend to inflict harm on our communities and in
our schools. Last, having troopers instruct in the L.E.A.D. program,
demonstrates the State Police's commitment to protecting our youth and
communities from the proliferation of drugs, drug-related crimes, peer-
to-peer/cyber bullying, and violence.
The division has also partnered with the O.H.S.P., in a coordinated
effort in the planning, and active participation in ``Active-Shooter
Exercises.'' These exercises are intended to test our abilities in
responding effectively and efficiently to any hazards and threats to
our communities and schools. Specialized units and personnel are
dedicated from both the Division's Homeland Security and Operations
Branches as they coordinate their responses in these drills. The New
Jersey State Police has looked at best practices on responding to an
active-shooter incident and has just begun rolling out a restructure of
our current protocols.
Field Operations Troopers normally assigned to general police
stations throughout the State, have received additional training,
certifications, and are positioned as school resource troopers for 9
regional high schools. They have the ability to immediately respond to
all hazards and threats, while providing instruction to students on a
variety of topics and lessons at the school administration's request.
The trooper's presence also provides a sense of comfort and deterrence,
while further building public and community trust in law enforcement.
Finally, in an attempt to further bolster school safety and public
trust in law enforcement, the superintendent, Colonel Patrick Callahan,
with support from the Governor and attorney general, has encouraged all
enlisted members to visit schools where the State Police is the sole
provider of law enforcement services. These unannounced visits take
place while members are traversing the State during the course of their
day or en route to and from their primary work assignment. The
randomness of this program also affords the State Police another layer
of security via visible deterrence, while building community relations
and trust with school officials. In order to promote an open line of
communication, all 21 county prosecutors received a letter from Colonel
Callahan informing them of this initiative.
The State Police must establish community relationships and
maintain public trust in order to continue to educate, detect, deter,
prevent, and respond effectively to all hazards and threats.
Collaboration and community trust are essential components that need to
be developed and fostered in order to sustain strong relations with our
community leaders and school administrators. The reality is, the State
Police, or any single law enforcement entity, lacks the personnel to
appropriately address all-hazards and threats independently. The State
Police must approach our training, response, deterrence, and
initiatives from a global perspective, while partnering with community
leaders, school officials, outside law enforcement agencies, and State
Departments and Offices to better serve and protect the citizens of
this State.
The collaborative working relationship between the State Police and
the Governor's office, Office of Attorney General, Office of Homeland
Security, and all of the Departments critical to school safety will
allow New Jersey to strengthen our plans and responses with regard to
school safety.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Major.
Mr. Gerity.
STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY P. GERITY, PRESIDENT, NEW JERSEY
ASSOCIATION OF SCHOOL RESOURCE OFFICERS
Mr. Gerity. Thank you, sir. Chairman Donovan, Ranking
Member Payne, my name is Timothy Gerity. I am president of the
New Jersey Association of School Resource Officers. I am also a
full-time sworn law enforcement officer in Saddle River in
Bergen County. My current assignment is that of Detective
Sergeant, municipal counter-terrorism coordinator and liaison
to the schools. I am also a member of the Bergen County
Prosecutor's Office Cyber Crimes Task Force and School Safety
Task Force.
In January 2002 I was assigned as a school resource officer
to a K-5 elementary, K-12 private, and 9-12 regional high
school. Over the course of my career I have had the opportunity
to serve on numerous committees and task forces at the local,
county, and State-wide level.
One of those working groups which is of particular
importance to my testimony today was the group that authored
the Uniform State Memorandum of Agreement between law
enforcement and education, or the MOA for short. This document,
jointly issued by the New Jersey Department of Law and Public
Safety and Department of Education, serves as a basis or guide
for the interaction between law enforcement and education. That
document has been updated in 1999, 2007, 2011, and 2015.
The purpose of my testimony as president is to speak about
the New Jersey Association of School Resource Officers. In
2001, a new organization was incorporated in New Jersey, NJASRO
for short. It is a not-for-profit 501(c)(3) organization for
school-based law enforcement, school administrators, and school
security safety professionals working as partners to protect
students, school faculty and staff, and the schools they
attend.
Through planning and strategic lobbying, the organization
was successful in having the Safe Schools Resource Officer
School Liaison Training Law passed in 2006. Recognizing the
significant importance of properly training law enforcement
officers, the Police Training Act required the Police Training
Commission, in consultation with the attorney general, to
develop a 40-hour training course for safe schools resource
officer school liaisons.
Similarly, in Title 18 Part A Education, 18A:17-43.1, the
same training course is required for service as a safe schools
liaison to law enforcement.
NJASRO has trained approximately 1,200 class attendees over
the last 10 years. On average, we would hold 4 classes in
police training commission-approved facilities around the
State, with approximately 25 attendees. In 2018, we have
scheduled 8 classes and have capped attendance for logistical
purposes to 40 attendees. Earlier this year we held classes in
Monmouth in Bergen County. For the remainder of the year we
have classes scheduled in Monmouth, Union, Ocean, Essex,
Atlantic, and Morris Counties. We have begun scheduling for
2019 and have already booked Camden County for a January class.
The 5-day class consists of instruction blocks that include
but are not limited to school resource officer roles and
responsibilities, school safety, behavior and risk assessment,
counterterrorism, juvenile law, school searches and seizures,
the Memorandum of Understanding, Title 18 Part A, mentoring,
special needs, and working with the administration. Attendees
must verify their employment with a law enforcement agency or
provide documentation of their employment by a board of
education. Our cadre of instructors includes active-duty law
enforcement, retired law enforcement, and education
representatives.
I turn it back to the dais. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gerity follows:]
Prepared Statement of Timothy P. Gerity
July 9, 2018
My name is Timothy P. Gerity, president of the New Jersey
Association of School Resource Officers (NJASRO). Thank you for taking
time to hear from members of the public regarding the important issue
of school safety.
I am a resident of West Milford, New Jersey in Passaic County. I am
the father of 3 children and a full-time sworn law enforcement officer
with the Saddle River Police Department in Bergen County, New Jersey. I
hold a Master of Administrative Science Degree from Fairleigh Dickinson
University with graduate certificates in Administrative Science and
School Safety and Administration. My current assignment is that of
Detective Sergeant, Municipal Counter Terrorism Coordinator and liaison
to the schools. I am also a member of the Bergen County Prosecutor's
Office Cyber Crimes Task Force and School Safety Task Force.
For the purposes of establishing my background in school safety I'd
like to give a brief history. In 1994 I was assigned as a D.A.R.E
officer to a public and private school. I went on to become a D.A.R.E
mentor. A mentor is an individual who trains fellow officers on how to
deliver certain curriculum in schools. In January 2002 I was assigned
as a school resource officer to a K-5 elementary, K-12 private, and 9-
12 regional high school. Over the course of my career I have had the
opportunity to serve on numerous school safety task forces and
committees. These task forces and committees have been at the local,
county, and State-wide level. I was a Schools Sector Facilities
Subcommittee member of the New Jersey Domestic Security Preparedness
Task Force responsible, in part, for making recommendations that were
reduced to writing for the 2004 ``School Safety Manual Best Practices
Guidelines.'' In 2005, as a representative of NJASRO, I participated in
an initiative that would see every school in New Jersey visited by a
school safety expert. This initiative facilitated the completion, as
part of Best Practices, two separate documents; a Vulnerability
Assessment and a Field Checklist. The field checklist was designed to
audit compliance with selected aspects of school security best
practices. The local use vulnerability assessment was designed to
identify vulnerabilities within the school and generate recommendations
to reduce the risks.
I still remain active and involved with committees and task forces
that continue to evolve as administrations change and the nature of
threats and incidents also change. In the interest of brevity, I will
not go in depth on all of my involvement on all of these initiatives
however the work product of a particular working group of which I was a
participant of bears significant relevance to this testimony. In 1988
the Uniform State Memorandum of Agreement Between Law Enforcement and
Education (MOA) was jointly issued by the New Jersey Department of Law
and Public Safety and the Department of Education. This document
continues to serve as a basis or guide for the interaction between law
enforcement and education. The MOA addresses emerging issues in schools
whether they are related to weapons, school safety, harassment,
intimidation, and bullying or technology. It also addresses the sharing
of information between education and law enforcement as well as law
enforcement conducting operations on school grounds. Undergoing
consistent updates, the document serves as a relevant and important
piece of reference material for not only those who function within the
school environment but also for those who create and execute school
safety and security plans. The MOA was updated in 1992, 1999, 2007,
2011, and 2015 by a committee of various representatives from sectors
who have interest in both public and private educational institutions.
I was a member of this working group up until 2011 but professional
demands limited my availability. It is my goal to return as a seated
member of this working group.
The purpose of my testimony, as president, is to speak about the
New Jersey Association of School Resource Officers. In November 2001, a
new organization was incorporated in New Jersey. The New Jersey
Association of School Resource Officers (NJASRO) is a not-for profit
501(c)(3) organization. NJASRO is for school-based law enforcement
officers, school administrators, and school security/safety
professionals working as partners to protect students, school faculty
and staff and the schools they attend. The true and tested strength in
the School Resource Officer program is that it is much more than a
curriculum. The SRO Concept can easily be adapted to the needs of ANY
community, desiring safe schools, and effective community partnerships.
The Mission Statement of the organization was and still is to:
``Provide a network of communications and training for New Jersey's
School Resource Officers, Youth services personnel, School
administrators, and Educators; Distribute and share advice, and
coordinate information on the value of teaching elementary, middle,
junior high, and high school students on the principles of good
citizenship and community responsibility; Reduce school violence and
drug abuse by enforcing violations of the law occurring on school
property; Introduce programs that promote and enhance acceptable social
behavior.''
Through planning and strategic lobbying the organization was
successful in having the Safe Schools Resource Officer/School Liaison
Training Law passed in 2006. (Pub. L. 2005, c.276 (C.52:17B-71.8 et
al.) ) Recognizing the significant importance of properly training law
enforcement officers; the Police Training Act required the Police
Training Commission in consultation with the Attorney General, to
develop a 40-hour training course for safe schools resource officers/
school liaisons. Similarly in Title 18A Education--18A:17-43.1 the same
training course is required for service as safe schools resource
officer or liaison to law enforcement.
`` . . . board of education shall not assign a safe schools resource
officer to a public school unless that individual first completes the
safe schools resource officer training course.''
`` . . . board of education shall not assign an employee to serve as a
school liaison to law enforcement unless that individual first
completes the safe schools resource officer training course.''
A Safe Schools Resource Officer/School Liaison Training Program
provided by NJASRO was found to meet all statutory training
requirements and was implemented in police academies throughout the
State. This training supports Section 1.8 of the State-wide Memorandum
of Understanding.
``It is recognized and agreed that without on-going active
communication and cooperation among school and law enforcement
officials the goals of this Agreement cannot be achieved. For this
reason, Article 2 of this Agreement requires that law enforcement
agencies and school districts designate one or more liaisons.''
It is important to note that a safe and secure school environment
requires the fostering of a supportive and nurturing learning
environment, as well as protection from outside/inside threats. School
Resource Officers, Class III Specials, school administrators,
educators, and school safety professionals, properly trained, pursuant
to C. 52:17 B-71.8, help to ensure that our children will learn in the
most positive and constructive school environment possible.
It is also important to note that while everyone involved in the
process wanted to make schools safer for students and employees, there
was also a concern that ``over policing'' in schools would have an
impact on the learning environment of schools and negatively affect
school culture. In 2009, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)
issued a White Paper: ``Policing in Schools, Developing a Governance
Document for School Resource Officers in K-12 Schools.'' In it, the
ACLU highlighted the importance of written guidelines for an SRO
program and the need for support and training for the SRO to understand
their role within the school and the rights and needs of the children
they would serve. Without that understanding, the SRO might create an
``adversarial environment that pushes students, particularly at-risk
students, out of school rather than engaging them in a positive
educational environment.'' The ACLU recommended that the SRO receive at
least 40 hours of training at a minimum, to include topics such as
adolescent development and psychology, working with special needs
children, and cultural competency. NJASRO's Safe Schools Resource
Officers/School Liaison Training pre-dates and meets the criteria.
School resource officers (``SRO'') are ``police officers'' who have
extensive training, experience with the juvenile justice system, and
community policing in schools. They are role models, mentors, and act
as a liaison between the police department, school administrators, and
the local community. In many cases, SROs also teach classes such as the
DARE curriculum to elementary students and play a vital role, on all
levels, in identifying at-risk students, cases of abuse, intervene in
drug and alcohol use and provide support for students who feel they
have no one to turn to. SROs also provide law-related education to high
school students in driver's education and business-related classes,
among other courses.
While most would agree that a full-time police officer who is also
a school resource officer is the ideal solution, this option is out of
reach to many New Jersey districts because of budgetary restrictions. A
full-time officer who is an SRO can cost in excess of $100,000, per
year, per officer, including salary and benefits. Also, a full-time
officer can be ordered to respond to police matters outside of schools
causing them to leave school grounds during the school day. As a
compromise to the desire to have full-time SROs in schools, balanced
against the significant cost and the 2 percent budget cap for New
Jersey public schools, the legislature offered a solution in 2016.
NJASRO played a substantial role in providing pertinent information and
proposing legislative language to find a solution to provide high-
quality and cost-effective safety measures for schools. With the
signing of Senate Bill 86, the creation of Special Law Enforcement
Officer--Class III (``SLEO Class III'') a 2015 legislative Task Force
recommendation was signed into law.
The creation of the SLEO Class III now allows school districts to
have a more affordable option to enhance school security and increase
the number of highly-trained SROs in New Jersey Schools. SLEO Class III
officers are typically paid hourly and do not receive health and
retirement benefits for this position. The Class III officer is
generally hired by the chief of police of the local police department
and is in his/her chain of command. Payment for these positions can be
paid by the board of education, the municipality or on a fee-sharing
basis. It is important for all sides involved from the superintendent
of schools, mayor, and police chief to have an open and productive line
of communication on this topic.
However, even with the current proliferation of Class III officers,
who are required to attend the Safe Schools Resource Officer/School
Liaison training, the financial struggle remains the same for some
districts. In the late 1990's the COPS Office, Community Oriented
Policing Services, under the United States Department of Justice,
offered a 4-year SRO grant program. The grant paid the costs of
assigning an officer to the schools for the first 3 years. The 4th year
was split between the community and the education entity. This is truly
where assigning police officers to schools gained traction in New
Jersey and became an accepted Community Policing Model. Unfortunately,
after its seminal introduction, the grant was not renewed. In the past
few years there has been some very limited, competitive grant
opportunities available to offset the costs of assigning an SRO to
schools. However, they have been few and far in between. Current
Federal grant opportunities, in the school safety arena, support
training programs, development of initiatives or lean toward installing
technology. There are very few, if any, that financially support
districts in putting ``boots on the ground.'' I'm hopeful that, through
my testimony, there comes a renewed opportunity through State or
Federal grants to help local districts pay for full-time SRO's, which
by definition includes Class III Officers.
NJASRO has trained approximately 1,200 class attendees over the
last 10 years. On average we would hold 4 classes at Police Training
Commission-approved facilities around the State with approximately 25
attendees. In 2018 we've scheduled 8 classes and have capped
attendance, for logistical purposes, to 40 attendees. Earlier this year
we held classes in Monmouth County and Bergen County. For the remainder
of the year we have classes scheduled in Monmouth, Union, Ocean, Essex,
Atlantic, and Morris Counties. We've begun scheduling for 2019 and have
already booked Camden County for a January class. The 5-day class
consists of instruction blocks that include, but are not limited to,
SRO roles and responsibilities, school safety, behavior and risk
assessment, counterterrorism, juvenile law, school searches and
seizures, Memorandum of Understanding, Title 18 A, mentoring, special
needs and working with the administration. Attendees must verify their
employment with a law enforcement agency or provide documentation of
their employment by a Board of Education. Our cadre of instructors
include active-duty law enforcement, retired law enforcement and
education representatives.
Security and vigilance has become standard practice in our
Government buildings, airports, and other high-profile locations as
part of our Nation's homeland security efforts. This has resulted in
the dismantling of numerous terror plots and created an environment
where terror attacks are more difficult to execute at these locations.
In light of increased security measures at other locations, terror
attacks on soft targets involving innocent civilians and often children
are becoming an increasingly more desirable target for attacks. If
schools are to be considered soft targets then planning teams must
remain diligent and open-minded as they consider emerging threats. This
is a complicated narrative as current trends dictate that emergency and
crisis plans must be expanded to include the threats from Home-Grown
Violent Extremists (HGVE's) and the use of encrypted social media by
terrorist networks. This places a tremendous burden on school safety
planners as the luxury of planning and preparing for an attack
orchestrated by radical extremist groups outside the United States, has
shifted to where the planning and preparation must include threats
originating from those individuals who are currently members of our
student population. While successful threat assessments are vital to
preventing the next school shooting the assessments must now address
those individuals who face potential radicalization as a result of
perceived injustices, anger, and isolation. The shift in planning must
overcome the belief that terror attacks will only come from outside
sources.
Given these challenges facing school safety planners an assessment
must be made in how plans are drafted and executed. School
administrators must be made aware of common radicalization techniques
affecting student populations and be given effective programs to
challenge on-line radicalization messaging. They must be aware of and
be able to identify behavioral indicators and provide assistance to
youth who are struggling to adjust within their community. This in turn
may help children cope with their feelings of isolation, anger, and
depression and reduce the opportunity for extremists to exploit these
feelings for recruitment.
There are ample opportunities to assist youth and many techniques
are already in use as schools look to prevent bias incidents and
bullying from occurring. Schools could convene students from varying
cultural backgrounds to promote cultural understanding and provide
educational opportunities on aspects of different cultures. They could
promote open discussions with the assistance of the community and
religious centers about conflicts and ways that violent extremists may
use religion to justify their actions. These few improvements in
training, educating, and providing resources may greatly reduce the
likelihood of a terror attack from within on a U.S. school.
New Jersey has long recognized the importance and value of a safe
and secure school environment. It has also recognized that safety and
security must be in balance with a school's main function which is to
educate our children. School violence is a complex issue that can
result in a never-ending debate amongst scholars in all fields of
study. The common agreeable element amongst those who debate the topic
is the fact we, as a society, need to do more to protect the school
population. If we look at the history of initiatives in New Jersey,
from 1988 to 2018 we see guides, task force creations, documents,
manuals, electronic databases, plans, codes, directives,
recommendations, laws, minimum requirements, and reports. NJASRO is
proud to have participated in the latest State-wide school safety
initiative. Just last week the New Jersey Department of Education held
its School Safety Specialist Certification Training. I was proud to
write the curriculum for and present on the topic of Law Enforcement
and Education Partnerships. All of the initiatives, recognized or
unrecognized, are the result of the due diligence in the areas of
school safety and security by the countless members of various State
agencies, task forces, working groups, and committees.
While continued public meetings and community discussion are
valuable platforms, true change will only come through action. Adequate
resources also need to be allocated to enable schools to pursue these
measures, and mechanisms need to be put in place to ensure compliance.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Gerity.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Reilly.
STATEMENT OF MICHAEL REILLY, PRESIDENT, COMMUNITY EDUCATION
COUNCIL 31, STATEN ISLAND, NEW YORK
Mr. Reilly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Donovan and Ranking
Member Payne, for inviting me to testify today.
One of the most frightening things a parent can hear is
that there is an emergency incident at their child's school. We
feel vulnerable, and our first thought is to immediately go to
the school. Parents and guardians should not respond to the
school unless they receive official notification to do so. If a
school has activated a shelter-in--the incident is in close
proximity but outside the school building--or a hard lockdown--
incident is in the actual school building--parents and all non-
emergency personnel will not be allowed into the building, and
all staff and students will not be allowed to leave the
building without authorization from emergency responders.
An increase in vehicles and people at the school can
interfere with emergency personnel responding to the incident.
The first priority is to have a clear pathway for emergency
responders to ensure everyone's safety.
Communication. There are certain circumstances when the
NYPD and the DOE will limit what details are released. Although
that may seem inappropriate, there is a legal reason. If
preliminary details are included in a community notification
and later determined to be inaccurate, that may jeopardize a
criminal case. All paperwork and communications generated by
the NYPD and the DOE are evidence and, as such, required to be
handed over to a defendant's attorney. For instance, if a
community notification lists a specific license plate, color,
make, and model of a vehicle used in a crime, and then it is
determined that the initial information provided was incorrect,
the suspect's defense attorney could use the incorrect
information to possibly raise a reasonable doubt, limiting the
chances of a conviction in a case.
When an incident happens, word can travel like the
telephone game. With today's technology it spreads faster, with
even greater twists and embellishments. It is understandable
that, in many cases, schools can't release specific details
about an incident. That can change when the incident is deemed
under control. Schools can and should communicate with families
to address any safety concerns they may have. An email, letter,
or robo-call acknowledging an incident occurred and reassuring
that safety protocols were implemented can help alleviate
community concerns.
Providing notification to the school community should be a
crucial part of a school's emergency response system.
Communication builds trust and collaboration. Lack of
communication leads to mistrust and gives the illusion that
nothing is being done. That can be extremely damaging to a
school community.
It is also important to note that New York Education Law
and the New York State Education Department mandate each public
school to conduct at least 8 evacuation/fire drills and 4
shelter-in/lockdown drills each year.
New York City DOE school safety, emergency readiness. A
vital component of emergency readiness within the DOE is the
School Safety Plan. As part of the Safety Plan, schools/
campuses must identify individual staff members to become
Building Response Team members. In campus settings, each school
must have one representative on the BRT. The BRT members are
hand-selected by the principal to manage all school-related
emergencies until the first responders arrive. In addition, all
schools implement General Response Protocols, GRP, which
outline the initial actions to be taken if an incident requires
evacuation, shelter-in, or a lockdown. These actions are based
on the use of common language to initiate the measures all
school communities will take in a variety of incidents.
All staff and students receive training in the GRP, and
drills are conducted at various times throughout the school
year. Lessons have been designed for different grade levels so
that the information is delivered to students without causing
unnecessary alarm.
Information about New York City DOE General Response
Protocols is provided to parents on the schools.nyc.gov website
to help guide conversations with their children about emergency
readiness in schools.
Community Education Council 31 has been advocating for
greater security protocols for several years. In 2012, CEC 31
introduced a proposal titled ``Comprehensive School Safety and
Security,'' which included locking all doors, installing
security cameras at main entrances to school buildings,
improving School Building Response Team training, overhauling
school public address systems, and incorporating retired police
officers as special patrolmen to supplement school security.
After discussing the proposal with our local, State, and
Federal representatives, the plan was introduced in State
legislation and signed into law by Governor Andrew Cuomo in
2014. The laws authorized the New York State Education
Department to provide grant opportunities to schools to improve
infrastructure security--replacing doors, installing cameras
and other technology for school buildings--mandating increased
training for school emergency response teams and more frequent
security drills. The law also allows school districts to hire
retired police officers as school resource officers. In
addition, in the same time period, DOJ authorized the use of
civilian clothes school resource officers, which aligned with
the CEC 31 plan. Until then, the Federal grant opportunity only
applied to uniformed school resource officers.
After the Sandy Hook tragedy, a principal on Staten Island
was proactive and locked the front door. Unfortunately, the
school safety agent assigned to the school filed a grievance,
claiming it wasn't in their job description to get up each time
someone knocked to open the door. These types of shortfalls in
security can and must be adjusted to ensure the safety and
security of our schools.
Some have raised concerns that locking the front door may
hinder emergency responders because they may not be able to
access the building as quickly as possible. I believe the use
of a key fob, pass key, or another similar technological access
device could be utilized, allowing immediate entry for
emergency responders. The FDNY has a similar system where they
utilize a master key for elevator access across the city.
It is important to remember that it is impossible to
prevent all incidents, but we must continually try our best to
limit the impact if an emergency occurs.
CEC 31 believes there are several other protocols and
supplemental supports that can help school communities.
Improving communication between agencies would be beneficial.
The NYPD and DOE do a tremendous job protecting our schools,
but like everything else, there is always room for improvement.
Having a regional Fusion Center model to monitor and track
incidents and threats to schools could streamline information
sharing to mitigate the possibility of missing an important
trend or piece of information.
Additionally, providing training and potential requirements
at the Federal level for school districts to report incidents
of bullying or threats, as well as the disposition of all
incident investigations, could help identify students who may
need additional support and/or counseling. Adding additional
counselors to our schools would be a proactive step, but as I
am sure you are aware, that requires funding.
Last, after a recent incident at a high school in Staten
Island involving a potential threat with a firearm, we held a
safety meeting with our elected officials as well as the DOE
and NYPD. We spoke about the impact to the response caused by
parents and caregivers rushing to the school at the onset of
the emergency situation.
During that meeting we discussed incorporating a family
staging area in school safety plans. This staging area would be
a safe distance away from each school building. The school
would send an email, family/community notification, that would
include the staging location, which would be positioned a safe
distance from the school building. Having a staging area could
reduce potential obstacles emergency responders may encounter,
increasing response times and saving lives. A staging area
would allow emergency responders to focus resources on the
initial incident and not redirect personnel for crowd control
at the immediate incident scene.
If possible, would DHS consider incorporating a parent/
community video and training piece in the Emergency Management
Institute Independent Study Program, suggesting schools
incorporate a staging area and the importance for parents and
other community members to wait for a notification and only
respond to officially designated staging areas?
I thank you for your time and allowing me to testify, and I
yield back to the Chair. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reilly follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Reilly
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and Honorable Members. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today.
One of the most frightening things a parent can hear is that there
is an emergency incident at their child's school. We feel vulnerable
and our first thought is to immediately go to the school.
Parents and guardians should NOT respond to the school unless they
receive official notification to do so.
If a school has activated a Shelter-In (the incident is in close
proximity but outside the school building) or a Hard Lockdown (incident
is in the actual school building) parents and all non-emergency
personnel will NOT be allowed into the building and all staff and
students will NOT be allowed to leave the building without
authorization from emergency responders.
An increase in vehicles and people at the school can interfere with
emergency personnel responding to the incident. The first priority is
to have a clear pathway for emergency responders to ensure everyone's
safety.
communication
There are certain circumstances when the NYPD and DOE will limit
what details are released. Although that may seem inappropriate, there
is a legal reason. If preliminary details are included in a community
notification and later determined to be inaccurate, that may jeopardize
a criminal case. All paperwork and communications generated by the NYPD
and DOE are evidence, and as such, required to be handed over to a
defendant's attorney.
For instance; if a community notification lists a specific license
plate, color, make, and model of a vehicle used in a crime and then it
is determined that the initial information provided was incorrect, the
suspect's defense attorney could use the incorrect information to
possibly raise a reasonable doubt, limiting the chances of a conviction
in a case.
When an incident happens, word can travel like the telephone game.
With today's technology, it spreads faster with even greater twists and
embellishments. It is understandable that, in many cases, schools can't
release specific details about an incident. That can change when the
incident is deemed under control. Schools can and should communicate
with families to address any safety concerns they may have. An email,
letter, or robo-call acknowledging an incident occurred and reassuring
that safety protocols were implemented can help alleviate community
concerns.
Providing notification to the school community should be a crucial
part of a school's emergency response system. Communication builds
trust and collaboration. Lack of communication leads to mistrust, and
gives the illusion that nothing is being done. That can be extremely
damaging to a school community.
It is also important to note that New York Education Law and the
New York State Education Department mandate each public school to
conduct at least 8 evacuation/fire drills and 4 shelter-in/lockdown
drills each year.
nyc doe school safety: emergency readiness
``A vital component of emergency readiness within the DOE is the
School Safety Plan (SSP). As part of the Safety Plan, schools/campuses
must identify individual staff members to become Building Response Team
members (BRT). In campus settings, each school must have one
representative on the BRT. The BRT members are hand selected by the
Principal to manage all school-related emergencies until the first
responders arrive. In addition, all schools implement General Response
Protocols (GRP), which outline the initial actions to be taken if an
incident requires Evacuation, Shelter-In, or a Lockdown. These actions
are based on the use of common language to initiate the measures all
school communities will take in a variety of incidents.
``All staff and students receive training in the GRP and drills are
conducted at various times throughout the school year. Lessons have
been designed for different grade levels so that the information is
delivered to students without causing unnecessary alarm.''
Information about NYC DOE General Response Protocols is provided to
parents on the schools.nyc.gov website to help guide conversations with
their children about emergency readiness in schools.
Community Education Council 31 has been advocating for greater
security protocols for several years. In 2012 CEC 31 introduced a
proposal--titled Comprehensive School Safety and Security--which
included: Locking all doors; installing security cameras at main
entrances to school buildings; improving School Building Response Team
training; overhauling School Public Address systems, and incorporating
retired police officers as special patrolmen to supplement school
security.
After discussing the proposal with our local, State, and Federal
representatives the plan was introduced in State legislation and signed
into law by Governor Andrew Cuomo in 2014. The laws authorized the NYS
Education Department to provide grant opportunities to schools to
improve infrastructure security (i.e. replacing doors, installing
cameras, and other technology) for school buildings, mandating
increased training for school emergency response teams, and more
frequent security drills. The law also allows school districts to hire
retired police officers as School Resource Officers. In addition, in
the same time period, DOJ authorized the use of civilian clothes school
resource officers, which aligned with the CEC 31 plan. Until then, the
Federal grant opportunity only applied to uniformed school resource
officers.
After the Sandy Hook tragedy, a principal on Staten Island was
proactive and locked the front door. Unfortunately, the school safety
agent assigned to the school filed a grievance, claiming it wasn't in
their job description to get up each time someone knocked to open the
door. These types of shortfalls in security can and must be adjusted to
ensure the safety and security of our schools.
Some have raised concerns that locking the front door may hinder
emergency responders because they may not be able to access the
building as quickly as possible. I believe the use of a ``Key Fob''
pass key or another similar technological access device could be
utilized, allowing immediate entry for emergency responders. The FDNY
has a similar system where they utilize a ``Master Key'' for elevator
access across the city.
It is important to remember that it is impossible to prevent all
incidents, but we must continually try our best to limit the impact if
an emergency occurs.
CEC 31 believes there are several other protocols and supplemental
supports that can help school communities. Improving communication
between agencies would be beneficial. The NYPD and DOE do a tremendous
job protecting our schools, but like everything else there is always
room for improvement. Having a regional ``Fusion Center'' model to
monitor and track incidents and threats to schools could streamline
information sharing to mitigate the possibility of missing an important
trend or piece of information.
Additionally, providing training and potential requirements at the
Federal level for school districts to report incidents of bullying,
threats, etc. as well as the disposition of all incident investigations
could help identify students who may need additional support and/or
counseling. Adding additional counselors to our schools would be a
proactive step, but as I am sure you are aware that requires funding.
Last, after a recent incident at a high school involving a
potential threat with a firearm, we held a safety meeting with our
elected officials as well as the DOE and NYPD. We spoke about the
impact to the response caused by parents and caregivers rushing to the
school at the onset of the emergency situation.
During that meeting we discussed incorporating a family staging
area in school safety plans. This staging area would be a safe distance
away from each school building. The school would send an initial
family/community notification that would include the staging location,
which would be positioned a safe distance from the school building.
Having a staging area would could reduce potential obstacles emergency
responders may encounter, increasing response times and saving lives. A
staging area would allow emergency responders to focus resources on the
initial incident and not redirect personnel for crowd control at the
immediate incident scene.
If possible, would DHS consider incorporating a parent/community
video and training piece in the Emergency Management Institute
Independent Study program, suggesting schools incorporate a staging
area and the importance for parents and other community members to wait
for a notification and only respond to officially designated staging
areas?
I thank you for your time and consideration and the opportunity to
discuss the challenges we face with school security.
Attachment 1.--Community Education Council District 31
March 9, 2011
The following resolution was presented to the public at the
Community Education Council 31 (CEC 31) Calendar Meeting held on March
7, 2011 at the Petrides Educational Complex, Staten Island, New York. A
vote was taken and the resolution approved unanimously by voice-vote of
the CEC members present, as reflected in the Minutes.
RESOLUTION NO. 65--RECOMMENDATION TO IMPLEMENT A CITY-WIDE PUBLIC
ADDRESS/FIRE ALARM SYSTEM REPLACEMENT PROGRAM IN NEW YORK CITY
SCHOOL FACILITIES
WHEREAS, many of the New York City public schools' Public Address/
Fire Alarm systems are not adequate for today's ever-increasing demands
for school safety; and
WHEREAS, numerous school administrators have requested overhauls of
Public Address/Fire Alarm systems through Capital Plan Amendment
requests; and
WHEREAS, many school administrators have reported deficiencies of
the Public Address/Fire Alarm systems during critical and non-critical
situations; and
WHEREAS, enhancement and/or replacement of such emergency equipment
will improve each school administrator's ability to notify staff,
deploy and coordinate resources and effectively alleviate emergencies
that may occur at a New York City public school facility; and
WHEREAS, The Public Address/Fire Alarm Replacement Program can be
funded by reducing each district's yearly Capital Plan fiscal
allocations by 5 percent to 10 percent. The resulting funds can be
allotted for 3 or 4 schools in each district to have a Public Address/
Fire Alarm system retrofit yearly; therefore
BE IT RESOLVED, that Community Education Council 31 requests the
NYC Department of Education, Division of School Facilities and the NYC
School Construction Authority implement a city-wide Public Address/Fire
Alarm System Replacement Program similar to the Boiler Replacement
Program that currently exists in the Capital Plan.
Explanation: In this ever-changing environment for school safety,
it is imperative to have an emergency notification system that
consistently operates effectively. It is extremely important to provide
quick communication for emergencies or other important information from
both a central location and an individual classroom. The Public
Address/Fire Alarm Enhancement/Replacement Program will provide for an
improved fire and life safety program for each New York City public
school.
APPROVED UNANIMOUSLY by roll call vote of all members present: 9
YES; 0 NO (Absent for vote: Chadwick).
PASSED and ADOPTED this 7th Day of March, 2011.
Kathy Baldassano,
Administrative Assistant, CEC 31.
Attachment 2.--Community Education Council District 31
January 8, 2013
The following resolution was presented to the public at the
Community Education Council 31 (CEC 31) Calendar Meeting held on
January 7, 2013 at the Petrides Complex, Staten Island, New York. A
vote was taken and the resolution approved by the CEC members present,
as reflected in the Minutes.
RESOLUTION NO. 76--CEC 31 RECOMMENDS THAT DOE INSTALLS ``BUZZER'' ENTRY
SYSTEMS WITH VIDEO AND ``PANIC BUTTONS'' AT MAIN ENTRANCES TO
NYC PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND CONSIDERS IMPLEMENTING RETIRED
NYPD POLICE OFFICERS TO SUPPLEMENT SCHOOL SECURITY PERSONNEL
WHEREAS, recent concerns have been raised by Council members,
parents, teachers, students, law enforcement personnel, education
officials and advocates regarding security in NYC public schools; and
WHEREAS, current public school security consists of unarmed,
uniformed New York Police Department (NYPD) school safety agents, with
most NYC elementary schools having only one (1) school safety agent
assigned; and
WHEREAS, current public school entry procedures allow individuals
to enter school buildings through an unlocked door at the main
entrance, with the first point of visitor verification at the security
desk--located beyond the entrance, inside the school building--where
visitors are required to show identification; and
WHEREAS, Community Education Council 31 (CEC 31) believes that
school safety agents should have the opportunity to view a person
requesting entry before the visitor gains access to any part of the
building; and
WHEREAS, CEC 31 believes a ``buzzer'' entry system with video
camera, video capture for future recognition and ``panic buttons''
directly linked to NYPD dispatchers would offer an additional layer of
security for our schools and provide valuable lead-time to alert
emergency personnel of a potential critical incident; therefore
BE IT RESOLVED that CEC 31 requests that the Department of
Education (DOE) installs ``buzzer'' entry systems with video camera,
video capture and ``panic buttons'' in NYC public school buildings; and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that CEC 31 requests that the NYPD and the
DOE consider implementation of the following proposal designating
retired NYPD police officers as ``special patrolmen'' to supplement
current security personnel in NYC public schools.
A Proposal for the NYPD and DOE to Enhance Security in NYC Public
School Buildings:
Recent events have raised concerns about security in schools
throughout the Nation. Several school districts across the country have
implemented the use of armed security guards to minimize the threat of
potential shootings in schools.
CEC 31's proposal would allow the NYC Department of Education the
ability to hire retired NYC police officers as armed ``special
patrolmen''. These ``special patrolmen'' will specifically be assigned
to enhance school security against potentially violent and armed
threats and will NOT be involved in routine school disciplinary
matters. These special patrolmen will have peace officer status.
The New York City Police Commissioner has the authority to
designate qualified individuals as ``Special Patrolmen'' under the New
York City Administrative Code, Section 14-106 (e) which states that
``the NYC Police Commissioner under the application by any agency or
public authority may appoint special patrolman for duty performed
anywhere in the city for the agency or public authority.''
This initiative will require hiring approximately 300-500 retired
NYC police officers, who are licensed to carry concealed firearms. The
NYC Department of Education will grant, in writing, authorization for
these special patrolmen to carry concealed firearms on school property.
These retired officers will fall under the direct supervision of the
NYPD School Safety Division. The retired police officers will be
assigned on a rotating basis to schools throughout New York City. (The
program could be expanded to assign a ``special patrolman'' to every
NYC public school building--approximately 1,000 school buildings.)
Suggested Rules and Regulations for the Program:
Administrative Code section 14-106 mandates that the special
patrolmen MUST comply with the orders of the NYPD Commissioner
and the rules of the New York City Police Department.
The NYC Department of Education will pay the special
patrolmen as an independent contract employee via a 1099. This
payment system is similar to the Off-Duty Employment Program
that currently exists for active NYPD members.
Retired NYC police officers assigned as special patrolmen to
the Department of Education will be required to file a 211 or
212 pension waiver, if necessary.
APPROVED by roll-call vote: 8-1 (8 Yes; 1 No; not present for vote:
Whitfield)
PASSED and ADOPTED this 7th Day of January, 2013.
Kathy Baldassano,
Administrative Assistant, CEC 31.
(Addendum letter attached.)
ADDENDUM TO CEC 31 RESOLUTION NO. 76
In addition to Resolution No. 76 which CEC 31 approved on January
7, 2013, we respectfully request that the DOE implement a policy of
practice, procedure and training that further enhances existing
policies established by schools to respond to emergency events.
Specifically, CEC 31 requests:
That the DOE implement a standardized plan that all schools
follow, regardless of a school's location or CFN network, which
will ensure a proper response to all types of emergency
situations in any school.
That the DOE ensure that each and every school is
appropriately training their staff, faculty, and students and
all responders within the school's established safety response
plan.
That the DOE regularly ensures, with the guidance of trained
professionals, that each and every school has a consistent plan
which is frequently updated and that the schools providing age-
appropriate drills & training on the approved plans on a
regular basis.
Further, and of utmost importance, that the DOE immediately ensure
that each and every one of the schools is equipped with a working
public address system and alarm/fire alarm system and that any other
equipment that is a required part of a schools response to dangerous
situations is updated and continuously checked to ensure that it is in
proper working order.
While the DOE insists that all of its schools have emergency
reaction plans, such as Building Response Teams (BRTs), it is
imperative that there be uniformity in the training of those who run
the response protocols throughout the city. All BRT members must be
uniformly trained on what, where, and when to do their tasks, no matter
in which borough or district they are located.
DOE's supervision of a standardized safety plan and consistent
checks that these plans are in place, trained upon and followed, will
ensure that everyone involved in reacting to an emergency does so and
that all safeguards and tools to implement them are always in place.
Submitted on behalf of the Council Members of CEC 31,
Peter J. Calandrella.
Attachment 3.--Community Education Council District 31
April 11, 2014
The following resolution was presented to the public at the
Community Education Council 31 (CEC 31) Calendar Meeting held on April
7, 2014 at Paulo Intermediate School (IS 75), Staten Island, New York.
A vote was taken and the resolution approved unanimously by the CEC
members present, as reflected in the Minutes.
RESOLUTION NO. 83--CEC 31 REQUESTS THAT NYC DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
EXPAND THE MONITORING OF STUDENT INCIDENTS IN THE ON-LINE
OCCURRENCE REPORTING SYSTEM TO IDENTIFY REPEATED INCIDENTS OF
BEHAVIOR REQUIRING ADDITIONAL SUPPORT OR INTERVENTION
WHEREAS, The NYC Department of Education Office of Safety and Youth
Development maintains the On-line Occurrence Reporting System (OORS)
for incidents involving individual students such as bullying,
harassment or fighting, etc.; and
WHEREAS, Chancellor's Regulation A-832 requires school principals
to document and investigate incidents in the OORS within 24 hours of
receiving the report; and
WHEREAS, The current data capability of the OORS monitors incidents
involving individual students only within the current school year and
school level; and
WHEREAS, Many incidents involving individual students continue with
the same offender and victim when they advance to the next grade or new
school; and
WHEREAS, Transitions from elementary to middle school reveal the
greatest gap in monitoring incidents, which can defeat establishing a
safe learning environment for all students; and
WHEREAS, Alerting and enabling principals with the OORS to
potential patterns of behavior that stretch across grades and/or
schools will help identify both student victims and offenders; and
WHEREAS, Since the On-line Occurrence Reporting System utilizes
students' Office of Student Information System (OSIS) numbers to ensure
privacy in identifying student victims or offenders, then if OORS
identifies identical OSIS numbers involved in separate or multiple
incidents, patterns of student behavior requiring additional
intervention or support could be identified; therefore be it
RESOLVED, That Community Education Council 31 requests that the NYC
Department of Education expands the monitoring capabilities of the On-
line Occurrence Reporting System at the school level to help promote a
safer and more inclusive learning environment for all students and
school communities.
APPROVED by roll-call vote: 8-0 (8 Yes; 0 No; absent for vote: L.
Timoney)
PASSED and ADOPTED this 7th Day of April, 2014.
Kathy Baldassano.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Reilly.
Because there are five of you, and we only have 5 minutes
each, we might do a second round if we don't get through all of
our questions.
I thank you all for your testimony.
I would just like to ask all of you, if you were here in
the room during the first panel, my question to the panelists
was that I wasn't sure--the report, the General Accounting
Report came out and said that there was some gap between the
Federal resources that are available to all of you, and you
utilizing them, that people might not have been aware of them.
Have you guys gotten to use the Federal resources? Is there
a problem with communication between us, the Federal
Government, and the localities? Have you seen any obstacles in
using the Federal resources that are available to all of you? I
would just open that up to the panel.
Mr. Maples. So, I will begin with the Federal Homeland
Security Grant Program. We work directly with FEMA on all those
initiatives, so we have pretty good communication and certainly
blast that out to our constituency throughout the State of New
Jersey. I think there definitely could be better communication
from some of the Justice and Education programs. As I was
hearing some of those opportunities, I would like the
opportunity to be a megaphone for those throughout the State.
It is something that we are certainly in a position to do with
our partners in Education, State Police, Attorney General's
Office, and that is something we are going to follow up on. I
was actually talking with my chief of staff about that earlier
based off of the commentary we heard.
There is opportunity, I think, from the State and local
level that we have this unique capability to reach directly
into the local governments and education departments, so we
will plan on doing that. We are really going to double down on
our efforts on that.
Mr. Donovan. I was watching you, Jared. When you heard
there was $2 billion available, I saw you writing that down.
Mr. Maples. Yes, you can't miss it.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Donovan. Have the rest of you had any experiences,
whether good or bad, or were you unaware of some of the
resources that were available to you until today?
Mr. Castillo. Yes, sir. If I may, this may be a good chance
to give a shout-out to some of the work that is being done by
our DHS partners. One of the representatives used to work for
Jared before the Feds stole him, but they have been very, very
good in reaching out to us, seeing what we are doing. That has
been working well.
If there is some way to maybe streamline that whole Federal
grant process, that might be helpful, although with the size of
the bureaucracy, that might be kind-of difficult.
In addition to that, if there is any way perhaps to get a
clearinghouse just for those things dealing with school
violence where they could collect data and analyze it and
provide that to all the States, anyone who might have a need
for it, that would be very, very helpful.
Mr. Donovan. Because one of my other questions was going to
be if you have good practices, best practices, how were you
letting other school systems know of your practices that maybe
they could implement, as well? So maybe that clearinghouse that
you spoke of could be a good source.
Major, Mr. Gerity, and Mr. Reilly, do you have any comments
about the Federal resources and how we can make it more
accessible to you?
Ms. Hengemuhle. I think any time money is involved, we all
should know about it, and I did write down that $2 billion was
it? Yes, with a ``B''. I think the State Police is always
looking for Federal grants, State grants, anything to improve
upon our processes right now. So I am going to go back and
follow up on that, and follow up with OHSP as well, because
money helps with a little bit of everything. If we can get it,
we will do everything we can.
Mr. Donovan. It has always been our belief to let the
people on the ground do the work. We should present you with
and offer and support you with the resources to do that work.
Mr. Gerity. It may be to your point and a little beyond the
point. I did hear the COPS Office mentioned earlier, Community
Oriented Policing Services, and if you will bear with me for 1
second, I will be brief.
In the late 1990's, the COPS Office made a 4-year, School
Resource Officer grant program available. Three years was paid
by the grant for the cost of assigning a school resource
officer, which by definition in today's language includes Class
III officers, paid for the grant for the first 3 years, and the
fourth year was split between the education entity and the
community.
After the initial launch of the grant, after the 4 years
expired, the grant was not renewed. So we found ourselves where
we had come up with this terrific community-oriented policing
program, embedded officers who became adjunct faculty members,
very attached, role models, mentors to children, but a lot of
districts loved the program and no one wanted to pay for it or
could afford to pay for it.
So just to bring it full circle, I know there have been
some very limited grant opportunities over the course of the
years, but they are few and far between. Most of the grant
monies that seem to come out, or are development of
initiatives, or lean toward installing technology or training
programs, there are very few, if any, that financially support
districts in putting boots on the ground.
Mr. Donovan. One of the difficulties we have in why people
are discouraged from Federal grants, they usually have a time
limit, and you never know if they are ever going to be renewed,
and 3 or 4 years from now there might be a different issue that
needs to be addressed with those same resources, and we take it
away from one and put it to the other. It is always easier for
the Federal Government to buy hardware for you or help you to
buy the hardware you need rather than the personnel that you
could always use.
Mr. Reilly.
Mr. Reilly. Thanks. Just real quick, Chairman, thank you. I
think one of the issues that we have, especially with New York
City, the largest school district in the country, we have
schools, we have 1,800 schools in 1,400 buildings. So 400 of
our buildings have campuses, so they have a shared school
safety plan.
Part of the problem with grant funding is a lot of times
there is a cap on how many people a district can have. Since
our geographical districts are broken down, like Staten Island
has its own school district but we are a part of the greater
New York City district, we have in Staten Island what would
encompass maybe several towns of school districts. We have 70
schools, and we serve 60,000 students, just K-8. When we
incorporate high school, we are talking 75,000 students. So
sometimes we don't qualify for a grant because it is capped at
a certain amount of population, and that goes both at the
Federal and the State level. The State level, we have seen that
that has happened several times. So maybe if there is a way of
targeting grants for specific areas in school districts, that
may actually help.
Mr. Donovan. Before I yield to my colleague, I just wanted
to let you know that this committee is known to hold fewer
hearings than other committees because we actually take the
information that you give us and do something with it. Don and
I never wanted to have a hearing for the sake of having a
hearing because we are in Congress and that is what you are
supposed to do. So all this information that you are providing
to us is incredibly valuable, and the difficulties or obstacles
that you all are experiencing through this process, we will
take back.
The folks behind us, the great, talented people behind us
are memorializing everything you are saying. We will go back
and work on these issues to try to make this system cleaner,
better, and more efficient for all of you.
I now yield to my colleague, Don Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sitting here listening to the discussion and the surprise
of the $2 billion that we all were surprised to hear about, me
included, goes to what I found since coming to Congress. There
are resources out there, but if you don't know the correct
question to ask the Federal Government, no one really
volunteers the information. They will answer it if you come up
with the right question, but if you don't ask the right
question, nobody volunteers it. So we find out about a billion
dollars today, something you probably all would have liked to
have known a while ago.
But let me just start with Mr. Castillo and Mr. Maples. One
of the things that we saw with the Parkland shooting was how
students really came together and got involved with one voice
to demand something be done to protect them in schools. If
nothing else, we have learned that students want to be at the
table when discussing school safety.
As each of your organizations works to improve school
safety, how do you incorporate feedback from students?
Mr. Maples. I will start, if I could, and just address your
first comment. One method we found in New Jersey that has
helped is the non-profit Security Grant Program. I know New
York, both States have done pretty well over the years. That
has been a pretty good model through the Department of Homeland
Security. FEMA runs that program. As far as getting the funding
out in a coordinated way, if we could replicate that toward
education, that does bring in multi-facets of the Federal
Government involved in that one kind of initiative, and that
includes hardware, sometimes personnel, but hardware, security
assessments, et cetera. So those are toward non-profits, but if
we could incorporate that into an education focus, that could
be helpful as well.
As far as our engagement with the students, we absolutely
put a premium on what the student population is saying. When we
go out and do these active-shooter drills, that is part of the
feedback loop, making sure we understand what they are doing,
how they are doing it, the flow of students. One area we are
also looking to expand into is the technology, whether it be
updating apps on the phone and getting out to them through
technology, incorporating the feedback through social media
networking, making sure they are aware of what we are trying to
do on the State level, but then also to your point of getting
the feedback into what they feel would be more secure, being
able to report the suspicious activity when there are issues.
So that is what we are doing.
Mr. Castillo. Yes, we do take the opportunities. Every time
we go out on an unannounced drill observation, we would mention
to the superintendent--they would often ask of their staff
members and teachers who are along with us on a drill to see
what they say. However, often they will leave out the students,
and we will ask them to try to reach out to the students to
find any type of feedback that they may be able to provide,
because probably many of the students know many of the
vulnerabilities that are in schools, and maybe we just don't
hear about them.
I did have the opportunity to partner with Congressman
Bonnie Watson Coleman in one of her town hall sessions in
Trenton. So any chance that we do get, we will speak to anyone
who will listen, especially with the students. I know OHSP has
been very, very active in trying to find just the right type of
app, because that is the way students are communicating. So
that has our full support on that.
Mr. Payne. Also feedback from teachers and parents as well.
OK. Thank you.
Mr. Maples. Can I add one additional thing, too? As far as
cybersecurity initiatives, we partnered in that with the
overall school security. So we have really tried to do a lot of
outreach through technology programs, STEM, to make sure we are
reaching out to students, educators, and administrators as
well.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Castillo. If I may also add, in addition to that, with
the unannounced drill observations, it was usually just police
officers, members of our office, perhaps a few people from the
State police, as well as the Office of Homeland Preparedness
that would observe what is going on with these drills. But what
we would do is to invite teachers as well for these drills, and
they would take the perspective of the bad guy or gal walking
through those halls, and we could actually see the light go on:
``Oh, this is the reason why we are doing these types of
drills.'' So that has been very helpful, and we are constantly
soliciting that.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Major Hengemuhle, I understand that New Jersey State Police
have begun to conduct regular unannounced visits to schools.
Please explain what has been learned from these exercises, or
are these exercises found to be useful?
Ms. Hengemuhle. So this was something that Colonel Patrick
Callahan put into place in the beginning of February. So the
return on investment, we didn't really get a good feel because
we have only had a few months to do it. What the Colonel wanted
us to do, all members of the division, whether during the day
during work or to and from work, was to go to schools within
our districts, the ones we go to, in uniform, just to have a
presence there to talk to the kids, to talk to the students.
We have gotten very positive feedback on that. But again,
it was only for a small time frame. So I have been in
communication with my Lieutenant Colonel and the Colonel to put
together some formalized training for all of the division so we
are on spot with Department of Education, as well as the Safety
in Schools and Security outreach unit. So when Troopers do go
to these schools, we are all saying the same things. We are
saying what we are teaching to these kids.
So we did get positive feedback from the schools that we
went to. It was unplanned, unannounced, just go in, be a
presence. As of Friday, we had over 2,500 hours put toward this
where Troopers--I don't know the hours per Trooper, but over
2,500 hours from February to the end of the school year.
Mr. Payne. It has been received well? I mean----
Ms. Hengemuhle. Yes, positive feedback from some of the
schools. But again, we are looking into making a division-wide
training so everybody knows what should exactly take place and
that we are relaying the exact same information at each school
within our areas.
Mr. Payne. It has to do with school safety.
Ms. Hengemuhle. Yes.
Mr. Payne. That is what you are going in there for, not any
other----
Ms. Hengemuhle. Visibility and school safety, no other
reasons with this initiative. We go into schools for a lot of
other reasons, but for this initiative it is just to be a
presence, visibility.
Mr. Payne. OK.
Should we do a second round?
Mr. Donovan. Yes.
Just two quick things I wanted to ask. As I said before, we
learn a lot from these hearings. What have we learned from the
tragedies that we have recently had in Texas and in Florida,
and what changes maybe have you guys made in your jurisdictions
learning from those tragedies that we have experienced?
The second question to Mr. Reilly, if you could explain to
us. I read your testimony, and over the weekend I was asking
parents if you heard something happen at your child's school,
what would you do? They said we would go to the school. I knew
that was the wrong answer from reading your testimony. I said
what if there was a staging area somewhere near the school
where you could get all the information, you wouldn't block
emergency vehicles from going, and you will learn everything
about your child's safety and what was happening at the school?
They said we would still go to the school.
So after we answered the first question, I would like you
to elaborate a little bit on how to encourage families to do
what you have suggested, which I think is an amazing
suggestion. But as the father of a 3-year-old, I am thinking I
might go to my kid's school. So if you could elaborate.
But if you could first speak to me about some of the
lessons that we have learned from the tragedies and how we have
implemented maybe some other practices after those.
Mr. Maples. So I will be brief so we can go down the row. I
think one of the biggest pieces that came out post-February
after Texas is a change in mindset. The normal training
scenarios don't always work the same exact way. So the answer
is it may not work in every single situation. So something we
have really tried to adapt with, again in partnership with the
State police, education, the SRO Association, is to make sure
the training is flexible enough to approach as many situations
as could possibly come up to therefore save life. That has
definitely been a big issue for us, and that prevention role
took a real front seat there, getting out ahead of the problem
before it becomes a problem. We have put a huge premium in the
State of New Jersey on doing that.
Again, as the gentleman from New York mentioned, it is
impossible to get out ahead of every one of them, but we are
going to do everything we possibly can to do that, and that is
through a collective approach, again with everybody at this
table plus mental health, children and families, et cetera.
That is something we have really focused on. So it is the
mindset, and then that prevention thing I think that has really
come out from our side and something we are trying to push out
from the State side.
Mr. Castillo. Some of the challenges that we have seen, and
they have been around for a while, probably one of the most
glaring issues is the silos, once again with communication. We
have heard time and time again that information was developed
on this particular student at one time but, for whatever
reason, it wasn't shared. So we think the intelligence
dissemination reports will be a step in the right direction.
We do have very good communication with members of our
partners. Again, if I can go back to that school safety
specialist, pretty much the school resource officers have
understood that we have got to give police officers special
training for when they go into the schools. That big piece that
has been missing has been what are we giving the teachers and
the school administrators in terms of the security perspective.
I think back to teachers and folks working in education are
among the most caring, supportive people I know. They didn't
sign up for the security piece. So I think if we can kind-of
let them know those things that they should consider and give
them that perspective, I think that would be very, very
important as well.
Ms. Hengemuhle. I agree that the communication that we have
with the Department of Education and Homeland Security, we have
looked at best practices with active shooters and, like I said,
we just started rolling out some new protocols in July with the
State Police approach to the active shooter. We would like to
prevent all casualties at schools. I don't know if 100 percent
prevent will happen, but if we can lower them--and what you
said in the beginning, New Jersey is the leading State in
school security, that actually made me feel very good that that
came up today and that that is brought up. It is because of the
collaborative efforts of everybody at this table and everybody
behind us, and with you especially, both of you, that we are
able to do that by coming together and working together.
For me, from the State police, from a training standpoint,
the better we can train, the more that we can train, training
the students, training the teachers, getting everybody educated
could help a little bit in this dilemma right now.
Mr. Gerity. I will echo everyone's comments at the table,
and I think it is demonstrating the collaboration and
cooperation we have here of the individuals sitting in the
different entities represented. I know in our district,
Parkland was a different response in our eyes, where it almost
appears that it is the first time that the students themselves
stepped up and said enough is enough, we are tired of being
sitting ducks. Prior to that, it would be the adult community
that would react, take action, form committees, task forces,
response plans. But this was a little different that the
students stepped up.
So our efforts, and I am sure it is occurring everywhere, I
don't just speak individually, that we are including students
in our safety teams, our committees. Every time we meet, we
bring students in, and we actively engage with students, and
there is a sharing of information between education and law
enforcement, so protecting students' records. The school
administrators will proactively reach out and look at that
student's involvement in the school community. If it appears
that they are not involved in the school in some way, shape, or
form, it may be because they are involved in some outside
interest, but it is a method of behavioral assessment, if you
will, to see why that student is not engaged. That may be, as
you read numerous documentation, an indicator or a flag that
there are issues there. So we are involving students.
Mr. Reilly. Can I just touch on the first question first?
Mr. Gerity just said about student records and safeguarding
their information, of course, and making sure that we don't
give out information. Back in 2014, the Community Education
Council, I wrote a resolution to the New York City DOE. They
have an on-line occurrence reporting system. That is how they
keep track of all the incidents in their schools. Whether it is
an injury, whether it is a bullying incident, whether it is
someone just fell down the stairs, every incident gets reported
like that.
Now, one of the things that I asked them to do is they
expunge those basically at the completion of the school year,
and one of the shortfalls that I see with that is it is not
just identifying, for lack of a better word, the suspect
student that is committing a harassment or a bullying, but it
is also doing a disservice to our victims, because when we
don't allow that information to be shared with the progressive
grade when they move up and the other teachers and other
counselors in that grade to support that victim, or even the
person that we will call the bully, for lack of a better word,
the actor, we miss the opportunity to provide support or
guidance.
It doesn't necessarily mean that it is punitive. It is
support that is actually going to make them more well-rounded.
So if we get the opportunity to share that information going
on, and if we don't do it, we may miss an incident where it
happened in 3rd grade between two students and they meet up
again in 6th grade, and now we had the opportunity to stop a
future incident between them but we missed that because of the
communication piece and fostering that information.
Touching on point No. 2, how I try to get the message out
about parents not rushing up to the school and other community
members until they are told, I try to tell everybody I run
into, I try to speak about it everywhere I go. I volunteer. I
have been doing this for the past several years, giving
internet safety and cyber bullying assemblies and parent
workshops and staff professional development.
I lead with talking about school safety, school security. I
have been on NY1 talking about school security. The first thing
I talk about is don't rush up to the school. In my prior life,
before becoming a professional volunteer in the schools, I was
a lieutenant in the New York City Police Department. So I
understand how those seconds getting to an incident can be
deadly, and the more time we save in the fastest direction to
the incident will save lives, and that is how I do it.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question for the entire panel in terms of the gun
reform that we have just seen passed in New Jersey. We just
passed a series of gun reform laws, making New Jersey the
leader on this issue. Do you believe that the impact of this
legislation--what do you believe the impact of this legislation
will be on school security?
Mr. Maples. One other important piece to this is the Crime
Gun Information Sharing piece, as far as the State Police and
Attorney General's Office security, making sure those are
connected to other States. That is part of this legislation.
As far as the gun legislation that has happened, it is
certainly something--anything that can help and remove threats
is a plus from our perspective. I will tell you that there have
been multiple arrests. I don't want to get into the specific
number publicly, but the State of New Jersey has made arrests
after some of the legislation that has been passed previously,
and I think that it will only happen after some of the more
recent legislation. We do know that there have been incidents
prevented based off of the ability to make arrests off of
those.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Castillo. I echo what Director Maples mentioned. Our
focus is basically at the door, keep those weapons and other
things outside of the school. Any way that would happen, we see
that as a plus. It has been very helpful in terms of what
Jared's office has been doing in terms of trying to get these
suspicious activity reports that will allow law enforcement to
take action and identify these folks, whether or not they own
them or have access to weapons. So that has been very, very
helpful as well.
Mr. Payne. Well, just on that point, that is something I
like to point out when we have been having this whole
discussion around gun reform and safety in schools, that we are
very positive about the move that these young people have taken
their future into their own hands and are concerned about gun
violence and safety in school. But I like to point out that in
other communities, as you state, to keep the guns outside of
the school, that is a problem for other students, is getting to
and from school safely. So we have to make sure that we are
looking at the entire issue because, yes, safety at school has
become the paramount issue over the course of the last several
years, but there is a question of children's safety between
school and home. So we want to make sure that we encompass the
whole issue.
Major.
Ms. Hengemuhle. In talking about the children getting to
and from school, I think that the initiatives that are taught
during school help the faculty and the students in their
everyday lives. Some of the programs that we conduct for
younger students, we do New Jersey Drive, we do Internet
Safety, we do Stranger Danger, we have an Explorer program. So
we have a lot of programs that are conducted while the students
are at school but will be beneficial for them coming to and
from school. That is the most important thing. There are
dangers outside the school, we all know that. So any
educational piece that we can bring to the students, to the
faculty is going to benefit going to and from the school as
well.
Mr. Payne. Right. Specifically speaking on the gun issue.
Ms. Hengemuhle. On the gun issue.
Mr. Payne. Yes.
Ms. Hengemuhle. What we can do--you talked about New Jersey
being the State leader in gun reform. Again, whatever can take
place to reduce gun violence in the State of New Jersey and the
United States is in the right direction.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Sir.
Mr. Gerity. Sir, with all due respect, I don't have an
answer to that question. I am obviously subservient to a board
of directors, and for me to take a position without addressing
the issue with them would be inappropriate.
Mr. Payne. OK.
Sir.
Mr. Reilly. I am actually not 100 percent familiar with the
New Jersey law, but I can tell you New York State has some
similar laws. I will say this: When they passed the New York
State SAFE Act, I had a little issue with it because I was a
retired lieutenant from the New York City Police Department,
and I tried advocating to the legislators, telling them that
there is something in the law that you just made me a felon.
You made me a felon because I had a 15-round magazine in my
Glock, but I was a retired police officer. Thankfully, a few
years later they corrected that. But unfortunately, when they
rushed it through--so I am hoping New Jersey didn't rush it
through, and if there are any concerns that would actually need
to be addressed, I would hope they would do it quickly and not
let us wait, because unfortunately sometimes in our haste to
get things done, we don't look at the full picture, and that is
even when I am talking about school security protocols as well.
There are many times when people make suggestions at our school
board meetings, at our CEC meetings, and we try and have a
discussion about it and show where maybe one view doesn't
support the actual protocol taking place.
Like one instance when talking about school security is
when you hear a school is in lockdown, the first thing you
think about is a school shooting. We actually had a school that
was put on lockdown because a deer ran through a plate-glass
window. So these all-hazard approaches, that is what the
community needs to know about when it comes to the school
security aspect.
But I am willing to research the New Jersey State law, and
if we can take some tips from there and advocate in New York as
well, I am open to that. So, thank you.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donovan. Well, I thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony today and for my colleague's questions. The Members
of the committee, as I told the other panel, may have some
questions, even Members who aren't here, additional questions
for our witnesses, and I would ask that you respond to those in
writing.
Pursuant to Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing record will
remain open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:53 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X
----------
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Jason Botel
Question 1a. In February, President Trump tweeted that arming
``educators and other trusted people who work within a school'' would
help protect students.
Has the Department of Education examined potential impacts to
school safety and students if teachers become armed?
Answer. On March 12, 2018, the President created the Federal
Commission on School Safety (``FCSS''). https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefings-Statements/president-donald-j-trump-taking-immediate-actions-
secure-schools. The President specifically tasked the FCSS to ``develop
a process to evaluate and make recommendations on school safety'' and
noted that ``[t]he commission will study and make recommendations on
the following areas of focus: . . . A plan for integration and
coordination of Federal resources focused on prevention and mitigation
of active shooter incidents at schools.'' The provision of school
security and the training of school personnel in that regard is
inherently a State and local matter. As noted in the President's
statement creating the FCSS, the role of the Federal Government and the
FCSS in particular is to ``make recommendations on school safety''
within the framework of what State and local jurisdictions have
crafted.
Accordingly, the FCSS has been studying, among many other things,
the training of specially qualified school personnel such as school
resource officers (SROs), school security officers (SSOs),
administrators, and staff. Throughout the FCSS' study of existing
programs that arm school personnel, there has been a consistent
emphasis on the efficacious deterrent posed by highly trained and
voluntarily armed school personnel. The FCSS has learned that in almost
every State SROs, who are sworn law enforcement officers, are armed.
Many States also permit SSOs, non-sworn security officers, to be armed.
Ten States currently allow school staff to possess or have access to
firearms. No State mandates the arming of school staff. The 10 States
referenced permit specially-trained school staff to carry weapons upon
meeting the State training and licensing requirements. It is estimated
that several hundred school districts provide school staff access to
firearms. All programs exercising the option to allow staff to carry
weapons require significant training, among other qualifications, in
order to participate. Examples of such programs include the Texas
School Marshal Program, the South Dakota School Sentinel Training
Program, and the recently announced Alabama Sentry Program.
On August 1, 2018, the Department of Justice led a FCSS field visit
to Arkansas's Lake Hamilton School District where the FCSS heard about
the challenges small rural school districts face when they have lengthy
police response times. As Superintendent Steve Anderson said, ``While
we are blessed to have excellent law enforcement officers . . . because
of where we're located, the last two sheriffs here in Garland County
told me we could expect 20 to 30 minutes wait time if an active shooter
situation happened on campus before an officer could be here. We're not
willing to take that chance. We need someone to protect our kids.'' The
Commission has maintained a livestream of the field visit at: https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAvkyAYMFSE&feature=youtu.be. The Parkland
school shooting, for example, lasted only about 7 minutes.
In the 1990's, the Lake Hamilton School District was one of a small
number of public school districts in Arkansas with Commissioned
Security Officers (CSO) holding a license through the Arkansas Board of
Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies. In 2015, the CSO
license was changed by action of the Arkansas General Assembly. What
used to be the CSO license was changed to the new Commissioned School
Security Officer (CSSO) License, through Act 393 of 2015 (Ark. Code
Ann. 1A17-40-330 et seq). The use of CSSOs in a school district must
be approved by the superintendent. CSSOs can be administrators,
faculty, or staff and must pass a standard background check and undergo
extensive training. In its preliminary report dated July 1, 2018, the
Arkansas School Safety Commission, after extensive study, reaffirmed
the deterrent effect that such practices have on school violence.
http://www.arkansased.gov/public/userfiles/Communications/
School_Safety/Safe_School_Commission_Preliminary_Report_July_1_2018.pdf.
Question 1b. Is the Department of Education making plans to arm
teachers in the classroom?
Answer. The Department of Education is not making plans to arm
teachers in the classroom because this is a function appropriately
reserved for the States. The FCSS, however, is reviewing existing
State-level initiatives that enable highly qualified school personnel
to access firearms under certain circumstances. The administration
firmly believes that arming highly qualified and rigorously trained
school personnel may help prevent violence at our schools and in our
classrooms.
Question 2. As I mentioned in my opening statement, I am concerned
about safety for children beyond the traditional classroom setting.
Many children experience safety threats on their way to school, which
is cause for concern, as these threats to their safety impact their
ability to learn and excel in school. What is the Department of
Education doing to combat threats to our children that exist beyond
school grounds?
Answer. Part of a comprehensive and effective emergency management/
school safety plan is the consideration of safe zones of passage for
students. One of the creative aspects of the Student Success and
Academic Enrichment (SSAE) program, administered by the Department
under Title IV, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965, is that districts have the flexibility to use funds for
activities that are coordinated with other school and community-based
services and programs. Title IV, Part A funds can be used for programs
that may be conducted in partnership with businesses, nonprofit
organizations, community-based organizations, or other public or
private entities with a demonstrated record of success in implementing
these types of activities.
The Department continues to offer technical assistance to States,
districts, and schools in how to best plan and implement activities for
student safety in going to and returning from school through sharing of
practices and trainings through the Readiness and Emergency Management
for Schools Technical Assistance Center. This planning should be a part
of a comprehensive school safety and emergency management plan.
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Alan R. Hanson
Question 1a. In February, President Trump tweeted that arming
``educators and other trusted people who work within a school'' would
help protect students.
Has the Department of Justice examined potential impacts to school
safety and students if teachers become armed?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. Is the Department of Justice making plans to arm
teachers in classrooms?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. As I mentioned in my opening statement, I am concerned
about safety for children beyond the traditional classroom setting.
Many children experience safety threats on their way to school, which
is cause for concern, as these threats to their safety impact their
ability to learn and excel in school. What is the Department of Justice
doing to combat threats to our children that exist beyond school
grounds?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr. for Robert Kolasky
Question 1a. In February, President Trump tweeted that arming
``educators and other trusted people who work within a school'' would
help protect students.
Has the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) examined potential
impacts to school safety and students if teachers become armed?
Question 1b. Is DHS making plans to arm teachers in classrooms?
Answer. The Department of Homeland Security has not examined the
potential impacts to school safety and students if teachers become
armed and is not making plans to arm teachers in classrooms.
Question 2a. Following the deadly school shooting in Parkland,
Florida, DHS established a Department-wide Executive Steering Committee
tasked with directing DHS's school security efforts.
Which components are represented on this steering committee?
Answer. Following the October 1, 2017, mass shooting incident in
Las Vegas, Nevada, the Department established a Soft Targets and
Crowded Places (ST-CP) Security Executive Steering Committee (ST-CP
ESC) to coordinate Department efforts with respect to the security of
soft targets and crowded places, identify opportunities to enhance
these efforts, and ensure Departmental unity of effort in this area.
The ST-CP ESC is comprised of senior executive-level representation
from Departmental components and offices engaged in ST-CP security
activities, including the National Protection and Programs Directorate
(NPPD), Office of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, Office of
Partnership Engagement (OPE), Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers,
Science and Technology Directorate, Transportation Security
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA),
U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Secret Service, Office of Policy, Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction Office, Office of Operations and
Coordination, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, U.S. Customs
and Border Protection, Office of General Counsel, Office of Legislative
Affairs (OLA), Office of Public Affairs (OPA), Privacy Office (PRIV),
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, and the Office of
Intelligence and Analysis.
To coordinate work across the Department on specific topics that
fall within the ST-CP security realm, the ST-CP ESC is authorized to
establish working groups. Earlier this year, the ST-CP ESC established
a working group focused on school security. The School Security Working
Group is co-led by FEMA, OPE, and NPPD, and includes representatives
from most of the organizations that are part of the ST-CP ESC.
Question 2b. Has the Steering Committee made any recommendations?
If so, please describe. Please provide copies of any written
recommendations of the steering committee.
Answer. At the direction of the Secretary, the ST-CP ESC School
Security Working Group developed an action plan detailing on-going and
future activities the Department will perform to help enhance school
security. Departmental activities described in the plan fall within
three lines of effort:
Education and Community Awareness.--The Department engages
school administrators, teachers, students, parents, and other
stakeholders across the K-12 and higher education communities,
as well as law enforcement and other first responders who serve
those communities, to raise awareness, communicate best
practices, and promote no-cost/low-cost security measures.
Capacity Building, Training, and Exercises.--The Department
directly helps schools enhance their security through capacity-
building activities, such as the provision of training,
exercises, workshops, and grant funding for schools to
participate in those capacity-building activities.
Early Warning.--The Department works with the academic and
law enforcement communities to establish and implement
processes that increase the likelihood of individuals
identifying and reporting concerning behavior or other signs of
pre-attack planning, as well as providing schools and local law
enforcement with the means to address potential threats before
they are realized.
Examples of specific school security activities the Department has
taken since the establishment of the School Security Working Group
include the issuance of K-12 School Security: A Guide for Preventing
and Protecting Against Gun Violence (2nd ed., 2018), providing schools
with a means to assess their current security posture and identify
options for consideration from among potential preventive and
protective measures that can help the school address the threat of gun
violence. The Department also recently issued the Enhancing School
Safety Using a Threat Assessment Model--An Operational Guide for
Preventing Targeted School Violence, which provides schools and
communities with a framework to identify students of concern, assess
their risk for engaging in violence, and identify intervention
strategies to mitigate that risk.
As the Department is only one part of the larger Federal community
working to enhance school security, we also are collaborating closely
with Congress, the White House, and other Federal departments and
agencies to coordinate efforts in this arena through the Commission.
The activities set forth in the DHS School Security Action Plan will
help enable the Federal Government to meet the goals established for
the Commission and will contribute to the development of the Commission
Report to the President in the fall of 2018.
Question 3. Though certain DHS preparedness grants can be used for
school security activities, DHS does not make these funds available to
public schools directly. Instead, State and local recipients have to
identify school security as a priority. What percentage of DHS
preparedness grant funds are used for school security activities?
Answer. FEMA notes that school security accounts for about 0.07
percent of preparedness grants (using 2007-2017 totals). Based on the
Biannual Strategy Implementation Reports (BSIR) for fiscal years 2007-
2017, FEMA has provided a total of $141,608,502,068.85 in preparedness
grant funding. Of that amount, $98,396,943.16, or 0.07 percent, has
been used for school security activities.
Question 4. As I mentioned in my opening statement, I am concerned
about safety for children beyond the traditional classroom setting.
Many children experience safety threats on their way to school, which
is cause for concern, as these threats to their safety impact their
ability to learn and excel in school. What is the National Protection
and Programs Directorate doing to combat threats to our children that
exist beyond school grounds?
Answer. The school security guidance developed by NPPD and recently
issued by the Department recommends that each school have a security
team that is formally organized and that includes representation from
district/school administrators, teachers, facility operations
personnel, administrators, counselors, students, parent organizations,
mental health groups/agencies, police, fire departments, and emergency
medical services. The school security team should work with local law
enforcement to ensure that students are safe when they leave school
grounds.
The Department also recommends the development of a ``community of
interest'' of teachers, social workers, counselors, behavioral
therapists, and law enforcement organizations in the local area, which
can create a network for the common purpose of enhancing the safety of
students and the security of schools. For example, in Cincinnati, four
city school districts and one parochial school have partnered with the
Greater Cincinnati Fusion Center to participate in their Intelligence
Liaison Officer program. This program provides local agencies, first
responders, and school administrators and teachers with an improved
ability to recognize threat indicators and report suspicious activity
to law enforcement organizations through the Greater Cincinnati Fusion
Center and the Ohio Fusion Center Network. Additionally, these school
districts and parochial school have collaborated with the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security to develop the Greater Cincinnati Safe
and Secure Schools Initiative. This initiative facilitates information
sharing and technical assistance--including Department-supported
vulnerability assessments of schools--between schools, school
districts, State and local government organizations, and the Federal
departments that support school safety in and around Cincinnati.
Relationships such as those created by the Intelligence Liaison Officer
Program and the Safe and Secure Schools Initiative provide teachers and
administrators with the resources and skills to identify potential
issues and work to resolve them through counseling or other forms of
available help to prevent delinquent behavior or violence that could
result if an issue goes unresolved.
While NPPD supports a number of activities that combat threats to
our children beyond school grounds, it is by no means the only entity
within the Department performing such activities. For instance, the
Department's Transportation Security Administration engages school
districts and transportation providers on a variety of school bus
security activities.
While TSA's mission space is counter-terrorism in the
Transportation Sector, TSA does work collaboratively with providers of
student transportation in order to mitigate the potential of terrorists
or home-grown violent extremists seeking to threaten school buses for
their malevolent purposes. TSA also works directly with the National
School Transportation Association, the National Association of State
Directors of Pupil Transportation Services, and the National
Association for Pupil Transportation, as well as the Illinois
Association for Pupil Transportation, to name a few, to share
information about threat recognition and awareness. These security
efforts between both Federal and State level representatives as well as
transportation operator stakeholders in the private sector have
potential safety implications that are a benefit to students in these
systems.